O, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the fulfillment of it its end is achieved in it, and by the expositions of it, and by the declarations of it, it is my view that you complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with me, so it is my surgery.
Because the operation with me is widespread in our region and in our time completely private, while many risk the science of it, and its knowledge is held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered and become subject to those errors and inaccuracies because their clauses are the understandings of it and the force of it and the art are elongated.
And it is seen to me that you vivify it with the ordering of this treatise in that according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as it may be by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artificer with his hand is found in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires the actor to be beforehand exercised in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia because he knows the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the connection and separation of them; and he had the knowledge of the bones, the nerves and the cartilages, the number of those, and the growth of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of the emission of them.
And for that reason, it is said by Ypocras that with a name is little, but in the work is much, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But we have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said of anatomy, it is not evacuated that he does not fall into error for which many men die, as I have seen too many of those, because some are formed in this science and cast themselves from that knowledge and their experiments.
Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed while the woman died among the hands of him.
And I saw another physician who prescribed that the patient swallow a stone from a man who had processed in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for that man on the third day died.
And I have already been called to extract that, and I saw that for the size of the stone and for the disposition of the patient I knew above him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was taking a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came to a black man who was broken in his hip; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he let him go according to his desires, and he relieved him, and left him for a few days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and it was thus that the hip and the leg became infected with abscesses, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I appeared to untie the ligament, and achieved the tranquility and then eased his pains.
But however, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, for I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the malignancy of it was magnified to its lord.
The cause of which is that the cancer is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not come to it with iron at all, but that it be in a limb which suffers that it be entirely held hostage.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be devised into two divisions: so it is in operation to which health is associated, and in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already existed that in all places of this book in which I see operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard that and leave that, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, seeking health and praiseworthy success, and leave the diseases terrible of difficult healing, and hold your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more is remaining to your glory, and more in the world and in the end to your sanctities.
Gualia already said in some of his admonitions: “Do not medicate bad sickness, so that bad physicians you are not called.”
And I have already divided this book according to three chapters.
This treatise begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of leeches, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and of things similar to those; chapter ordered about the feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
Know that you should say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its harm, and in what completion it should be prohibited cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its harm is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already many wise men have spoken of it, and they have disagreed about it, and to me a little of their sermons suffice, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery conforms to every universal completion, whether it is of matter or of its matter, except for two complections, which are complections of cold matter.
In the cold and dry completion of matter, they disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry illness with that which is hot and dry be healed.
And he who says the contrary of that, says that cautery is done beneficial in all cold and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humors to the completion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already to me on some occasions discovered.
But however, it should not come upon this that which is already explored and exercised in the chapter of cautery by the previous exercise, and who has known the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complections, there is no fear upon you, and more so in the hot and humid illnesses, because all the physicians have agreed upon those, and they are not disagreed about the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that of the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of its goodness, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and not to the other member attached to it, except with slight harm.
But the action of comburent medicine reaches to that in the members which are removed from it, and it makes them come to the member illness of difficult healing and often a great deal of harm.
But fire, by its sublimity and by the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it superfluously. And it is already known to us by experience and by the length of service of study in the art about the truth of the causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not written in my book in this place to you, a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels the illnesses, with a philosophical sermon demonstrative, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because so that the harm by the accidental time is submerged in the goodness of that which with the cautery is thrown, and more so if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared of those that come evil, which is greater than slight harm entering by time.
And thus do not catch in your minds, o sons, this that is not esteemed but by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, so it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not at all so as they think about it, because cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause for which the pains come.
But however, cautery superfluously over medicine by the desire of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns at some time in the future, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and what has come to it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that illness in which cautery was administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humors, as cautery of the tooth for pain and things similar to it, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but rather that it is made in small.
And most common opinion is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a right opinion, for those who understand it in it, because they believe that there is no cure that profits with medicine nor with any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the ways of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it profits for that. And therefore, that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, it is not according to the understanding which understand the common people and many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and have found that it does not do that except in some bodies, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the heat of the gold, and that it prepares to receive the heat; and if you adjust on it fire, the gold melts for the fire, and in the fire some plates so that the artisan catches for the occupation of that.
And for that reason cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more properly to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that afterward the one asking for that wants it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and coldness over the service accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and of the ears flowing, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth and of the throat, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to what requires the virtue of the illness and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then do that seizure between your hands on a low bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his heels. But however, as the your saying of the middle place is reached, sign that place with a tent, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then place that on the place signed with a tent, in the manner that descends, with which your hand is constricted little by little, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of a grain of errs, then elevate your hand, and if not, turn your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone that I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a cloth soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with anguent tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more helpful.
And they said some of them that it should be cauterized the bone inside the bone, and it should be held the cautery until it is burned some part of the appearance of the bone.
And then be ras that which is burned of the bone, and then be cured.
And they said others that with the cautery reach the end, until it presses in the bone strong pressure until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate of that place expire the vapors of the head.
And it should be held the wound open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me no have been seen these two species of cautery of all, but in some men according to way of fear; and leave that, of me, better is with health, when it is; because the head is revealed for solution of continuity of it as well as we have testified in the other members, and more when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the species of cautery first is more safe and better of me; and of that husi and with that work with health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When throughout the head occurs chronic and long pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of herbs and of potions and of purgatives and of plasters and of guats and of cadels and of gualinas and of resemblances, and mostly if already is cauterized with a cautery which is counted and does not profit to him of any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds a great cold, then cauterize with another cautery besides that one a little. And then cauterize that one on the corner of his head with a cautery until the bone is parted. Incise the bone and be discovered of the bone the quantity which we have recounted and cauterize that one with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and is that place in which is placed a cupping glass. And alleviate your hand in that, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by that finds a great pain different from the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
And you say this cautery in its place, because whoever the cautery with which are cauterized the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle cautery than that with which is cauterized the middle place of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of migraine non-ancient.
When in the part of the head pain is sudden, or is stretched pain into the eye, be evacuated with medicines the head modifying, and be administered the other cure, which I have said in the divisions of the sicknesses; and all does not profit, then cauterization in it is in two manners: or cauterization with medicine acute comburent, or with iron.
May cauterize with comburent medicine is that you take a handful of alum, and scour that and abcise the extremities of it from both the heads. And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid until there is in it made place besides the bone, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopped by descent constriction, and leave that for the spaces of three hours; and then untie the and take out the alum, and leave the plague for two or for three days, and then place over it a cloth submerged in water until the place makes a scab.
And then cure that with an enema until it is healed.
And if you want, do this with some comburent medicines which I have written in the two treatises of comburent medicines.
But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a clavilh, because the head of it is as the form of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small eminence.
And then place over the place of the pain, and retain your hand — so that the artery which is besides — is not injured, and revolve the iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is cauterized by the thickness of the bone as much as the majority of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery which is besides is not injured, so that no blood comes.
And then imbibe a cloth in salt water and place that over the place, and leave that for three days; and then place a cloth mulled with water, and then cure with an enema until it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize with the extremity of the scalpel according to cautery, and guard yourself of incision of artery in this migraine properly non-ancient.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of ancient migraine.
When you cure migraine with that which we have said of the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of the sicknesses, and it does not profit the cure, and sometimes by the sickness that does not reach to him that which we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then cover that you ignite the scalpel cautery until it is white, because it signifies over the place of the pain with a line of length of which is the majority of the said, or that which it is; and detain your hand for one time and strengthen that until you incise the artery and it arrives until the bone.
However necessary is to you that you guard of the continuation of the mandible, which is bad of the chewing, and that the lacert is not cauterized and the nerve which harms that, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and mostly to him who ignores that which is done and is not studious and expert; and leave the operation in him at the beginning.
And I will come with remembrance of the regiment of the flow of blood accident of the artery according to its manner, in its place of this book.
And if you see of this sickness that does not suffice this cauterization and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the plague until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter of the artery's cauterization, using a cautery with two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more convenient.
Chapter 5.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has a point, of which this is the form:
And when it is pointed, ignite it, and it should be moved around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever. Lengthen it with the cautery from the base of the ear little by little so that you can feel the place with your touch.
And if the cautery touches ten points in the entire ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter 6.
Of cauterization of a tumor.
A tumor which is cured and by cauterization is only of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the species that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of tumor with poultices and purgatives and washes, and if you do not find your cure effective, then you must cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first you should apply to the base of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third to the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the diseased area, because softening does not come except in the side that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, more sovereign a little above the corner of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the code is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutler, the form of which is shown in front. But however more subtle it is that one a little so as you see; and where a handle in it instead of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is shown in front until it is healed.
Chapter 7.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and if you do not find your medication effective and the illness does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on top of all the horns of its head; and with cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the nape of the neck. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it should be cured with the water that proceeds.
Chapter 8.
Of cauterization of oblivion made by flame.
And when it is given to the patient at the beginning, large poultices and pills of the serving modifying.
And then shave the head of the patient and place on the nape of his neck a plaster of the kind described in the treatise of plasters.
And pause that several times, for that is the manner of cauterizing. And do water according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those it is healed well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part most below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water that proceeds.
But if you add more and the illness is water-tolerant, then make to him cauteries in the middle place; and if you wish for greater addition, then cauterize that on the two horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form given before.
Chapter 9.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
And that you proceed in softening of the head with poultices and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on top of all the horns of the head, and with a cautery on the rear part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body of too much and the illnesses tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the loins, and diligently with a cautery until it is burned of the code of him, and raise your hand. And then take care of the one who is being healed, and this one should be an olive cautery.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, if you modify the brain of him at the beginning of him with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer safeguards and masticators to the brain, before that for several days, with the blessing of the food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the back of his head, and on each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and is tolerating, then cauterize him with cauteries the ones which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be an olive cautery according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent tortoise of him on the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient be feeling cauterized, and be held from all sides.
And then apply liniment; and it is more worthy to border with sheep's wool. And warm that over the fire for a moderate heating by measure, the one which the said suffers when it is most in him. And then put that in the middle location of his head in the circle, and leave him until it is cooled.
And do this water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him good while he is being healed; or if you want, cauterize this by making small points according to the most of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a special kind of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then place that coat embedded in wool or in  gualina's  grays.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of  water descending in the  womb.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the womb by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient to drink water that purifies his head, and guard him from all humidities.
And make that suffer in a bath in degu for some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of the descent of water in two wombs, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one womb.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left the  codena; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see from him fluxes of blood, stop him with some medicine, the one which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom the one which is in the extraction of arteries and in the abscess of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the wombs are old and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous frigid phlegmatic, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water descending in the wombs, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if you are indigested of addition, then cauterize that in all the side of the tail of the womb on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of nose odor.
When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give to the patient the cochies for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with an olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery, with two cauteries on the two eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
And guard yourself from the archery that you do not burn that.
And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Chapter .xv.
Of cautery for softening eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter .xvi.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the parts of the inside and punch the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts of the inside so that they puncture the eye, cauterize in those in two manners, either cauterize or is with burning medicine.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of it that he see his hairs as those which they cleanse, until they are prolonged and lengthened; and if he punches that, then you strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it is not harmful until the hairs are born.
Therefore, as soon as they are born and lengthened, then pause the head of the patient in your seat, and then send over the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a myrtle leaf, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then place a poultice buried in a white of egg or in a mucilage of ptilli over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in several times, until the surface of the  code is burned, which is as a myrtle leaf, all apparent properly.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated from the puncture of the eye.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then place over it a poultice with border until the scab is eradicated. And then cure it with an enema until it is healed.
But if it returns for the hairs any cause to their puncture and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery over that all as you had done first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is lengthened and that the hairs do not puncture the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine this is that you command the patient that he see the hairs until they are prolonged and lengthened, and then be made of cloth the form of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of known soap and of living cause one. i., that is,
And place the said over the medicine and press it a little and do not harm until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for bite is in it as of fire.
And therefore as it will endure that the other bite, then remove the medicine and put it with your hand; therefore as it ceases the bite, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if times the eyelid is already lifted as it is washed from the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if not return over it of the medicine over the place in which it has not put the medicine and do not degrade until it is lengthened your operation and be contracted the eye.
And then place over it a poultice with border until the scab of the burning is eradicated, and then cure it with an enema of  a definite or with another until it is healed.
And it is necessary to you,  in your operation that you guard with great diligence that in the eye does not fall any of the medicine, and if the eyelid almost some days is softened and for any cause the hairs puncture the eye, then iterate your medicine over that place which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you had done at the beginning, and then encircle it until it is healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And the path of rectum should not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold the head of him some minister between your hands in such a manner that it is not disturbed nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the shape of a cane or a vulture's feather, from one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, let it be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you wish, let it be shaped as a tentacle.
But however, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it pus and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be disturbed, and then place the cautery on the grain of the heel and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and surround it with an exsiccative enguent until it is healed.
But if after eleven days it is not healed, then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what you have ordained in your chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first-dayers say: understand the place of the fistula and cut it out and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which is the form of it: And pour into it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a fine retention, and do not disturb the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the heel of him; and when you place on the heel of the patient a cloth soaked in oil or in water, because the lead hardens the place of the fistula and heals it by a miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tract from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and most often in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is shown:
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of a needle.
Then place that initiated carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure it with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there should be an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is antiquated, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure it and do not profit from the cure, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited into the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that it reaches the iron ignited to the bottom of it, and at the back of it do so once or twice; and then cure it with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the pus is abscised and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the angivas.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure them with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and then ignite the cautery the form of which will come close so that you place the point on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then remove your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to your will.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then spit it out, for the bad tooth is stopped and the softened gums are tightened and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterizing tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is a worm in it, or it does not respond to cure with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take the horn of a cow and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a handle and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and then immerse that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly while it is heated.
And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a stick in the heated horn above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the handle of the iron or of the cautery, and that it is in the middle of it some thickness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it while the cautery is heated; and do this several times because the pain will be mitigated either on that day or the next day.
And cover that by the pressure of that cautery the patient rinses his mouth with good broth and keeps it there for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterizing extrophulos.
When extrophulos are of phlegm and of cold humors and are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke of the cautery may escape from the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you judge it necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick soaked in broth on top of it until that which the fire has burned is mitigated.
And then cure that with gargles and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterizing a sore throat and of constricting an ulcer.
When the humors come upon the throat of the lungs, and most especially when that is of cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the root of the goiter in the depressed area.
And guard yourself that you do not reach with the cautery to the goiter nor burn the skin of it but a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the collarbone at the last vertebra of it. And the cautery of it be clavilh according to the preceding manner.
And then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterizing lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever nor phlegm and it is an old ailment, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the clavicle in the depressed areas of the left and right; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two toes; and let the cautery be clavilh according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the shape of which you have seen in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And let the cautery have three ramps because cauterization is done in this way: at one time you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterizing a tic that is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, and then by a small movement it is dislocated as it should, as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient be laid on his back or on his side; and then elevate the skin which is in the front part of the neck to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is dislocated to the front.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the tendon while it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are .viii. cauteries.
And then place on the cautery a piece of salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the parts above and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or with a motz cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach fire and many humors that that extract from its complexion and so multiply sores in it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then it happens that the patient is on his two sides, and extends his hands and his legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery on the foot for the quantity of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the cautery, so that it comes the figure of a triangular cautery; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form addition, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach punctually to that one who of this cautery is frightened: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tendon, and then cauterize that with cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of cauterization of the liver fire.
When it happens in the liver pain by fire or by humidity or by gross windiness so that from its normal complexion it is cast by superfluous egress, and it is cured the patient with that which we have said and do not confirm it, then it happens that the patient is on his back on his neck, and feel with tendon three cauteries according to this form and this quantity put on the liver below the ipocondres, the honor to the decubit of man.
And be the space the one which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress your with the cautery mot.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered the quantity of the majority of the species of the tendon, and there be no more adjusted; and if the patient standing on his feet of him; and if he is not standing, then be lying, the one who already has extended his legs, and elevate his arms.
And it is to you possible that cauterize these cauteries with a cautery cutellar, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that too much you process in the cauterization, and be adhered the species of the whole tendon so that it be adhered all the body and reach into the bowels, for the tendon here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of perforation of abscess of the liver with cautery.
When it happens an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in the tunic of it, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient atrobos gravitates and pain sharpens.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is sharpened great and sometimes that already fatigued the doctors the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is on his back; and then feel the location of the abscess with tendon; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which preceded in the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the tendon be combusted, until it reaches the ciph, until it be healed.
And then cure that with cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not that from this form of cautery use except that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; but with this experiment some times be dared on this operation, but however leave that of us, and it is better.
Chapter .xxix.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They say the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristologia to pleurisy fire according to this manner to be made, and it is that you take of the roots of aristologia long dry a root pun long which is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries placed, one slightly leaning towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is leaning between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, leaning slightly towards the rear; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not let your hand come into contact with the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the code in action.
And some ancients have said that some men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it is cauterized and healed, just as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because it immediately heals in the place of the fistula which is not healed.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it is according to three manners, all of which are straightforward, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not let your hand come into contact with the cautery; and the patient be raised on their two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two vertices, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the straight line of the spleen the honor to reach the lying of the left patient.
And be your elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then introduce the two vertices, ignite it, in that entrance where with those you penetrate the code from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and therefore are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertices.
And then you cure the cautery as if it had been laid aside for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes mentioned in the cure.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of cauterization of hydropic.
Cauterize not in hydropic but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydropic with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets laid aside for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure after the cautery with what must be so that two understandings are added to it, and it is festively treated with the help of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be like a key according to the shape of which is used previously, and it is that with which the back is cauterized be olive-shaped according to what is previous to its shape.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are festering in hydropic and are filled with watery pus, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the nocrati which is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it entirely, because the watery pus will be retained.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh be made cauteries with the edge of the cautery. And be the cautery according to the length of the thigh; and one below and the other below the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the wound open after the cure for a long time so that no water is retained from it.
And therefore care for those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is affected by coldness and humidity, which should be treated with the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and this is cured by the methods of healing and not by confections, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization to exhibit virtues, then cauterize with a large cautery on the patient's stomach according to what has been said before about the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery of the clavilh; and with cauteries on the alcatin above alozis great, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humors are exuberant and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize with the cautery on the pentenilh and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the benefit of which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in nature old hemorrhoids or one of the gross humors cold or of corrupted humors, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and not with confections, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left behind the small and small triangular spines of the tail, and with a cautery below the navel, by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him is cold and his food is not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been said before; and with a cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then care for him until he is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of the aethyl near the abscess of them.
When you abscess the aethyl, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to the ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that abscess of the aethyl, and last your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the aethyls are too many, then cauterize each one of them according to what we have recounted, and then care for those with what confections you give them until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alcatin, it is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in nature in the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, he is healed with cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the nature behind, and it is old, corroded, and healed of him and corrupted humors, and therefore that which is most worthy to cover it is that which is presented with a subtle cautery, and then you know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe enters.
And iterate over that cautery within until those corrupted bodies are burned once, twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the bowel, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then care for the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are abscised from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not of it stayed, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it the corrupted ones, or this of those causes of which there will be a remembrance in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils it is necessary pain from cold or from gross windiness, and because of this the patient's groin is inflamed, then you cover that which cauterizes on the boils with a cautery on each boil with a cautery clavilh of which I prescribe the remembrance.
And firmly cauterize with the second one a little, so that there will come three cauteries lined, and then they will be more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there occurs in the bladder weakness and softening from cold and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize him in the part pus behind above the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the tail, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of him.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the not of the feet; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And cauterize with a pointed cautery as it is processed.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of cauterization of the  thigh.
When there is heat and humidity in the thigh, and therefore pregnancy is prohibited, and the menses of her are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the area of their descent, then the place should be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be pointed.
Chapter .xl.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When humid, mucous substances are poured into the area of the hip, and they are caused by the swelling of their place, and the sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in it quite soft.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient over the area of the hip of him with a cautery in a circle shape, as you will have felt with your finger in the circuit of the area as it is turned, and so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery of which preceded the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole thigh; and take care of it that it be healed.
Chapter .xli.
Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the area of the hip, and it is caused by heat and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, then when you lance the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize it over the area of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or large.
But sometimes it is the cautery on the middle place on the top of the hip for that are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, the one that be containing and burn the thickness of the whole thigh.
And this is the manner of cauterizing the sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh over the place where you feel the patient's pain; and with one cautery on the  bone for four fingers a little below the  cylindrical part.
And if the cautery is a knife, and the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the thigh.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended into the place near the toes, then cauterize it here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.
And if the patient feels pain below the hip and the thigh, then cauterize it here with a knife cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterization that you do not finish with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that for that to you is on the patient not harmful or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the bone and finished in the cauterization, and the leg fire inflated until the tumor reached the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot. And then acid strong solution of the belly, and then that is death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise said in the cauterization of the hip the cautery of which this is the manner: make like a circle of iron of which the circuit be the majority of a palm; and be the depth of it according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from within that circle be another third; and be the spaces the which is between them the quantity of the size of the foot; and be those circles opened of two parts; and be the length of those cays a finger or two fingers, and make in those marks of iron decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with wool and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: O, children, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
Most of those cauteries to him who suffers them, and find him in that place of him.
But cauteries with medicinal ointments are that you make two circles having a perforated arm in which they put the handle of the iron door; let the length of the sides in the width of them be two walnuts or whatever those are.
And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they be open below and above, and they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then place upon the patient's back, the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand upon the patient's back; and then take some boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the burning of it — for that burning bite thus like of fire — until it ceases the bite.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the boiling water from all the back with sweet water.
And then leave that for three days and place upon that wool until the blackness of the burning is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it pus; this is called in healing.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make to him a statue in him which contain water according to that it is made in the back equally.
And this is the manner of boiling water, and you have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of lime in the extinguished of both one part one, and thrice them and place in a new pot of which the lower part be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
And place below the bottom of the pot another pot in the middle, and pour upon that alkali and lime living water from the sweet which covers them by a finger, and as you compress those with your hand by good compression, and leave the pot that descends from it water sharp in the lower part to the middle pot.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over other living lime and other renewed alkali, for that one is then of strong sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation does of fire.
And so of medicines some with which is cauterized much, as tezitic and honey anacrat and lime with sabon in such a way that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which is cured pain of back and sciatica, and magnifies much well being of that, and says that no has need of other cure, and that it is healed by one time as he recounts, for strong  that one enters in bath and it is already known of that.
And it is that it be taken of certain rag green, and if it is not found green, it be taken fig fresh; and much be thrice it with a little of gray and it be placed upon the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it be bound.
And it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cession of the burning.
And then put that in bath and then when the body of him be red, enter that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with a goat's skin the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits him well; and let the cautery be with him according to this manner: take wool and be it soaked in old oil, and let it be placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take dry goat skin and inflame that with fire until it be made charcoal; and place it upon the wool and leave it until it be extended. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the sensation of the burning reaches into the back and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of two.
Sometimes pain is in the two by many causes, as by hunting or by percussion or by superfluous evacuation, and by causes to those similar, by infusion of matter cold and humid.
And cauterize not but in this only species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar ones, which are made on the two sides in which is the pain three lines according to the latitude of him, because you have with the tenth in each line apply cauteries or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
And let cauterization be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial chisel-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of inflammation.
Often this ailment befalls small children; and a sign of its beginning in children is that they cry over their structure in the leg and feel elevation and movement.
And a throbbing in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is circular according to this form: which presses the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two lines or three. And let the points be close together.
And after curing the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But be careful that cauterization is not administered in inflammation that is made by a spasm of the nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, as gout caused by cold is cured by a method of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the knees or to the other joints, and this many times happens, then cauterize that over each knee with three cauteries or four of the entire part with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand with the cautery before, be only around the circumference of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the knee and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands only, and it is called suagra, then point in the circuit of the knuckles as they revolve, point in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point in the circuit of the knuckles over each node and over the palm of the hand.
And if the pains rise near the bones to the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize the ones of the entire part of the armpits.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done good regimen and it is evacuated with this cautery it is healed, God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines are protruding in front of the hernia, and this begins to protrude, then cove that you order the patient to leave his food on his day and that he uses of lenient causes so that the wound descends from his belly.
And after following the patient between your hands over his back, and command him to keep his leg inside until the hernia is thrown or the intestines appear.
And after returning that with your fingers and feeling the rupture over the bone of the pubic bone with the sign the extremity of which is similar to the majority of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And after igniting the cautery of which this is the form of it:
while it is hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And after placing the cautery on that sign with your hand with the cautery straight, and you have that inside that with it you manage the bones of the pubic bone into the middle of the groin; and repeat with that another time if you have not achieved that in the first time into the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine so that it does not come to death or other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, do not hinder your operation.
And cover that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And after the cautery, take care of the area for three days, until the burn scar is healed.
And take care of it with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the ulcer are sealed.
And cover that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his healing, the one that stretches his belly, and that the intestine does not come out, due to the effort of healing.
And after, when he wants to get up, after forty days, then administer a decent diet, and keep him on that for another forty days.
And be careful of work and repletion of food and drink, and of violent voice, because when he uses this regimen of healing entirely, he will be healed.
And you shall say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is that which is exhumed from the chain as the third part of it; and after, care for that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first ones say that a rupture be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
And it is placed a line that goes through the latitude in the broadest part of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When in some members by accident or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not comfort to the cure with medicines, then cover that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to its magnitude and its smallness, and its virtue and weakness, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat on it the cautery; because by custom of those pains, it is that they be pointed of member to that member the one that approaches to it, so that cover that you cauterize those ones until the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy some times with cautery for much help, and more so if the kind of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and that cured with what we have said in the division and do not say, nor is it, and fear over the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of him and the whole complexion of him, then cauterize that on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second further down from it, and the front to the end of the hairs; and two on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And last your hand with the cautery a little while until it imprints a small impression in the bone, and from it the scabs be dislodged, so that the expiration of thick vapors be alleviated from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is needed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then cover that you cauterize that with those cauteries the ones that we have said in the head; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the rib, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of their feet; and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the hollows of their thighs.
And guard yourself from the nerves the ones that are on the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the pubis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that as much as you adjust cauteries, so much is more helpful and more conferent; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as if they have their own, because for that the body of him is already stupefied.
And cover that the cauteries be great or few according to the members and the joints according to what is preceded by the kinds of the tools.
And then carefully apply the cautery with flour of herbs mixed with honey and the other cure while it is healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When some member is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to what merits the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the  depth of the flesh a little. And then carefully treat it with an enema while it is healing.
And sometimes stupor is cauterized which comes from the spine and feet, and the vertebrae of the lower back and the emergence of the nerves which move that member, and the stupor is removed.
May no presume about this, but only he who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of the nerves throughout the body moving.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal treatments, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, a little, according to the amount of the depth of the flesh, until the whiteness and color of it are removed, and the color of it is changed.
And then carefully treat it with flour of herbs and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and pigeon's blood or  round blood, from each one a part and all mixed together, and then apply a cloth and place it on the area while it is healing.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of crabs.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its perimeter, as it is turned.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the pointed cautery in the middle location; but to me, this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more trustworthy to be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with a moving cautery.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of boils.
When some boil is delayed in maturation, and so it is because of the superfluity that causes it, or because of the patient's age, because he is old and decrepit, of little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the boil; then cauterize around it with small, moving cauteries, and then leave it so that it will hasten in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery, the form of which is this: and place it in the middle location of the boil until it penetrates the flesh.
And if the cautery in that location is deeper, so that the body of the arm is relieved; and then carefully treat it while it is healing.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of corrodents.
Corrodent is a corruption that walks in the member, which corrodes it as a fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in a location that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite small, moving cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that location where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized areas a compress with oil mixed together until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then treat it with poultices that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery over what is raw in the corrupted locations.
And corrodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, which that is placed in place of cautery. But however, cauterization with fire is of more light help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have an emergency from it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of warts and other similar ones.
Many times, a malady called a wart appears on the lower parts of the foot, and it is a large, thick, growth which disfigures the foot; and it is cauterized in those in two ways, either with fire cautery or with boiling water cautery.
But the fire cautery is that you ignite the concave cautery, resembling the beak of a vulture, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the wart from all sides, and be of subtle margins.
And then place that ignited one on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the circuit of the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. And let him rest for three days before he begins to raise his arm. Then apply a plaster made of wild herbs crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, for this will be eradicated from its roots.
And then cure the area with an enema of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the hands and feet, then you should administer cautery to those with water, and you should take a cannula of lead or iron or vulture's bone, and place it on the claw; and then pour a small quantity of water into the cannula, and hold your hand, and you revolve that with compression of your hand of all, and press the edge of the cannula into the root of the claw, and it will drive the water cauda via to the root of the claw; and wait for the patient a little the bite of the water cauda for an hour, and then remove it, for the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do to those, and the other one until you come upon all of them on their body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the claws are eradicated with this of the enemas which the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to fire in the nerve or fever of a fiery cause, or by another similar cause, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with olive oil cautery.
And the tremor of him will be rested and hasten the health of the fiery illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents on the body.
When on the body are spots white, and are pustules split which are made of coarse corrupted matters; therefore at the beginning when it appears, that it be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with twigs of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and if they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken, they do those, and heal from those.
But however, it should be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of flux of blood accident by incision of artery.
Many times there is a flux of artery that is incised, the plague which should be for, or by the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you should tightly cover with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place on it your finger, pressing it tightly many times until the flux of blood is stopped from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number few, and exhale over them while they are hot.
And then take of those one small or one large according to the location and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein, quickly, as you will have removed your finger, and place the cautery until it is abcised and constricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery tightly from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is constricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another evil.
And know that when from the artery blood flows, then it is not possible in those to constrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four ways: or with cauterization as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him most are burned and the blood is constricted, or that it be tied with a cord or with a ligament for strong structure, or that medicines be placed upon it of which the virtue is to constrict the blood; and be strengthened with a pillow with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent constriction of him with a ligament and with structure with cloths or by position of causes comburentz and similar, do not confer otherwise than sparingly.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and on the artery the finger be not removed; and over the artery be asperged with cold water of much great frigidity until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more cosse where it has to cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incision and perforation and ventosa and of phlebotomy and of plagues and of their likenesses.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine comburent, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in those necessary with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the sovereignty of the head within the feet.
And you proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the inquiring one may be helped about what he has asked.
And before that you begin this, know, son, that in this chapter is terror about what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that, know that there should be great caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times the catgut evacuation is carried out, which is with blood, with which the life of the person depends, the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of the fistula or purification of the plague or extraction of the arrow or incision of the boil and their likenesses. And of all those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the hands of them, the death.
And I admonish you that on you may not fall that which is in this state, because sometimes it happens that you must handle ways of men with many ways of illnesses. And of them, some will go away with their illness and it is lighter to die, and so because of the vehemence of what they find of their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear, which signifies death.
And of those is the one who gives to you his hope and said, you expecting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore, know that you must not consent to that one who comes to you of whom is this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause about this except with certain knowledge which verifies this, and to which by consequence, a praiseworthy success.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication of them to which is health converted, because in that is to you an assistant over acquisition of fame and of memory, of the praise and of glory.
O, sons, God in you inspire his understanding and no os to direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters, second that which preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be to you alleviated what you have asked of this and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness many times happens to children, especially during childbirth and when the midwife tightens the head of the child, its vitality.
And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, the death has come, and so it is to me, the work has been left undone in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not sit on himself because of the greatness of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased so much that it died of fire.
And this humidity is either added between the bone and the bone, or it is added below the bone over the skull.
Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must do in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure two nights, so that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand at the parts of the head and it is not hidden from you. Know that you must do in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision extracts all the humidity; and after you tighten the fissures with cloths and cotton; and after you embroca that from above with wine and oil within the fifth day, and after you untie the bandage and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and tighten the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you consider to open the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore, attend to the incision where the abscess and the repletion of the water appear, and do it according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and thereby cause blood to flow and the patient to die from that blood flow by the evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the eye or foot, and it is ancient and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the last cure in this is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those that the patient feels in their head, and then cover the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly wrap the patient's neck with some cloth; and then consider where the vein is; and the places of each one on the places that are near the ears, and they are so hidden that not all men see them.
And then press on the artery with a tent, and then incise each one with the spatula of each sharp part with incision reaching into the bone, and so that it is through the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions at the upper parts.
And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when some vein is incised the blood is emitted with a pulsatile egress, which jumps out by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then press with a tent, and finish into the bone.
And this is what you must get out of the blood is the quantity of one ounce. And do not get more or less from it, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of it.
And then consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the head, then incise it so that it does not become a cautery abscess.
And then strengthen the plague with cotton and with bandages of cloth from it, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When some ancient or acute catarrh occurs, due to humors and qualities in the lacerations of the temples, or a very violent and similar one to those, and it is medicated with the ways of medical cure and it does not respond, then we have resorted to these ailments the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hairs that are in the temples; and understand the artery appearing in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in few men by the vehemence of the flesh.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck be tightly wrapped with some cloth; and then cover the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with cold water until the artery appears to you manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you cut the flesh with it with ease until you reach the artery; and then put it on and extract that to the sovereign parts until you extract that from the flesh and uncover that of the tunics which are below it, of all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then wrap that with the extremity of the oncii, and then incise it from that one part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not bring a flow of blood, because if it is not incised it will not raise the blood from all.
And then evacuate the blood of one ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong cord or with long cords, and do not let it putrefy before the consolidation of the plague and cause a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone with a cauterizing knife until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that mettyssa work.
And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover the extraction of the arteries that you have made the place of the anti-coto, and let there be placed powders decently made, and then cure it with dry medicines that make the flesh rise and with poultices until it is healed.
And if while you work another vein becomes a flow of blood from the artery, then you must take care to restrict that blood, either with cauterization, or what you put in the place of the coto, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restricted. And if due to any of those causes it is not present to you, then pause your hand on the place until the blood is congealed, and embrocate the place with water of vehement frigidity until the acuteness recedes, and strengthen it according to what is necessary.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and pause some, not ignited, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it be elongated that which is between the extremities of him, because they are not consolidated altogether with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is also. But however, if they are less sharp than two handles are better, because if they are sharp with two handles, it approaches to each wound, and does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better in all work and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles are the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the cure of the bodies of acute and sour rheums of the heels.
When the rheums are sour, and the bodies of those veins which are on the test of the head are inflamed, and do not confer any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels on his forehead a walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid in such a way that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the old remedies mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to scrape the hairs which are on his forehead, and then cut three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle location of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the muscles which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if to you a piece of sponge dressed or dried cloths most with which you dry the blood.
And then introduce the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the chisel which is on the bone, and then do that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then scrape with this spatula and introduce into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutter, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the edge of that sharp of the flesh annexed of the flesh, and the edge of it along the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then do that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And since that blood flows in quantity equal, squeeze the places of the pieces of coagulated blood.
And then pause in each fissure a poultice of old cloth, and pause on those powders mixed in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and be careful that it does not become an abscess.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of basilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of rheums by catarrh and in the heels descending from the parts of behind the head.
When it comes to a certain catarrh acute and continuous, and sometimes the heels of the patient are exhausted small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the forehead of the head is acute pain and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matter and catarrh do not come but from a few veins of the parts behind proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut in that a fissure in the middle location of the forehead, a little by the width (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand of the muscles of the temples which are bad of the chewing), until it be the bone uncovered.
Dry all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with linen rags. And then strengthen above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess.
And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the wound so that it begins to form flesh, and then take care of it with an exsiccative regimen which makes the flesh grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make a poultice of them and apply it to these sores at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catz in the ears.
Every cause that catz in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral or a cause similar to mineral, such as iron and lead, or it is of plant, such as saffron or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when lead or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or grow in the ear, and put the ear in the sun, and if you see the lead, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient sneeze with the condiment, and plug the nostrils to prevent the event of sneezing. And then put some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, for many times it is driven-out with these causes.
And if it is not driven out, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called a delicate epicyclic gester, of which this is the form:
And if it is driven out with the gester, it is well; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not driven out by this, then make a canula of brass and insert the extremity of the canula into the tract of the ear and close around the canula with wax and softened oil so that it be not open except the canula. And then extract with your wind with strong suction, for many times like the water that we have recounted.
But if it is not driven out in this manner, then take some halka illuminated or a vecz apparelled with which the birds are taken a small quantity, and put that on the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it over that well-placed cot. And then insert that into the tract of the ear with ease, and then exsiccate the ear of the humidity.
And therefore if it is not driven out with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should resort to cutting that before it becomes an abscess or a spasm.
And the manner of cutting it is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make that cezer between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear, above the gray of it, in the well-premeditated place. And let the fissure be of a lunar figure until it reaches the lead, and, the lead being reached, you can remove it with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and cure it while it is healing.
And if the cause catz in the ear is one of the greases that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if you do not obey my advice and so, then you take a subtle teune spatum according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that grease which is catz in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in several pieces, and prop extract it with the oncis or with a subtle gester, or with incision as we have said, for the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is entered into the ear, cover that the patient uses sneezing with condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and jagua over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is driven out, it is well; and if not, then take many small lead weights and leons according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with lead until all the water is driven out.
Therefore do not cease this with lead until all the water is driven out. And already the water is driven out, so that you take paper or of gonc, that is, and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned most of it.
And then put another gonc and do this so many times until all the water is driven out, and stract that with a canula as it was said above of the lead extractor.
But in the extraction of beast intrant into that ear, if it is a small thing, as small as it is similar, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes appearance in the front of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is less weighty of all the other causes that catz in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat that with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your treatment, then it is necessary that you guard the ear in the sun.
And therefore if there is any cause of worms here, then extract them with tweezers or with subtle instruments, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula, which is narrow and wide at the top, and this is its shape: And introduce the fine extremity into the ear according to the amount which the patient can suffer; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this several times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey this, then you plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatment of distillations.
And it is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the shape of which is: And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole, and flat on top.
And therefore it is as if they were pushing it into the concave part of the cannula, which is necessary here. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it decently in the extremity of it, and then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or juice of some herb, or water that you wish of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the reed with the cotton on top and press with your hand with moderate compression until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear should already be scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter .vii.
Of the cure of earwax.
Sometimes babies are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this happens to some men, earwax in the ear canal due to plague or flesh that has nothing to do with that; and this earwax sometimes is made in the front of the ear canal which does not allow the passage, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the front of it, which does not allow passage, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that one in which you achieve passage, then you should place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see earwax appearing, open it with a subtle spatula, the shape of which is:
If the extremity of it, in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is of two lengths, so that it does not cause damage to the ear.
And therefore if the earwax is due to flesh born in the ear or in the canal of it, then you take that with subtle instruments and cut it vehemently with ease until all the flesh is gone.
And if the earwax is in the front of the ear canal, then take a subtle reed and scald it with fire a little, and then put it in the ear canal.
And therefore if you have felt earwax with that which the patient feels with ease, due to the gravity of the ear, you will increase the pressure of it with ease; and guard yourself that you do not damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the amount of the width of the tube which you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some and put that in water and pulverize it over it, following the advice of the wise, and use it; and if you see the ear already suppurating, then you should extract the pus and replace it with another one which you have wrapped in a cloth that is made with rose oil, until the pus has subsided; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there is a flux of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other cure which you restrict the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatment of distillations.
Chapter .viii.
Of the cure of the itch which develops on the eyelids.
The itch which develops on the eyelids of the eyes sometimes is wet, sometimes is dry.
Therefore, you should have those with tweezers or with a knife, and cut them with a spatula at their roots, and then place on the places according to the advice of the wise.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood coming, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is to do it after the incisions and several times return when there is any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of a large swelling that comes to the eyelids of the ankles.
Often a swelling appears in the eyelids of the ankles, some cause of which is assembled to a large hardness and rigidity, and by its largeness it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore the operation in them is that you consider this, if the swelling is proceeding in it that appears apart from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is lightness.
Therefore, cut on that with a fissure along the width, and then drain that from all parts with ease while it is escaping, and then suspend that with a bandage and cut off that.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with suture; and care for that while it is healing.
And if it is small, to you it will not come to harm for that, because the ointment of it restores that and it heals.
And if the swelling is declining to the parts of the inside of the eyelid, then you open the surface of the inside, then you open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, another that you do not dig into incision, and press that from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, that you do not notice in any cause.
And then the incision, wash the ankle with salt water; and care for the place with water that heals until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the cure to be applied to the eyelid above the ankle.
The ailment is gray that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mostly in children, it aggravates the ankles of those and it accides to their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that, because tears are collected to those.
And because of that, those times make them rub their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, the ones that already have covered inflammation, and imminence of acne appears in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel acne within those.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient lays his head in your lap, and then you lay cloth on him and make a poultice of it, and make of it a circle according to the quantity which contains the abscess from all parts, and then you lay that on that and press with your fingers from all sides so that it may be aggregated abscess in the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision with a fissure along the width, and the fissure not be larger than the fissure that is made in a falotomy.
But in the pressing cover that you make the incision all while you arrive at abscess, because in the most serious processes abscess by fissure according to the form of white grayness.
Therefore extract that with cloths the ones which you have enveloped between your fingers to the parts of the outside and revolve between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the fissure for that, with the spatula, you do not reach the eye and scrape that.
But if there does not appear to you abscess at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease until it processes abscess; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and wine and lay them on the place and strengthen those with powders.
And if some that mix salt and lay that in the concavity of the fissure so that that which is remade of that humidity.
And then care for that until it is healed.
But if it happens in the place abscess caut, then care for that with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of manners of touching the ankle.
When in the eyelids of the ankles there are hairs that are natural and are old, then those ours to the ankle and make become manners of ailments as such as continuous tears and softening of eyelids and web until that is a cause of destruction of the ankle that is called touching of the ankle, and care for it in four manners: or by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to that it was said before in the chapter of cauterization; or it is made touching by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I have said.
And therefore, cover that you lay the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is well; and if not, introduce a needle into that in which it is firm of the part below of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle with firm below, and that be — near the edge of the eyelid in which there are the hairs — near the hairs, and pull the thread to the parts below with the eyelid, and turn that with the ray.
And then make in the part of the inside of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with a spatula incision from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the thread and lay below the eyelid small powders of cotton or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with a tent, and be as such as figure of a leaf of myrtle.
But however, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because some of those who are indigenous that should be incised of the eyelid a large quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then bring the spatula over the two lines which you have drawn, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as is the thickness of the king.
And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the code, and then exfoliate the whole, and then adjust with the scitur the two lips with a thread or a fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads on the two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and if not, do not care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then take care of it.
And if you want, leave the plague its suture, and take care of it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated, it needs the sealing of the plague and the aggregation of it; but suture is better, and therefore I say so as the ancients did to taxanir.
But however, there is solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another manner in taxmir, and it is that the figure on the eyelid is like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three unci segregated and congregated according to this form:
But if it is not possible, have the unci, and that is not equal, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the lacrimal major, and the other thread near the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the two said threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole code on which it is drawn as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess happens from your incision or your fissure,  dress that abscess with cerot and to its semblance, and with enguentz.
And some times it happens that the eyelid's hairs are converted, therefore it is necessary that you use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is dedintz according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle astelas of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And then add each with subtlety over what is superfluous from the eyelid of the heel, and constrict the canes of each part with a strong constriction, and leave it for some days, because the code by the constriction will die and become denied and will be able to enter while by itself it will fall.
But if it is late, then break it with the toroyras, and then take care of the plague until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of stinging hairs in the heel with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and stinging the heels, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and place in it a thread of fine cedar and lion, and then that you adjust the extremities of it and nuts in a way very subtle. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it in short, and use the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair adjusted the one which has needed of engen, and make it penetrate into the eyelid carefully until you extract that out of the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out and introduce it into alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair is removed with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is thrown alixalati and the hair is not removed, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it be thrown alixalati from the top.
And see that with the vision of the heel, because then you will throw alixati and the thread, and grotan some and close the heel, and leave the clauses for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and is born over that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you let it enter until it is lengthened in a certain space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the cure of the cataract which occurs in the upper eyelid.
When it occurs in the eye and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted upwards, or to the right or to the left part, due to bad consolidation of a plaque or of a cautery, and it is called leporina, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and it is made by the consolidation of a plaque or of cauteries, or by things similar to their malcuratz.
The way of the operation in it is that you break that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
And no cover that you use of cure of it from the causes which dry it, constrict; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than any time you have not had.
Use in that of causes that soften it as is fenugreek, and embroca with the water in which they are cooked the root and seeds of it, or a decoction of dyquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to what you had before.
Chapter .xiv.
Of the cure of cataract which is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly named cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plaque or by scissura or by cautery or by other things similar.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which make double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal right, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and stitch that with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid according to what cover, good is; and if not, take the ray and put that in the figure broken, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they meet, and be of their made angle until when they meet be made figure of them.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then place the flesh that for the quantity that is the edge of it sharp below of it, that which  seals the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the wool thread; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it is healed.
And if cataract arises from fissure or suture or cautery, then cover that you make with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that run in it operation, according to what is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepare engine in any manner which is possible to it until it makes return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to what it convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is more above with the album of the eye, and is prohibited of the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore cover that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate that upwards, or extend that with the unci.
And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which not be with the sharpness of the incisions, have obtuse a little for so that the patient is not troubled during the operation, and remove the spatula that it does not damage the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision which excoriate that adhesion with facility until it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that it is healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and put over the eye wool infused in album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidative causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and it is like a hard, fine, chip; or it is non-nervous, like white, congealed moisture, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on an incision, it is cut off and the incision is not put into it.
And both kinds do not begin until the larger tear duct, which goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient puts their head in the low position, and then opens their eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with an incision of little duplication and extend that to the upper parts. And then take a needle and introduce into it a little bit of horse, or cow, or boar, or something similar, or a strong thread, or duplicate the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape with the thread the side of the nail which lies near the pupil. And thus you follow that with the thread, entering it at the back of it.
And then you incise the remaining part in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the tear duct natural so that by incision of it, there does not become continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail, with the sole incision extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a spatula lion of which this is the form of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea and that there comes a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision is put in the eye a little bit of salt or a bit of chief made of sulfur, and it is left there until the next day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put into it the incision, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I and recount in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula of sharp steel according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and confused and put into that root, then distill from your own hour into the eye of chief made of sulfur or with chief rog or with salt trissat, and close the eye until the next day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess comes to be in the eye, for then you leave it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye for great harm, be suspended with thread; and incise it from that one part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not incise the flow of tears.
And then distill into the lacrimal chief rog and made of sulfur until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of the alguezardeinic and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh red is born, and it is over-laid so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and very much compresses the eyelids at the sides and is assembled to a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient puts their head in the low position; and then opens the eyes of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient threads for water, and take water with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself of the eye that you do not cut it during the course of your operation.
And let your incision be with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which it is collected ascebel according to how it will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as is completed your incision and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt trissat, or distill into it powdered rog and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and put over the eye outside a cloth with album of egg until it is assured of abscess caut.
And if there remain any cause of alguardenici and is lordly blood caut, and you fear abscess caut, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that yields that abscess, and then repeat over that with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which happens in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye frail by natural or accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of pus in the groin.
Pus veins are seen which are situated on the groin and prohibited by the garment its operation, and the groin is lengthened over days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the groin in which is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment than pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or two according to your prudence; and let that bandage of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two bandages gradually in one body according to this form:
And then they are collected those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and remove the blood hour by hour, while those veins are being pulled away from the groin and are being rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the groin with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the best part before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not injure but those veins.
And when you will have finished, then you distill in the groin chief green or red for that with its sharpness corrodes that which is pulled out of the pus.
But if that is not possible for you, collect everything in that hour, then you plaster everything with that which gives relief from the pain, and leave it for some days until the pain is subsided and that it is assured of a cauterized abscess.
And then repeat over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the shears:
Chapter XIX.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arisati with cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is preceded the narrative of it and it is not healed, then it is not generated in it but that you make on the abscess you remove the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power while it is uncovered the bone.
And therefore when it is uncovered the bone and times in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with a instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called aspre cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the head rounded as if it were to grip the one which is made pointed by the point of a file or by the point of a rasp subtly (as it is in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted place of the bone, and then roll that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And that is done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and the body of the wound is separated and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not abscesses and you do not happen in it accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is not in it generated but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when it is uncovered the bone, then you take tribo according to this form:
Let the extremity of it be triangular, and the shaft of it be prim extended to the extremity as if it were so.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little from the groin, and then roll your hand with the tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as soon as it finds air coming out of it when your hand.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore as the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which flowed to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the groin.
When the groin prominences with its totality and does not happen in the garment harm or diminution, then cove that relaxes the patient, and then that you follow it, and then that you place windy scarifications in the neck its suction and good suction; and then place on the groin liniment which is made of aethel and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the groin with motz powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's motz, and each cloth be duplicated in four folds; and make of those motz.
And then place those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the groin has need. And then strengthen upon those with hard cloth with strong structure; and iterate the ventosas with suction its scarification; and then remove the ventosas and leave the groin straight the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then cove that it be mot streyt.
And then remove the ligament aprop the day and the night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already be reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the stricture and the leeches until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a disruption in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of a man is formed by it, and you want to cut into it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the side below to the side above, and then put the other needle, which has a double thread, from the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that knot.
And then extract the needle and place it on the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, gather a whole piece with a circle of cloth around the wound, adjust the prominent eminence, and then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes to the root of the wound, and let the albuminous humidity run, and lower the wound and enter quickly.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This illness that is called alconati is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the wound resembling a descending water and it is not that.
But the manner of acting on it is that you make the patient lie on the prepared and straight saddle, and then take its head in your two hands and pull it so that you see the swelling coming to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as you see.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
But if the descent is not prepared to the swelling with the water that we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a fine spatula and cut into it on the panniculus, separating a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the place where the eye is), until the swelling is removed.
Therefore, when it is removed, then you distill into the wound water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water of the wound.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which one it is convenient to pierce with a sermon, declaring it according to the health.
Now, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands on a chair and tie their wound tightly.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their eye, if the eye in which the water is the left eye; or on your right hand, if the eye is the right.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the side of the lacrimal gland, and then press the almond with virtue and roll your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the cause of the void.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the almond to the root is the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see with it the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the tunic cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where the water is, and then you throw it down once, then another, and therefore if the water descends immediately, then wet the patient's wound with water over which he will look immediately, and the almond in their eye.
And then rest for a little; therefore if the water has descended, then you remove that other time as long as the almond is not thrown away.
And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the eye carefully; and then place outside the eye cotton or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lubricate the eye with water.
But in those who are of our time, place on that with a tripe soaked in egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the eye because of its hardness — because it is in some men whose eye is very hard — then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
And therefore pierce with it that conjunctiva, and do not end your hand in the track, and it is not if you do not make a path for the almond to go in subtly.
And then, insert the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete the work, prepare the patient to sleep soundly in a dark room, lying on his back, and prohibit all movements.
And pause in his nature so that it may be cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its disposition on the third day.
And then, untie that in that dark room and remove the eye cover, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not cover that which you have done in the hour of cures or as soon as the infusion. Have it covered so that your water may flow lightly through great and vehement regard.
But if pus should occur, then you must untie the bandage before the seventh day, and rectify that with the water that yields pus.
Then you must remove the cover from his eyes and place your hand over his face through which the movement of him is governed, leaving him for a few days, existing in the dark room.
And then, he must be taken out of that room gradually and converse about his causes.
And know that in alchemy, the disciple of vision is not excused some times, and then you should be bold about the operation.
And now we have come to some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that they made fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which the water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen any in our land who had perfect water, nor is water mentioned in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it may be upon those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or properly of iron, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as such is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse carns adjusted of which some cause is assembled to a scorpion of motz pes, or to a polyp peys; and this malady is called polyp because it is similar to that peys represented. And of this is cancerous flesh, lapadea, of dusky color; and of this is that flesh leon not of dusky color.
Therefore, in that which is in these flesh leon not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and placed in the sun, and open his nostrils, and pierce your own onci in those carns. And then extract that to the foreparts, and then incise that which you have comprehended of those with a sharp subtle spatula of one part, so that you know that all the flesh is already removed; that if any cause of it remains, of which the abscission is possible, then you root that with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing of it remains. But if it bleeds or pus should occur, then you pause to him that which you should; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that so that it may be abscindit sanc and the cavities are all removed.
And then be getatz in the nose after the incision vi agre and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that from it the flesh wounds in the pus sobiras bones of the nose to which the abscission has not reached.
Therefore, then you must introduce a thread of linen into which there is some thickness, and nudge in it moth nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is to it possible.
And as that will have done, that it may cast its odor into that which reaches the canals of the nose, and be spit upon the patient's throat, for troops of times the semblance to this action do the children at the schools, and it is lighter cause to him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that escapes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the nuts that are in the thread, and do this so that you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and place in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the engent corroded all that which is remains of the flesh.
And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a tube of lead for some days until it is healed.
But if in the course of the cure that requires, use of that.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make a plate of silver or brass, which is like a small open lamp, thus as a small basin, and the meat seemingly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the nozzle of the instrument to be a maker of purging and be flat, uncovered; to which there is a handle at the back of it, with which you have that when you heat it in oil or water that you want of the suckable juices and causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the nats in the extremities of the nose.
Many times the nat is seen in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and noted on some days when it is not seen.
And for that cove that you notice that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and record all of that. And then place over the area the cautery or medicine comburent the which was in place of it.
But if it is late its incision before it is magnified, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron because it is a purulent abscess; because many times to the one who incides this abscess it befalls great malice upon the one who had it.
And if the abscess is of lion touching and not of dark color, and times that incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incisions that without fear, and cure the place with water that excises and constrict within that it be healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of suturing of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblances.
Know that when accidents dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little confer you in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it befalls to any cause of those, that you consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that until it be healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then it behooves you to excoriate each part of its apparent codena until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on those pulverize blood of dragon and incense, and place over the powder a patch of diaphicon plaster, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then untie that and change that plaster and leave that until the fibers be by themselves abscinditz, and then cure with enguent until it be healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the dissolution of continuity with thread as to you and have made known.
Chapter XXVII.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts between.
Many times it befalls to many men in the parts between of their lips some abscesses hard resembling to fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, it behooves you to convert the lips and fendas each of those hardnesses from all parts, and then the abscesses you fill the place of sage incense until the blood be restrained, and then be washed with wine and be cured the place with water that is styptic, until it be healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Great many times there is on the gum flesh adjusted the which the ancients called albulus, therefore it behooves you to suspend that with an ounce or that you have that with the forceps and incisions that you must the root, and leave the sania to run or the blood.
And then place over the place sage incense or other powders styptic or excicative.
And if that flesh returns, then incisions that secondarily, and cauterize that, for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts between and of the front and between the gums are adjusted scabs rough, white, and some times are of nigras and are made citrinas or green until the gums come by that corruption and are made the teeth white.
And therefore it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head of it in your knee, and ratz the teeth in which appear those scabs and causes resembling sand until of them no cause remains, and that do of the blackness and of the citrinity and of the others until they be modified.
Therefore, if this is what is at the beginning of the reason, it is good; and if not, then you repeat the reason on those the other day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of diverse forms and figures of instruments according to how it is prepared for your operation. And for that the razors have which the tooth is scraped from the part of the teeth is another from the razors which is scraped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you must prepare which you will see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Extraction of Teeth.
Take care that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and take your time in its entire extraction, for there is no cause that should supplant the healing of it when it is extracted, for it is substance sublimated within that the excuse in the extraction of it.
But take care when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, that you firmly ascertain which is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and leads you to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and aching tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must ascertain which is the aching tooth, and that you know well, then you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums of all parts, and then make that with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until you make it come loose.
And after that, firmly hold it with large pliers for good communication or strong stupor, and place the head of the patient between your teeth, which you well hold that it does not harm, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place that behind it of all parts with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must compresses of cloth that break and tighten that with the extremity of a fine ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with pliers.
And you must operate exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gums and guard much your strength that you do not break it and remain a part of it, and return upon the patient by the malice that be greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fumbling and audacity about the extraction of teeth, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men illnesses great ones that are more difficult to be cured, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the jaw as many times as we have witnessed.
And after the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
And if it should flow of blood thereby, as many times it should, then triss some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it upon the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and pliers subtle with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when with those you must operate.
And be as many times of thick handle within that when you tighten with those they are not bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron, descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some introne in the others and tighten by strong constriction descent, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has the name ciconia, so it is guanta, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Extraction of the Bones of the Jaw Broken.
When you must extract the tooth which is broken and there remains some cause, then you must place upon the place a poultice with border for a day or two until the place is softened; and then introduce algesti or pliers with the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of them be made of flint as if lime or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your easement with these forceps or pliers, then you must cave upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be enbegged so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by that the root is forced out, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of a very fine extremity.
And now you have helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the shape approaching the following: And with other instruments which precede in the shape of teeth; because the shaving is done with this instrument which is assembled to a large onion, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which is some thickness, and not embedded so that it is not stuck.
And other know that the instruments of the teeth are moved so and similarly the other instruments.
But the skillful and subtle artificers in the art, find by themselves according to what to them signifies the operation and the diverse illnesses; because they are of the illnesses to which the ancients did not say nor placed proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is stuck, or if you can, then it be cured over that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with the management of which this is the shape:
And be in it some thickness little by little, and be intrenched or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to that.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then ratz that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the prominent teeth over the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, for those the shape is laid, and mostly when it happens to women, and mostly to the venerable old ladies; therefore, since you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment it, then eradicate that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and be made of Indian iron of a sharp extremity.
And be your incision with which you incise that in too many days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not damaged another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
And be all of Indian iron the margin and very well; and be of very small points as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth be damaged and broken. And then line that at the end, and ratz that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which one part is stuck and it hinders the tongue, then when you file that until the sharpness of that fracture is stayed and smoothed, and be filled so that the tongue does not touch it and the word does not break.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which manages, and you have cured that with topical medicines, and it has not been of any use, then for so that it does not break, it is generated in those that are strengthened with gold filings and not silver, because silver becomes green and soon you can see it, but gold at no time is changed.
And be the filings in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the straight is that you take the filing and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and then that you increase with two tortuosities of the filing between two damaged, or if it is one or many, until it reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the testimony within the part of which you begin, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And be your striccio with which you strengthen the filings, the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then incise the extremities of the superfluous filings with the forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with care, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave that so straight as a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another filing in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and two damaged, as well as sometimes these are tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the falling of each one, and they are recreated as we have recounted, and that they remain damaged.
And that is done only by good artificers and wise.
And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of cows, and it is made as such as the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from under the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and caused by a plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevate his tongue, and then incisions that ligament nerve according to the latitude so that it be dissolved the tongue from its recess.
But if in that there is any hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of a plague, then you throw an oil and split that by the latitude so that as you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And guard yourself that no fissure be made in the flesh of the preon and that you split here artery and blood comes.
And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with wine vinegar or with hot water; and then place under the tongue linen; so is the method which holds the patient's tongue in each night so that it be not consolidated another time.
But if blood flow occurs, place on the location vitriol trissat; but if the blood comes, then cauterize the location with a lancet cauterizing the which convenes ad aquo. And then that cure with the other causes so that it be healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue resembling a small lump which prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified so that it swells the mouth.
And the operation on it is that men open the mouth of the patient, seeing before the sun and considers the abscess.
And if you see it of dark color or black, hard, to which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch that, for it is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the oil in it, and incisions it with a subtle spatula, and incisions it from all parts; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place above it zegi trissat, that is vitriol, so that it be restricted the blood.
And then return to your work so that you have treated it with compliment of it, so that it be washed with wine vinegar and salt; and cure it with the other cure ad aquo so that it be healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of an abscess of the two ears and of that which is nothing in the goiter and of the other abscesses.
When in the goiter, it is swollen, so are the glands which are assembled swollen, which sometimes occur externally and are called two ears, which when you cure them with water that we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; let it lay there until it is matured, and then either you will extract it, or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is the one that must be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess of it has already rested, with a complete rest, or if it has diminished with any diminution; and then make the patient stand before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands, pressing the tongue of it from below with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle like a knife.
Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and gaze upon it with your instrument, then take oil and place it in the opening, and pull that to the parts outside as much as you can. And other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise it with the instrument of which this is the form:
And other water that you pull some cause of the tunics, and then incise it with the instrument of which this is the form: And it is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the straight of the other, very sharp, the one which is of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised a well, incise the other one according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient wash with hot water
But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of the bark of  millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to that of the stiptic causes so that the flow of blood be restricted, and then cure it so that it be healed.
And sometimes there are born in the goiter other abscesses other than those two ears, and incise those according to what I have said in the incision of two wells equally.
And I had once treated a woman with an abscess which was located in the throat of her, the abscess tended to a brownish color, of little feeling, the one which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman was breathing with tight meat, and had already prohibited her to eat and drink water, and she had already arrived at death if more a day or two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that it had meters two ramps inside which they came out through two tracts.
Therefore I cuitegui fisturally and I stayed in one of them openings, and I pulled out that one, and thrown is of it a great portion, and then I incised that one from where I understood of the other tract, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and then I stayed the opening in that abscess.
And then I abscised a large portion of it, and it was not running from it but a little of blood. Therefore absolutely was the throat of that woman, and she began to drink water, and then she ate food, therefore I did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and it succeeded abscess in place of that one, the one which incision entered while it was prolonged that one.
Therefore I engineered a needle and cauterized the throat of her, therefore as much as addition; and then I walked around and I did not know what God had done of that then to me.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is an abscess.
When catarr arises in the boil, and it is an abscess and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called buba.
But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and it does not confer the your cure, and it happens many times that abscess caut already is out of it and it is subtle, then cover that you incise that which is aggregated round; and if it is to that longitude, and it is sanguine, of brownish color or of black, and it is not to it feeling, then cover that you attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you do make see the patient and press the tongue of him with an instrument of which you process its form and then stay the opening in the nova, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments the ones which are said in the incision of two bellows.
And cover that you do not incise that but the water that is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you incise of it more, you will lead the his speaking.
And after the incision, use of water the one which have recommended in the incision of two bellows, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, cover that you use of needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you pause the head of the patient in the your seat, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument the one which we have said, and then take of the water the one which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and confer with that cause alive, and pause that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument the one which this is the form:
Be the extremity of it concavity in which be paused the medicine as well as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the boil, and the patient jagua over the his latz so that it runs saliva or musellage of the mouth of that by the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend of that any cause over the throat of him and that it leads that.
And after you your hand with the medicine, and express that over the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that it is being darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take cotton and envelopes that over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and enter the ray with the cotton in a tube of above until the cotton adheres in that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want of the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that because it dries and falls about three days or four.
And if you indigeysses that you iterate the medicine, iterate that, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cotton embedded in border, and modify with that water that is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured before with embrocation, and dedicate with gargles until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and more long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with water that is more subtle than cautery and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: receive calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and be submerged them with wine agre, and boil; and the olla be well washed with lut decently, and be in the middle place of the olla a tract, over which be paused an instrument concavity of aram according to this manner; be made of silver or of aram.
And the extremity is introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula over the tongue, until the uvula is somewhat obscured.
And then repeat over those moistened parts until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the emergence of abscesses, because it would too much tighten the abscess, and in the case that you do this, you must declare the abscess of it cauterize.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then take a cane and compose in the extremity of it a cup of wool, so that the mouth of the patient be covered, because the wool cup prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Moistened things adhere in the throat or a thorn of fish or any other cause.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what of those appears, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, so that to you it is declared what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause annexed to the throat is thrown-out by vomit; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or  chew a piece of dry marine sponge, and tie it firmly with a thread, and then the patient swallows it, because when it arrives at the place where the spines are and is extracted, then it is thrown-out. And more, take an eel and tie it firmly with a thread, and it is placed and gently extracted; or take a pear and gently the stem and gently the end.
But if it is not thrown-out with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be thicker than a small ray, and in the extremity of it be a concavity which you introduce into its throat with ease.
And let him take his head elevated upwards, and be careful that the touching of his bone of the throat, so that it becomes engaged with his body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the doctor with his hand.
But however, that the patient that introduces is best, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pushes down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is thrown-out.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the extraction of bloodsucker annexed to the throat.
When the bloodsucker is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you have examined the tongue of him with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract it with a small pin or with a subtle gesture gently.
And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce it into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this so many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day of water.
And then chew a full mouthful of cold water, and work the mouth of him in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of that, and bad the water an hour after another with his hand, because the bloodsucker as soon as it feels the water catz.
But if it is not thrown-out with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cumin or with asafoetida with the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so long as it falls.
And there is another way of operation in the fumigation of that, is that you take an olla in which there are burning coals and the olla be covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a trough, and it is composed in that trough the extremity of the instrument; and then let go downwards the fumigation; and place the patient his mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not thrown-out until you know that the fumigation has arrived at the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker as soon as it falls.
And if it does not catch, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty and bitter causes, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it be thrown-out.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, unless that in it there is some curvature: which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is smooth, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when it grips any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the sum of the sermon on the opening of abscesses and their section.
Abscesses are special sores, of various kinds, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section by two ways, of which one is by the nature of the abscesses themselves; and by that which we comprehend of the humidities.
And the second way is according to the places where they occur in the body, for the abscess occurring in the head is another from the abscess occurring in the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place is another from the abscess occurring in the joint; and to each of them is its own way of operation.
And more than abscesses are some which ought not to be perforated until the maturity of the healing in those or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses which ought to be treated when they are ripe, and not until the completion of them, such as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess occurs near a joint, the being of it is prolonged until it can pour out what is in the circuit of it, and then the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until its maturity, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the buttock, therefore perforate it when it is not ripe; and you ought not to perforate it cru, of no-complete digestion, but that which is near the buttock, so that you cannot touch the preon of it and it be elongated to the parts behind the buttock, and a fistula be made, or that it be done in the term of it that it not be healed. But you ought to know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is ripe.
And know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and near the diminution of the heat and of the pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you ought to know the perforation to be made in the place furthest from the abscess and of pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And perforation always be by the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the limbs or of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use of perforation according to that limb.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is best that you let the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, it is prolonged the body of the pus of it and of much filth, and then the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or of the body as necessity demands, or according to what the limb requires.
And you ought to administer small perforation, and in large abscesses large perforation and many sections according to the diversity of the greatness of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which the opening ought to be concave and be incised, when it is made so that it is like bread and made in the term that it already sticks, as that which occurs in heaps of boils and buboes.
And of those are those that are incised with section having three angles; and of those is that in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those are those in which round section and lunar section, and similar to those, are administered.
But that one to whom there is no such as his abscesses are superficial, you ought to perforate that with superficial perforation, or plane only.
And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not take that you extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted from it one part, and then close the abscess until the other day, and then extract a larger part, and then do that many times according to gradation until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the pus, and then the patient dies easily, and you operate on them.
But guard this chapter with great caution, and in the perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, you ought to abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is little, or a flat section, then you administer the qualms of it or of a counter-coction; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you ought to place a cloth in each tract until they meet.
And if in the abscess is incised a part of the opening or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you ought to cover it with old poultice or a thread made of cloth of it, as when you have treated bread or roots, its humidity; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process it and cure it with that which ought of the ointments until it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs during the operation, then you administer cold water and wine in which a cloth is soaked, and place it over the area of blood flow many times.
But if the blood flow persists, then you must administer a regimen and cure, and follow the powders that I have recommended in many places in this book of ours and of division.
But if it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must enfund pulvils in wine and caut oil, and place those on the place.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that be cold until it is the third day, as we have said, and then you must untie the abscess and cleanse it and administer in its cure what is convenient to it until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of all abscesses in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters individually.
Chapter .xli.
Of the section of abscesses that come in the neck of the head.
In the neck of the head small abscesses, and so of species of nodes that contain tunics that are to their making; and the species of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are those that contain moisture similar to lime. And of those are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling to them; and of those are those that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the exterior of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the shape of which comes close thus, the one which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is moisture, then you split that with section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begins in the section of the line of .B.  into the line of .G. Therefore, as the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that moisture, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops many times return, if there remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian enguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it in for another day, because with that you corrode all that is raw of that skin.
And then repeat over that wound with Egyptian enguent second and third times if you judge it necessary, until you are confident that there is no raw any cause of that skin; then cure the wound with enguent until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the section and scorsa that of all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunic that contains that.
But if your artery makes contrariety, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do in the lapidified abscess of section and cure according to what I have told you; and section over lapidified abscess is lighter, because it is of little blood and of little moisture.
And some times there are some of these abscesses that are in the head in some men with whom there is no moisture at all; the cause of which is that I incised over an abscess in the head of an old woman and brought back the abscess as it were deaf, rough, white, which could not be pierced, and if anyone were struck with that, it would plague them.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other than this, so as the abscesses that come to the heads of the children and that you must the roots of the ears, but the section of all of these is superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body of the sania be alleviated in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is convenient to that of cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the section of scrophulas that happen in the neck.
Many times these abscesses become in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and some times they happen in the other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and there are many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and so as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, so as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrophulas are many, because of those some are lapidified, and of those some contain humidities, and of those are malignant ones that do not obey to cure.
Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and it is maugud to all parts, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not pre-occupied, then you must incise that with superficial siccio from the part below to the part above of the body of the line of .G. into the line of .B., and scorsa that of all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extratz that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, that you do not injure your hand by incision, or that you disturb the patient, and that you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and you would prohibit your operation, then pause in the plague with tricolored vitriol or other powders that cause the flow of blood, and tighten the plague, and leave that within which rests the sharpness of the abscess and the plague is softened and begins to be pus-filled. When the blood is separated.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, therefore cut those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofulous vein, then cover it so that you do not cut that scrofulous from its root. Cover it so that you place that with a strong bent iron and let it stay there until it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old linen which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you cut that whole scrofulous, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as pus comes out so that there is no superfluity.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofulous, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suture and what is said.
And those of the scrofulas that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a perforation of that which seizes the pus from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, poultices with ointments and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then you cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the section of the pile of the abscess that occurs within the groin.
The ancients said this section in the groin, and no one in our land has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a hernia, cover it so that the extraction of the groin be avoided, as for that it is not done well for its sake because all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the canal, cover it so that the use of the groin section is used to avoid the destruction which is done by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, cover it so that they cut the groin below three circles of the circles of the groin, or four with a small incision for the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the incision be in cartilage, not in the bone, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood of it are there.
And if the doctor is fearful, cover it so that he extends the groin with a scalpel, and then fends the groin until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause of them.
And then cut the cartilage as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal for the flame which is of that which is emitted with that which is broken of it and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is remaugded in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the groin of the wound, and sew that one only the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is nothing but that you see that some of these abscesses have already opened the groin of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the skin of it is dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by any respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that, I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then cover it so that the wound is cured until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in his groin and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to his cure, and I brought back the woman as if it were the mooing of the dead, and I uncovered the wound and brought back the blood which was coming out of the wound little by little.
Therefore, I was confessed that he had not cut a vein nor guidegi, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if not for the pain in his voice, and after some days he returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the incision over the abscess that occurs in the goiter outside, and is called goiter hernia.
This abscess called goiter hernia is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not of curing.
And the accidental one is in two ways, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess that is made by the blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no cover that one should make presumption to it as iron, but in that one that is small. And you probe that one and investigate that one with the finger, and if you find that one similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended with any of the veins, then you incise that one as the nodes, and extract that one with what contains it of the skin and the bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize the whole of its being, and then you care for the place with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the incision of the species of nodes.
Of nodes there are many species, and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I must recount thus the difference between node and excrescence as to make a doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and vehement pains while the boiling of the superfluity is seated; and it is completed putrefaction that at that hour ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts that which is called a lion's head, which is in the one sac proper.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cyst and it is made so as a vase, whether it is major or minor, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you explore it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument that is called intromes, according to as it will come its form in the chapter which is next to this.
And this way of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And then finally your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then you extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the residue of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to as I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the residue of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry it over it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this shape: as you have been taught, and suspend that one with hooks, and excoriate the core from every part with ease, and guard the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it must be so, and then you extract it in pieces until from it there remains no cause.
Because if from it remains no cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains any small part, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over it that which sits abscess caut, and cure that one of the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you stitch the two lips of it and cure that one with what is necessary for healing.
But if a pulsatile vein is in it contrary, or non-pulsatile, then you coat and moisten the place of three times distilled vinegar, and leave that strait for two days or for three until you can stitch the wound and that the boiling of the blood rests; and then return to incise that which is broken from the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and of them one is medium, and of them one is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They are made of iron, of lead, of extremities rounded decently, so that they fit the entrance in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experts, and they are called probes, and one of them is called a berid.
And there are three kinds, for some are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large one, its form:
The form of the medium one, its form:
The form of the small one, its form:
Convey that they are for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes so that among those are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, like needles, just like large needles with which the stitches are sewn, and they are made of citron bronze, or of lead or of iron, and the best are when they are made of citron bronze.
And they are made the instruments of black plume, the ones that are agreed that for those to be openings the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that they be reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three species, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Form of the large instrument of lead:
Form of the medium instrument of lead:
Form of the small instrument of lead:
The forms of the probes are of many species, for some of them are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small and medium.
And of them are curved probes, and they are of three species.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of them are having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small probe, its form:
Form of a large probe having two curvatures: Form of a medium probe having two curvatures: Form of a small probe having two curvatures:
Form of a large probe having three curvatures:
Form of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for some of them are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which a section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but so that a careful incision of the nodes may be made, the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and so that the disease may be healed and tranquility be restored a little by the burning which causes the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of spatulas, and they are of three species: large, medium and small, as you see.
They are made of bronze and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that one runs to the inside and outside parts, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the fingers for the perforation of the abscesses and not the ailments are perceived, and they are of three species: large, medium and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of leeches with which the flow of blood is abscised, and they are of three species; large, medium and small; the forms of them:
They are made of citron bronze, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And cove that these species of leeches be yours, large, medium and small, so that by those you abscise the flow of blood with speed in need, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
However, do not use those to abscise blood in every place of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the folds of the arms and legs, and in the folds of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groins, and similar to their fleshy folds moist.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments other small ones similar to scorpions of fish according to this form; by which the blood is abscised when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of some men become inflamed due to the fact that they begin to be hairy, and then the nipples become inflamed, and the nipples are assembled like those of women, and they are pus-filled, they are removed.
And to that one who has this, it is necessary that he incisions these with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then he scrapes the entire thickness, and then he fills the wound with a reddish medicament, and then he adjusts the two lips of the wound with stitching, and takes care of it until it is healed.
But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should to women, then it is cut in two halves, its pus overflows, with two sections similar to the lunar figure, of which each one should be contained in the other, until the greater line contains the lesser according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then scrape the strip which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suture and the poultices, what is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of that which it is necessary to cut because of the agitation of the patient, and the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive wash and leave it until that corrosive corrodes what is of the flesh, and then take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the kind of scrofulas, hard, the ones that contain a skin that is sac.
And of these, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as all that is in the abscess of the pus is evacuated, then you fill it with old cloth and leave it until the next day.
And then the cloth is removed and it is cured with a convenient wash to the wound, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind of nodes and scrofulas, then you cut it as we have said in the section on scrofulas, in the same way.
But if the wound is extended so that it is a cavity, then administer a cautery in it according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the incision of abscesses that happen because of artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the strip that is above it is consolidated, then many times an abscess happens. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are from the artery or vein: that when the abscess is from the artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it that there is a stridor.
And that one which is from the vein is round in the manifest of the body.
And incision on this abscess is an error, and most of all in that one which is from the armpits, and the corners, and the neck, and in most places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary that its cure with iron be avoided, and that one which is in the extremities, or on the head, it should be avoided.
But on that one which is of those by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut in the strip a long incision; and then open the incision with tweezers and then the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to be able to extract two arteries which are in the temples.
And then pierce the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until the blood that is in it is evacuated, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which it is generated power until the ligaments fall; and then take care of it with convenient washes to the wound until it is healed.
And if the abscess is from the section of a vein, then you must have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the strip, and then introduce the needle from the place which you have had from your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the thread with that needle from the entire abscess, with the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of it until when it is emitted that which is in it, then you cut the superfluity of the strip, and leave that which is tied from it.
And then place upon it powder which has been submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with calx and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which happens by twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses happen in arteries and veins, and seemingly abscesses happen in the nerves when they are struck or happen by excessive labor, and by similar means.
And it is made most in the places of the helpers or the talus, or in every place in which the joints are ill.
And it is a grave abscess, and it is assembled to the color of the other body, and in the greatest of its dispositions it is of its own and when it is straitened with vehemence, it is felt in the patient seeming stupor.
And it is not abscesses aggregated in the front of the body, and for this it is left the chain, and it is ill to all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore those that are in the joints should not be enclosed with iron, because very quickly they will become entangled with contraction.
But that which is in the head or in the front, fence the chain with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take that with the forceps and excise it from the roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an anchor, and excoriate that, and then cover that; and adjust the plaque with suture, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .li.
Of the section of abscess which happens from the cheek that happens to the belly.
There happen to some men growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, the ones that are called fungals for similarity to those with fungi, of which the roots are subtle and the head of that is thick; and already the lips of those are turned, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is magnificated.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him there were two parts that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine roots.
And already the lips of those were turned and were divided, and humidity flowed from that all the time.
Therefore I incised those and attributed in one in weight of eighteen ounces. and the other of six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the one is white, humid, of subtle roots; then you the incision with a spatula late, and be in your presence cauteries in the fire, because many growths you must the section of it is expelled much blood; and if you feel the blood, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient fearful and timid, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a lead of fresh lead made, and strengthen with that one, the manner of which is that which we have said; and leave that for two days.
And then adjust in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead great, as it devours in the one, until it is excised and falls by itself its labor.
But if the one is of thick roots, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of terror, and more so in that which is in the belly.
But possible is that you incise the majority of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then cure that until the plaque is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise the one that is of dusky color, of little feeling, of leg regardment, for that one is an abscess of cancer.
And I come with remembrance of cancer, then.
Chapter .lii.
Of the cure of eminence of the umbilicus.
Eminence of the umbilicus is made by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphrac which is above the belly, and yeys of it the cloth or bowel according to that it ought in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from vein or artery according to that it is said before, or by wind contracted in it.
But if it is by fissure of the ciphrac and by the emission of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion its pain, and then appears from different situations. And if it is by egress of the bowel, then the situation of that with it of that which we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and when you press that with your hands it is concealed, and then returns; and fort leu is with it, and it is magnified much of the introduction of bath and vehement labor.
But if by humidity, then it is lion and is not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is constrained, nor is believed.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess to black declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then it is a grave abscess, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lion.
And the operation on him is that you consider at this time if the prominence of the navel is by artery blood, or by vein, or by wind; therefore, be prohibited from the cure of him, because in that there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is by the intestine or by the cloth, then command the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then send him to attempt in the circuit of all the navel, and then command him to stay between his hands over his two, and then surround him with a spatula wide in the circuit of the navel on the place which you have sent with the tentacle; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the parts above with a large unci; and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
And then pierce the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce your finger into that indication and try the intestine; and if you have found it or guarded by the ligament, then you extract it and expel the intestine to the parts inside of the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, then take that with an unci; and cut the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that knot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until you can see the skin extended and fall by itself; or cut that when it is subtle and you can, and then cure that with water that cove of the enguentz until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then command that you concave the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that with water that cove and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is to be cured with medicines, and that it is avoided in it the cure with iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and most when it is beginning small.
But when it is old and is large, you should not have confidence in it, because I have not been able to heal from that kind of ailment nor have I seen another, nor that has been able to reach that.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black cholera some times, and then bleed him, if a manifest repletion is found.
And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located with the operation, and then prohibit in the tract uncis which cove to that; and then concave from all part with the good codena excrutiation until no remains any cause of the roots of it. And leave the blood to run, and do not cut that lightly, and express the places, and purge the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you of the instruments.
But if it makes you contrary to thick blood incision of vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydropic.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropic of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of timpanistres nor to the species of yposarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydropic timpanistre with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if the patient has already achieved debility, or is with that other ailment other hydropic, as if it is in it cough or body of belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is upon that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other ailment but hydropic solely, and not a child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, expel the water to the part below the navel, and then take a spatula spines according to this form:
be of two parts acute long, of acute extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some shortness small by small, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead that.
And consider if the generation of hydrops is from the intestines, because then when you have the section you move away from the navel for a quantity of three fingers to the left side, on the right side of it over the pubic bone.
But if the generation of hydrops is due to liver disease, then your section should be to the left of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section should be to the right.
And do not let your section be on the side where the patient wants to make the incision because it does not allow the superfluities to run to that place freely.
And then perforate with the instrument the whole chain, and then introduce yourself into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the chain and the skin, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of a fingernail or around.
And then perforate the skin until the spatula reaches the desired place, and that is the place of the water. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of which this is the form: and is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead, and at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is made blunt in the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
And at the tip of it most sovereign is an armlet, because when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately detaches from the instrument, so it evacuates the water in the middle quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it is not good in the hour, for it will die the patient very quickly by resolution of his animal spirit, or it will happen to him a five-pointed thing which is approaching death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what they signify to you the dispositions of the patient from the virtue of the pulse and from the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause because it is retained immediately by the chain which retains the hole that is on the skin of which and remind you that you perforate that in that manner.
And then repeat the instrument the other day if the patient tolerates the water, and extract a small quantity of water, and do water for some days with caution, and guard yourself from error so that it does not remain of the water but little.
But if you fear for the patient, and let out a great quantity of water, then cure that with burial in warm sand, and bathe him with warm water, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver after the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what has preceded.
Chapter .lx.
Of the cure of children who are born with the places of the urine not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are so from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixing is not perforated (or it is straight hole or not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to return with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And then place in the hole a fine lead nail and tie that, and keep it for three days or for .iiii.tre.
And when it wants to urinate be careful and let it urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is already possible that the urine which goes over the place, does not let this opening.
But that one of which the hole is straight be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, are leditz, the cause is that of those, that one who is born and the hole is at the end of the head of the vagina because it cannot urinate at the sides of it, until it elevates the vagina with its hand to the sides above; and it is not to him generation, because his sperm cannot arrive at the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be reversed on his back, and then extend the head of the vagina of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and incise the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is incision of a feather, or that you do not tear any part, so that the middle of him comes similar to the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place as it is necessary.
And guard yourself in the operation of the flux of blood, because many times accidents happen in this; and pause yourself to it with water that you have stopped the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of albater which happens in the prepuce in the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce of the head of the vagina.
Many times this albater happens in the vagina and it is a prominence of bad flesh.
And of those one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, cover that you suspend with a subtle thread and cut that which is within that world entirely; and then place upon that wound submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure it with diaphana ointment within that it be healed.
And if it is malignant, of a leg color, then cover that you administer cautery to the incision of it and the root of it.
But if the ulcer is in the foreskin of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then cover that you show the ulcer which is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure that outside, because when you cure that together with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be troubled.
And if there are sores that occur in the genitals and in the foreskin, blackening and corruption, then cover that you conquer all that which is already degraded and that which wants to corrupt or that which is already corrupted; and then line upon that with honey, which is mixed with flour of the rind of millet and of herbs crushed and sifted.
And then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
Because cautery is helpful in two dispositions at once, so it is in the flow of blood and in the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed all at once, then cover that you introduce into the flesh of the foreskin a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in that of whom the foreskin is his, and upon it circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs because of plague or because of an abscess) cover that you excoriate with a blunt spatula until it is dissolved the ligament and it is separated the head of the penis entirely.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then cover that you excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is very lightly perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of the subtle, the which is already softened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then be cured with vi stiptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of children and the cure of that which occurs to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as with other plagues: but rather because it is of our operation and our will, and it is of that which is proper to those of children, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way lighter losing to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, the cause of which is that I have found the majority of the artificers and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and with torrets; and they use of ligament with a nail and of incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these manners and have not found better purification with scissors, with ligament with a nail that in purification with the nail, because many times the outer coating escapes, because the coating of the foreskin has two tunics, and the outer tunic remains, and very lightly it is forced to another incision and certain pain. And in purification which is made by alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, it is not assured the incision of the extremity of the virile member, because very lightly it enters into the furrow of it.
But in the operation with a nail, very lightly it obazes iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a manner that there is no need of purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification that is made with scissors and ligaments with a nail, the goodness, experiment described to me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharpnesses, and incides so according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the nail with a figure containing the foreskin of the penis entirely, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if it is of those who understand a little, that you do not do except that you tie the nail in its penis only, and that you let it go into the other day.
And then do that to cheer him in all that manner which is to your possibility of that which receives his intelligence. And then make him lie between your arms, prepared and not be moving; and hide the scissors in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the patient's vagina and blow into the canal, and pull that out until the head of the vagina comes out, and then modify that which is attached to it of filth.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let the one pair of extremities be non-cutting and the other pair be cutting, so that the handle of the key does not come out, and let the length of the two points be as the length of two handles equally.
But the error in modification is that when the forceps are forcefully applied, the internal canal is completely expelled, or part of it is cut.
Therefore, so that you extend that one from your hour with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the place and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with a tool and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and what is swollen remains below the vagina, an abscess, then you let that out until the abscess is cauterized, and exfoliate that with facility, and cut that according to what you have prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the vagina, for it would not be good for it.
And therefore cure that with the water that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
And if it is cut from the canal beyond measure, and obeys the parts above, that does not hurt it.
And however cure that with the water that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction caused by a stone or by congealed blood, or by a tumor or by a tumor, and similar to those of water that we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have said and it is vehemently caused on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It is of silver and it is a subtle lion's cone, as well as a tube of bird's feather with the subtlety of a long ray in similarity to a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle tube at the head of it.
And the manner of the emission of urine by this is that you take the faithful double knot and tie it in the middle of it wool or cloth for good ligation; and insert the extremities of the knot in the part below the syringe, and cut with the forceps if any cause of the wool is superfluous, but introduce it into the tube with vehemence and then tighten the syringe with border and with album of cow.
And make the patient lie on their side, and rub the bladder of him and the vagina with humid oils, and olive oil and water.
And then insert the syringe with facility until it reaches the root of the vagina; and then double the vagina above at the part of the navel; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient be brought to the desired cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
And then extend the knot with the wool little by little, for the urine seeps the wool.
Then extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do water and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient recovers relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are according to water.
When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or congealed blood in that, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you want in that to distill waters and medicines, then it is done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is the form of it:
...but in the extremity of it is closed, so it is closed. And in that there are three straps: two on one side, so many times.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which is what is called the navel, and as much as it is filled, it is added, until when any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what is clamped with the which is phicat naphta in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, as you want to prohibit humidities in the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and draw with that what is expelled to the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
And then introduce the extremity of the clamp into the vagina according to what we have recounted in the ciringua; and then expel the humidity with that which you expel, so that that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Form of the subtle cristeri with which the bladder is sterilized, and it is that form:
And it is made of silver or of lat, of which the head is more or less like a small feather, and below it a canal is led into it.
And then take the bladder of the motor, and put in it the humidity that you want to sterilize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligature, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the cristeri into the vagina.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity with the structure descending until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle of it; and pierce that of all its roundness; and then introduce a strong thread into those holes, so that it is rolled; and then add the circle so that it is attached to the sofatur, because you put in it the water that you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And you so narrating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient feels his vagina, and many times it aches, and then it is straightened; and with that, there is a hole in the anus in many of them.
And it is easier the healing of children of those who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is milder for that which is between them.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, cover at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with the cristeri which extracts all the fissure which is in their bowels; because that fissure sometimes prohibits the entrance of the stone, and the inquiry of it.
And then be present the patient on his feet and be counted and maugut in a way that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or what jumps from there sometimes.
And then do that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it be below the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the lower parts.
And then pierce that and all that from there.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you take care immediately with section over it.
And if you don't catch all of it with your touch, then cover that you anoint with oil your said index of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said middle if it is a young complete, and introduce that into their anus. And pierce of the stone while it stays below your said. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your said, and expel that to the parts outside ves the place where you made the section.
And command the minister that presses the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand restrains the vagina which is below the genitals, in a part of the place where the section is made.
And then introduce a spatula well incident of which this is the form of it: And divide in him that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, to the left side of the thigh; and let the incision be over that bone and your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision outside be wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that comes out of the bone to him possible, and no more, because very strong compresses your finger which is in the anus the bone must the incision, and is forced-thrown its faculty.
And know that of the bone there is some to which its angle and margins are, so that the incision of it is made difficult by this.
And of that which is like a gland, and is round, and is made of it light incision.
Therefore if it is that one to which its angles and margins are, adjust in the fissure.
And if it is not so forced-thrown, then cover that you engage upon that, or that you grasp upon that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is like a file with which you grasp upon the bone, and do not escape from it; or that you interweave of it a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot upon that, then you amplify the tract a little, and if you see flux of blood, abcise in strength that with vitriol trissat.
But if the bone is more than one, then at the beginning you impel the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then you incise upon it; and then you impel a little upon that; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if it is a very large bone, then ignorance is that you incise that with a large incision, because you inflict upon the patient one of two causes: either that it dies or that it devours to it the distillation of urine continuous, because of that the place is not of all consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is forced-thrown, or engage in the fracture of it with the forceps until you extract that in pieces.
Therefore, as you will have completed your operation, then fill the wound of incenses of aloe and blood of dragon, and strengthen that. And pause upon that cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and water, so that abscess caut be ceded.
And then turn the patient upon his neck, and do not untie the ligament until the third day.
And as you will have untied that, embroca the place with water and a little oil, and then cure that with an enguent diafinicon and with an enguent diabazilicon until it be healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess caut,  adherent and corrosive, and of that semblance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and by it the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood with urine), then therefore interweave your finger in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and of it putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all species, with that which you convene to it of the cure until it be healed.
And cover in the hours of all the cure that you lie both the thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed upon the place.
And if the bone is small and is in the middle of the vagina, and is stuck in it, and the egress of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water which I recommend before you arrive at incision, because troops of times by this cure it is accused of incision; and already I have spoken of this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron blunt, of which this is the form of it:
of triangular extremity, acute, fitted in a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie with it the vagina below the bone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then interweave the iron into the vagina, perforating with facility until the perforator comes to that bone. And revolve the perforator with your hand in that bone little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately absolved.
And then press your hand upon that which is broken of the bone from the outside part of the vagina, because that is broken, and is forced-thrown with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not to your disposal for any cause which prohibits you from that, then tie a thread below the bone, and another thread above the bone. And then incise upon the bone in that vagina between two ligatures. And then extract that. And then untie the ligament and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary the ligament of thread below the bone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligament above, because when the thread is untied the egress of the bone, the codena returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for that it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the codena to the parts above, or that you must return the tie to it, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
On the Extraction of a Stone from Women.
Stones in women are rarely produced.
But if a stone is found in any of them, then its cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman, if she is very young, is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-versed who describes herself to the physician when she is chaste, or of women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the section on the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because you indigeys of preonda section, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to do so, then you must take a woman physician well-versed, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a skilled and subtle physician, or present a woman matron well-versed in the ways of women, or a woman who in this art is partly of the art.
Therefore, do this presentation, and command him to do all that you command him, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason for which is that he should regard whether the woman is a virgin, then he must put his finger into her anus and want the stone.
Therefore, if that is found, force that from her, and then command him to insert into that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she puts her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends that with good understanding.
Therefore, if that is found, then command that gradually she withdraws that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue, until it reaches the root of the vagina.
And then insert into that position of the majority of the vagina, the root of the vagina, from whichever part it is stopped and hold the stone in that part, and the finger of it not be removed from the stone, short of it.
And the section be little at the beginning; and then insert the ray onto that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the stone is thrown from that.
And know that the species of stones are many: for some are few and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many species are of it by what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissat and take it for an hour until the blood is absconded, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments which are said in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is incised, then you put powder on the place and tighten that with poultices and stricture descent, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
And when the acuteness of the blood is ceded after some days, and the place can be opened, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter lxii.
On the Section of a Hernia.
Hernia ayguoza is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the huou, and it is called ciphac.
And some times it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared it nature in the part of the huou, so that it is a cuyat that already is another huou; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is for debility which happens to the genitals, so that into those is effused this matter, and some times it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this humidity is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or roge, or it is black feculent, or it is ayguosa blanqua, and this is the most.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is this: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the apostema is round declining a little in length as if a figure of huou, and appears the genitals, for the humidity contains that from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the apostema is round with part of the huou and by this man estimates that it is another huou.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then catz below the centiment.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you probe the color of the humidity in the apostema with entromes cayrat of which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the entromes, judge of that which is deduced from it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of him with iron, then we command the patient to be flexible if this is possible, and times the body of him full.
And then raise him on his back, on some cause a little higher, and place cloths over him.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right of him, the one who extends his hand to one of two sides to the groin of the genitals and to the part of the navel of the belly.
And then take a spatula wide and cut the groin of the genitals from the middle place for the length into near the penis.
And be made the section according to rectum equally distant from the line that goes through the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white head encompassing.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut that; and your scraping with which you scrape by a part of the skin that may be suspended with the most and subtly examine with the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then perforate the head full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the section with a hook, and extend the head to the upper parts; and do not touch the groin encompassing, and cut the head in that manner that is to you possible. And cut that with its entirety or in pieces, and mostly its side subtle, because if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not made certainty that the water does not return.
But if the fluid proceeds from that outside of its groin in the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the head, return inside that, and then adjust the two lips of the groin of the genitals with suture, and then cure that thus as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by another illness, then you must tie the vessels which are on the suspender, and extract the head, and then cure that with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts simultaneously, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to that which you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it should be an operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the blood, and introduce into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place before other wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and the navel of the belly; and place above folded cloths and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then take two cloths and be them filled with carded wool according to this semblance; and be made the extremities with which is pressed from cotton or from damp wool, and be added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the buttock into the two, and the second presses to the part of the penis, and two extremities over two thighs and two other extremities over two angles, and all structure be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cautery knife and that you cut with that the groin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to that we have recounted until it is discovered the white head containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: And it is assembled in Greek letter.
And then perforate with that head, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
And then extend the head with a hook, and scrape with a hook, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and cut that according to that is to you possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than operation with section.
But if to you makes contrariety abscess caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then you must cure whatever contrariety makes to you for that, with cure which you convene to him according to that is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer perforation according to that we have recounted here; and it is when it is certified you, for that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then you must make the patient lie on some elevated cushion, and then perforate the abscess in the lowest part of it with a wide spatula, and place the perforation according to the length of the body.
And be the aperture wide until it runs all the water.
And then place on the place cotton and tie that and leave that, so that it runs the remaining of the water. And then cure that until the wound is healed.
But if contrariety is in the outflow of the water in that hour you perforate that: and this is not done except for that which the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water, then you must put in the wound a needle or instrument with which is extracted the water from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the aperture of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and is collected for about six months or around those; and when it is collected, then it is pierced according to that same manner, so that the patient will pass his days thus.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of the section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of losing it to harm in the greatest dispositions; because to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And you are remembering the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes: or by acute excess, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not atrophic in it pain, and it is a grave abscess.
And very hard is the abscess lapidified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is made by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those so that already it is perceived the recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
But that which is by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and no cover that you touch it.
But that which is made by the inflammation of the vein is not dispersed of it any cause, despite the compression with the fingers.
And it is already possible that on this species a section may be made and on the other flesh; and that you insert the cord of the genitals, and then extend the bowel to the upper parts, and extract it from the white cap, and deliver the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensory more than you deliver it from all parts of the bowel.
Therefore, if the bowel is already among those carnations consolidated, then you must extract the bowel and insert it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the cap, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and insert it by a round incision.
But if it is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must insert all that which is of it, and extract the bowel as we have said.
Therefore, when the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the vitals.
Vit is an abscess enveloped by some wrapping resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is out of fear for that of which it is preceded recollection.
However, it is necessary that they say operation on it according to that which I have done the first.
And I say that it is necessary that you make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then peel the suspensory of the testicles to the lower parts; and then take the cord of the genitals with your fingers with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and have those other ministers that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then insert it with a wide sharp spatula by a transverse section in the right of the vessels while the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle which is double-headed, and tie that in the first of the places where it happens vit, and tie that other time in the rear of them. And then insert those in the middle place by a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered of the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you wish to be healed so that the vessels which annoy one of the two genitals, because it is not bad for that.
But if it happens vit to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles be tied by that with the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be established, or that they be tied so that it be not a benefit to those.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by a section that ends in the cap extended over the belly of part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, for that descending the bowels of that rupture ad to some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the cap or of excision of it, and these two species happen for many causes: either percussion, or by seizures, or by clamor, or by elevation of any heavy cause, or by similarities.
And the sign of it, when it is by extension of the cap, is that it happens little by little in long time, and it does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within ves the preon for so that the cap comprehends the bowel.
And the sign of him is when he is by section of the head, because at the beginning he makes a violent pain suddenly; and is pus different appearing after the code propdana appearing, and this is by the exit of the intestine, and the body of it to the sides of the head.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine the cloth, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the intestine wound, and here it is retained, and this is a great harm to the patient, and sometimes it makes a bad pain and more when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the kinds of this disease with iron there is fear, because whoever is to be avoided the catching in that.
And the way of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the sides of his cavity if he obeys his return, and then he is laid on his back between your hands, and raise the legs of him.
And then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the sides below, and cut the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix in two lips of the section uncis according to that you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that to you is possible that of that the fluid be forgotten.
And then scrape that skin which is below the cord of the testicles, until that the white hard skull of each part be discovered.
Now you introduce your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between white skull, the one which is below the cord of the fluid, and between the skull second, and loosen with that adherence that is in the part behind the fluid.
And then with your hand the cord of the testicles to the sides above, and thus extend the white skull on your left hand, and elevate the fluid with the skull to the part of the section; and command the minister that extend the fluid upwards and you loosen the adherence that is behind with solution complied.
And search with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard skull. But if you find of it any cause, then you peel that to the belly below.
And then cut in the part below of the cord of the testicles by section of which runs blood and heals thus as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool immersed in oil, and pause in the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white skull is cauterized, which we have said near the incision fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the binding until that by itself it falls.
But if the catching of him is late, then of water caused be embroiled, and pause on that until it falls according to that we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of the wounds until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of  ventosa hernia.
In this hernia no one has been seen to have been bold on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you lie the vessels near the section on that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place in sending the abscess with that which opened it, until that the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to that we have said until that it be healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the disruption that is made in the  anguonars.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the anguonars as we have said, and emerges the place.
And do not leave to the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they leave, that is few; and return them in all hours.
But if it is prolonged the time with that, it is adjusted fissure in the skull until that descends the intestine in the skull; and occurs that by the extension of the skull which is in the anguonars as we have said, the cause is that the skull is extended, and then it is softened and the place is putrid and emerges.
And the care of him is by cautery as it is preceded by the narration of him.
And some times it is cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies on his two between your hands, and then dry the place of the rupture of the abscesses emerging with a section according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the loincloth while it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it on the prominent place of the cloth, and press it to the front of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent places on the end of the ray of the cloth, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
And then extract the end of the ray, and do not cut the cloth at all, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause as you have now learned in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the plagues, and as you cut the threads, purify that and restore the plague while it is consolidated; because the cloth is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of softening the scrotum of the testicles.
Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is fed by the regard of it.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it to make the patient lie on his two, and cut all the scrotum which is softened on the natural scrotum; and then adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, sew at the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by the cure of the other plagues while it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is exempted, but for the reason it is told to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary the remembrance of it except for two ways, of which one is so that it is in the science of the physician when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our usefulness for those, as well as of goats, and of sheep, and of pigs, and of similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be put in hot water until its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang. And then take those with your hand while they are soft and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, cover that you have the beast and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lie the suspensory, and cut over each testicle with a section between two testicles processed.
And then cut those that you will have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the cloth any cause, but the subtle cloth which is over the vessels.
And this manner of castration is better the one done by attrition, because attrition firmly leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the plague while it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that it appears in that which sees the space in the scrotum of testicles, in which one figure as the  female part in which it is felt.
And sometimes from that cord urine the which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the female organ on the  pith is as two testicles of a man a little of all diminished at the forward part as the prepuce of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that cover that you cut those flesh adjusted while it flees the  impression of it, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men of which yeys urine the which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh for causes of the women.
Lenting is very often adjusted on natural causes while it is stressed and is made to be seen; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it spreads as in men and serves during coitus.
Therefore, you must have the superfluity of the liquid with your hand or in a cup and cut it.
And in the last incision, mainly in the front of the root, so that no flow of blood occurs.
And then care for it with the cure of the plagues until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn that nays in the horrifici of the mayre entro that umple aquel, and fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa of coa (and for aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove that nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro that sia sanada.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is that the conh of the woman is not perforated, or is the trauc petit. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is by illness which has preceded, and that is done either by flesh not well-adjusted or by a subtle or thick ciph.
And it is done either in the front of the mother, or in the sides of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and forbids coit and pregnancy and childbirth, and very much forbids menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is done by regarding the metrona, if the oppilacio is apparent, proper; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with your fingers or with the ray.
But if the oppilacio is by a subtle ciph, and it is proper to the two labia, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you place on the two labia pulvils, and then you place your fingers indicated from both sides at once.
And the woman be upon her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force so that that subtle ciph be broken and the oppilacio be opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and wash with warm water every day so that the incised area not be consolidated.
But if the ciph is thick and thick, then it is that you cut that with a spatula or with a leaf of myrtle.
But if the oppilacio is by carnada, then suspend that with a cup, and cut that.
And be with you the medicines that make cease the flow of blood by biting, such as ahacatia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with album of egg.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the plague not be consolidated lightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calgua of li sec.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the mother's nativity of other carns, and then it is that you cut according to this manner. But if this is by a carbuncle, the carbuncle which is in the mother not be done contrarietat with iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botor that happens in the conh of the women.
Hemorrhoids so appear from the orifices of many veins into which of those corro blood continuously; and as so old hemorrhoids and are made theyls.
And already I have said in the division the species of those and their signs, and say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when so in the front of the mother and do not appear to the sentiment, then in those not be done cure with iron.
But those which so in the orifice of the mother over which cats sentiment, so those which are cured.
And it is that you put the woman in a major frieze and then extend the theyl with the forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut those with the razitz.
And then pulverize over those of the fluxes of the blood of one of the incised powders biting, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then enpellesca her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if it perseveres the fluxes of the blood, then do that sezer in decoction of sumat and of the skins of millegranas and of guals and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and comfiys that with honey and vi agre and make a plaster with water over the back of her.
And if the blood is abscindit, bo es; and if not, do adhere with two ventozas, and to the nipples ses escarificatio.
And then take wool and submergeys that with juice of coriander or with juice of arnagloza or with juice of guarravier with vi pentit and make adhere to the place; and then cure the place with enguentz until it is sanat.
And care for that within that is healing.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of the perforation of the eyssedura  accident in the womb.
Many kinds of abscesses happen in the womb, as well as boils and abscesses, and ulcers and buboes and carbuncles and fistulas, hemorrhoids and fissures, and boils and other abscesses. And I have already said these ailments and the kinds of them and their symptoms, and their cures in the division.
And I want to say in this treatise about an abscess that comes in the womb when it is of abscesses that are healing, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it catz upon that feeling, then do not cut with perforation of it, and care for it with that which helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then have you make the woman lie on a cot that has two cots; and recline upon her two and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms below her shoulders, and tie her with a band to that which is convenient.
And then the midwife follows from the right side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the womb is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done afterward.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray on the preon of the womb of the woman, and that which from the instrument enters into the womb be no more than the preon of the womb and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the preon of the womb, then have you put powders on the texture of the preon of the womb so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instrument in the preon of the womb.
And have you put the verdigris that runs in the instrument from the side above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the verdigris until the orifice of the womb is opened.
And as the excrescence appears, and is touched with the hand and is lion and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
And as the sania is evacuated, then have you put in the wound a meca submerged in oil rubbed or green oil in which there is some stippity; and put the calca7 in the section in the preon of the womb.
And put before the womb and on the pentenilh clean wool submerged in water in which there are boiled malvas.
And then it is cured after two days with gargling which is convenient to that until it is healed.
And sometimes the womb and the wound are washed in such a way that it is christened with water and honey, and then with water in which the root of lily or aristolochia longa is boiled, and then returns to the gargling.
And if the wound is deep in the womb, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have care for it with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos should be medicated when they are second figure unnatural.
It is necessary that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by the signs of it, and that when you see the woman expressing in the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and on that it is eased by that which is on her of the part, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this part is second figure natural, and it is the emission of it on its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, as you see those signs, then have you the belly of it be compressed so that the embryo descends lightly when it is descending on its head, they give it the second one, and it is washed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this part is unnatural and not laudable, because when the embryo is emitted on its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and the feet of it, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it. or it is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its collar, and seeming of the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, it is necessary cause that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I have shown all figure of those, and what kind is in those by that so that it be signified by that and be stood upon that.
When the feyt is emitted on its head by natural egrecio, and that is vehement on the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that sezer, or what the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fenugrec coyt and with humid oils.
And then insert the metronome between his two small shoulders and cut it with that second one, or pierce it with your nail until you draw out what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly while she pushes the child.
But if she does not push, then make the woman drink a concoction of ptillium and fenugreek with a little bit of wine.
And then command her, the midwife, to be ready and make that stirrup with the condition; and hold her mouth and her nose for one hour, so that the child is quickly forgotten.
And if the two hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then make them return little by little with ease. But if she does not obey the entrance, then place the woman on a cushion and raise her legs; and then shake the cushion on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
And if the hands are not brought back and the child dies, then cut those and extract the intestines of the child or tie the body to your hand with cloth and extract it with equality, for that is forgotten.
When the child lies on its feet, then make you push those up, and then convert the child small, and then make that equal, and then take one foot of it and extend those little by little.
But when it is born into the thighs, then command her to express herself, and make that stirrup with the condition, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then return the child little by little until you place it in that second natural figure, for that is then forgotten with light ease.
And if it is prohibited with all that we have recounted, then take a mixture of althea and dissolved gum, and strike it all in the mortar with a good percussion, and then line it with water on the woman's cunt, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that censer in tepid water, until you can catch the vapors.
And when the parts of her are softened, then make her a fumigation of myrtle and place it under her. And when she has been fumigated for an hour, then make her lie on a cushion, and then make that stirrup and extract her mouth, and take that away, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, for the child will be quickly forgotten.
From this moment, the child lying longitudinally while one of its hands is extended. Try to reduce the hand of the child, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her walk.
And if walking is not possible, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with a vehement shaking, and then administer the remedies which I have told you about from the mixtures.
And if the birth has come, then make her lie on a cushion, and then study about the reduction of the hand, and make the child lie in its natural figure, and make the stirrup for the woman and command her to compress herself until she is forgotten.
From this moment, the child lying on its back with its arms and feet spread out, and its face on the side of its mother. Make the midwife take the child's hand and gently turn it little by little, and make it so with ease.
And when it is done and as much as it is made straight, then place on its cunt what we have recounted of oil and mixtures.
And then command her to suckle little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a cushion and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make that stirrup with the condition. The end of the preparation of the fetus on its side.
When the mother pushes the horrifici in this manner, consider, and then make an incision with your nail into the second one until it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of it, then make an incision of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then gently push the patient's feet towards their hips while you hold that second cloth, and tell the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and the sir should be laid down with light movement, if God wills.
Death of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four, but that is strange and difficult; but it is due to the course of nature, and not to life.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one second after another, and are separated by the sac, distinguish them among the ligaments in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are laid down as if it were a single fetus by gentle natural movement, and are sometimes laid down by unnatural movement as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult during childbirth and reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then you care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the ingenious one, leading to health.
Remembering what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and I have already verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to ten, the cause of which was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this covers that which is in the science of the midwife, who is very close to that appearance of this, and therefore pauses it as much as it covers.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of the medicine, and it is not expelled outside, and you are forced to use the operation with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not suffering from any of the accidents for which she is feared to be in danger.
Then the woman should be laid down on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs elevated.
And the minister should have those two parts or be tied on the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oily and with mucilage of althea and of fenugreek and of cumin seed.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she introduces her hand with gentleness into the mother, and then she seeks with her hand the place where the hooks will be in the fetus.
And convenient places in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends upon its head, and then you place the hooks in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or behind the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the places proper of the back, or behind the hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon the feet of it, then in the pelvis, or in the middle of the back.
And you should hold the hook with your right hand, and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and introduce your hand with gentleness and place the hook in one of those places which we have said, until you reach the left cause.
And then you pause and place in the opposition of it another hook, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction is equal, and it is not extension according to its rectitude alone.
And be careful to every part, so that the movement of it be alleviated as it is done during the eradication of it.
And consider in it that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces them with gentleness and revolves with those that are retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the hooks are changed into the place which is more out; and do so until the whole fetus is expelled.
But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then the midwife should envelop that with a cloth; and then extract that until the whole is expelled, and incise it either at the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And so you should do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is a constriction in its movement, or there is water adjusted in the head of it, then the midwife should introduce between the fingers the pointed spatula and split the head and extract the water, or what discharges that with an instrument which is named "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is after this.
And similarly, if the bone is broken in a large part by nature, and then the bone is inserted into the fracture, or the bone is splinted as we have said, then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is broken and is constricted by the collarbone, then it is fractured so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obeys to such a thing, then you cut the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the bowels of the belly are suppurated or are in it hydrophic, then you must pierce that so that the moisture which is in it flows out.
But if the thing is on their feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is constricted by the belly and the foot, then you must extract that with a cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and that you make the belly and the foot so that the water which is in those runs out.
But if the other members are outstretched and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is closed, then she inserts her hand into the perineum of the mother, and with that she seeks the head, and pulls it into the mouth of the mother, and then inserts into it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an abscess caused by a boil, then it must not be touched; it is best to administer an infusion of moist fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the thing is on their side, then if possible it is, be pricked; and be administered the water that we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it is incised in pieces, and it is extracted.
And you must not leave any cause of the second coming.
And when you have completed your whole operation, then administer the water that we have said of the cure in the abscesses caused by the ones which happened to the mother.
And if there occurs a flux of blood, then send them down in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and then on that very fire another pregnancy, and then a dead fetus is the other. It happened to me a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated so that a fire opened, and it began to throw out pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Then I put on him some causes of strong attraction plasters, and extracted from him a bone, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore, I continued to treat the abscess, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in that manner for a long time, cured of him a little pus.
And I do not affirm that this is strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the physician artifices with his hand for the cure administers.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the forceps with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the stretcher in which the blades are inserted, to which are inserted two forceps in two extremities of two feet. But nevertheless this forceps must be more subtle than the stretcher, and be made of either ivory or wood of beech.
And its width of each shaft is two fingers and the margin of each one is one finger, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of two shafts are two adjustments of that same shaft, which are already closed, of which the length is the majority of a palm and a little less, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed forceps.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ivory or beech shafts according to the semblance of forceps. But nevertheless, at the extremity of it are two adjustments as we have seen, and the length of those adjustments is about a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And as you want to open the mother with those, then you make the woman lie on the bed with her feet dangling, opening what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother so that the midwife makes it as you want.
The form of vertigo that the ancients say:
Form of impellent which is pushed by the foot:
Form of dizziness which is contained by the great head
And it is assembled like forceps, which has teeth at the extremity, thus sometimes, and some times it is made long thus like forceps according to this form, thus sometimes, which has teeth thus like teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained. Form of dizziness little:
Form of a nail having a spine:
Form of a nail having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is severed:
Form of two spatulas wide:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of that and are prepared the artificers, as much as is lighter to their operation and more of them the men by their quantity.
And in works of those instruments already whatever it is of them you should prepare, because the necessity of those is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, then you command the woman to retain her breath, and then make that stir with a condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of her and over her nostrils, and if by this it is pushed out, it is good.
And if not, then you take a wool and perforate in the cover a hole and place in that herbs inside the mouth of the mother, thus like calament and rue and anise and chamomile and sicados arabic and cinnamon and santaurea. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the wool, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cannula of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stir as we have said, and the secondine is thrown out with velocity.
But if remaining after this cure and it is not pushed out, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the vagina and with that she feels the secondine, and when she has found it, then she takes it and extends it little by little. But if it is annexed in the perineum of the mother, then she introduces her hand as we have recounted, and when she has found the secondine, she extracts it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not feel the violent traction. It is necessary that it be changed to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with stirring and with medication of the wool with herbs.
But if it is not thrown out with all the causes that we have recounted, then guard that you do not tire over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is emitted from it to the mouth of the mother lies to the cushion of the woman, and then christenize that with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it to rot that then after some days and it will be dissolved and it will be thrown out.
But when it may be possible, it is elevated bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and what you read the woman; and then it is necessary that fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
But some of the Ancients already are espoused sub-fumigation of nazitort and of dried figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated of the retention of menstruation and of the secondine:
It is made of lead or of bronze.
And it is placed the subtle extremity in the vagina and the broad extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of cure of the unperforated anus of the child.
Many children are born and the anuses of them are not perforated, those which already have a subtle and oily cicatrix. Then it is necessary to the midwife that with her finger she perforates that cicatrix; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and guard that it does not touch the lacert.
And then place over that wool infused in wine and oil; and then cure that with enguent until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is oily, then place in the hole a cannula for many days, and remove it when the child will want to defecate.
And already accidies suppuration of the anus for consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then it be cured with what we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of cure of the fistulas that come from the bowels.
The fistulas that develop in the area below the navel and the size of which develop near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or a lump.
And since that lump is ancient and flows from the moist, white, or subtle pus, and sometimes from these fistulas, some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is emitted from them by egress and by windiness; and sometimes the patient feels the egress, and it is strongly emitted from them.
And sometimes from these fistulas, some penetrate into the space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the root of the groin.
And in which a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating is known, is that you put your finger into the anus, and you introduce a subtle probe of lead or iron into the fistula when there is no turgescence.
But if there is turgescence in that, then introduce into that a subtle probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor do you proceed from the tract any cause of egestion or worm or windiness, thus as we have said, then you know that it is not penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the vagina, then the significance of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the groin and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe penetrates here if there is no turgescence into the groin, and causes pain in the circuit of the area; and that from it there is pus always; and that it does not benefit in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all, and the cure of those is the labor and vanity of the physicians over which they are based.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I tell you, and what I have already said and proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his two and elevates his legs into them, the thighs leaning towards his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or of iron if there is turgescence in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
And if that feels the patient around the anus, then cover that when you introduce your finger into the anus.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself penetrate, or another that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
And of the medication by which is expected help in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those carns adjusted fistulas that are like a feather quill of a bird are already cauterized.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until they can all those carns that are cauterized, and then cure that with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is always a suspicion of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which it seizes the surface of the pudendum, then dry the pudendum from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the probe, and in the fistula until the section reaches the place where the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe is liberated and caught.
And then purify those fistulous carns which are assembled like a feather quill of a bird and do not remain from them any cause.
But if flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you were inserting those carns, then the best that may be and of the lighter pus instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those adjusted carns, and the abscess of the blood excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in caus trissat until the place gets brac, and then cure the plague with enemas of firm flesh generating and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is styptication and excretion; when then it is restored already it is healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the perineum of the anus and is elongated from it to the surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the anus and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is always flesh or skin, and it is proper to penetration, then there is no operation in it but according to your trust and hope.
This cause is administered in him in one of three ways: either that you cauterize that as we have said; or that you reduce that while you obtain the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to introduce the instruments and the proper cure; and do not proceed to move it by section so that you do not injure the ligament containing the tail, and that it occurs on the patient as if of the will of the egistio; and then cure it with what we have said that it is very strong sir; or that you lengthen that veil and cleanse that pus that dries that inside the buttock, as we have said, or by probe or other instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those carbuncled flesh which are in the section within the one you can by percutaneous; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague by section, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus is light for the patient. And in some cases the fistula is finished in this way: it is when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the buttock around the surface of the body with the codina and on the edge of the buttock, then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is as if a needle to prepare the hearts according to this form:
And introduce it into that faithful envelope of v fiels or around them; and then introduce the probe with a faithful into the fistula until you obtain its cavity.
But if it is penetrating in the edge of the buttock near the end, then you extract the probe from that tract so that you introduce your finger into the buttock; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities at the same time, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have incised the probe deeper into the flesh, tighten well that inside so that those flesh which are between the two extremities of the probe and that they close.
And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared for you, so that it is not in the preon, because it is not to you that you do this so that you do not injure the ligament; and then do it with that inside so that it is healed.
The shape of the spatum spinos with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of suture of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, that is, they are between the buttock seeming like that of carbuncles, or that those are like the fat of rasim. And of those are small and large, and that the blood runs from those always and is one, and are many, and are outside the buttock, and in the extremities of it.
But however, those that are outside the buttock are according to the few humidity, of which water citrina or a little blood with a continuous body runs, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is inside the buttock is that you command the patient to lie down and to express it while the buttock is loose and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take it and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your nail, and then you cut those by their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those because of the humidity of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with wool fleece, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and pulverize over them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they are applied to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not obey egress, then christenize the patient with a christery in which the bite is small, and wash it with that water that is in the buttock and that obeys egress lightly when the patient is expressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttock, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a hook, and cut those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that one who has incised, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take a faithful and introduce it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make it penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and enclose the two extremities of the faithful in the part below the needle, and so it is laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then untie the faithful and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of them untied, so that the superfluity of blood runs from that one.
And then pause over the buttock cloth infused in rose oil or in cerot; and pause that over the buttock and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it dries; and when it is dried, cure those with ointments or with other cure until it is healed.
And since old remedies are not effective in this medicine, when you see them with the point of a spatula or your fingernail, while they are moist and the pus of them is being extracted, you prohibit them from solidifying; and then cure them once they are solidified.
Then you open them with a sharp incision, the first one when blood comes and they are excoriated; and then cure them once they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids, this is the key, and it is not if not a knot rounded according to the color of the body, resembling a key's head, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and in the buttocks, and because of these pains you must treat the ailment.
And therefore, when you see it that is in the circuit of the key, you must cut it with forceps or a knife, and eradicate it from its root; and then cure that.
And if you want, cauterize the one that precedes in its chapter.
But warts are a small, rough, fistulous, round eminence on the surface of the body, and many times they appear in the most of the children.
And the cure for them is that you extend and cut that, or that you tighten that with a thread or a needle, while it is being cauterized. And if you want, cauterize that, according to what we have said, with fire or with an acute medicine.
But a wart is a small, rough, or fistulous eminence on the surface of the body, going into the flesh, and when the flesh touches it, it is felt in it, resembling a bite from an ant, and it is made around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a quill of eagle or of vulture, and it is strong, and place that over the wart while you contain it with the circle of the quill in the parts of it; and then you roll your hand with the quill while you cut that which is in the circuit of the wart, and place it in the flesh of the skin, and that you eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you want, make that with a quill of iron or of steel, according to this form:
Let the part above the needle be drawn to subtlety, blunt (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that on the finger the perception of it be ablated and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the wart according to what is said before in the cauterization of the aethyl in the chapter of cauteries.
On the forms of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christening is made of silver or of laton or of melted or hammered iron; and sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, that the one that is administered in the cure of the small children be small; and of those whose buttocks are bruised or sore, the christenings of those be small.
The form of the large and few christening:
The head of the needle of it above in which the bag is tied be wide according to this manner; and there be a distinction in it where the bag is tied as many times.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the anus, be blunt (so it is not open) very long, extending to subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and in the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and thicker a little.
And be the bag in which are placed the medicines of the bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes, the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes thread strong of thread cru which be of ten threads, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag, be straight in the head of the christening between two distinguishings with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, that be scalded according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be laid on their back, and elevate their legs up and place below them a cushion on which already are the men or a pillow; and then anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or with album of egg or with mucilage of fenugrec or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister presses the bag and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated in the belly all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to emission, hold it as much as you can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better in recovery.
But if you treat those with the ailments of intestinal solution and its expulsion, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or festering abscesses, then the cautery should be applied subtly and gently, of the cauteries with which children are treated.
Of the cure of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was convenient to the free, and I say so the cure of those with my own and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what by which the plagues are made and according to the place upon which the plagues fall.
And the causes for which many times the plagues are made are such as a wound from a rock, or an incision from a sword or spear, or a blow with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are such as a plague that falls upon the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule upon the other plagues.
And I will begin with the plagues of the head simple, because the remembrance of the composed ones will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague happens in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a wound from a rock or similar, and the wound has already been cleaned and is large and you fear about that patient having an abscess, then you cauterize and perform cephalic flebotomy immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from that of the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits flebotomy, mostly if the blood that is extracted from the plague is little.
And let the flebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded area; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from heavy foods.
But if from the ministration any cause prohibits, then let the food be lessened and do not approach meat or wine.
And pause on the plague, if to it there happens an abscess cauterize, coat infused in rose oil or in wine in which is steeped.
But if it is certain of an abscess cauterize, then pause on the plague, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recount soon.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause on poultices until it is healed.
But if the plague is large or is from an incision from a sword and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by pulleys, then adjust those with sutures according to as I will recount of the sutures of them.
But if the plague is already discovered of the bone and skin, and there is no retention of it but a small suspension, then incise that and approach cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in the place of the wound, and command the patient to be sparing of foods in which there is thickness: caps and forms cooked and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if there is putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that pus and throw it out, and then cure that.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which the flow of blood can occur, and it is not incised by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that not incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or tie that; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way that you pulverize over those this powder, because consolidated that before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: receive olive oil parted one, of dragon's blood parted two, of cauterized non-extinguished parts three; be all three ground and sifted, and of it be the plague filled, and be constricted by good constriction until well over that adheres, and be coagulated with the blood.
And then strengthens that with pulleys and lessens that, and do not untie it while it is thus that it is not apostatized, because it is not eradicated from it the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes do this only cauterize, when it is not to you in present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it is necessary that it be placed over them and be tightened, and are recent plagues with their blood, those which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and mostly when it is in summer time, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, in this way that you pause over those poultices digestible, or that you pause over those powder of barley flour with water and honey until they get pus; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if the plague fractures a bone, and it is small, then you extract it with forceps.
And I will say the cure for fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its place but that its cure is avoided with that which makes vehement coagulation, as zinnar and zegi that is vitriol and similar to their kind, no to the nerves and against that. And do not place on the wound any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most delicate of all the members.
And if that is cured with light medicines, as it is washed with sweet water, some herbs infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then washed with sweet water and the other herbs minced in this manner, and moistened.
But if the wound is large, then administer suture, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the body, then perforate that in the most depressed place.
But if in the wound already is incised artery and is obtained flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessity provokes to that.
But if already are incised the vertebrae of the throat or all, and are saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the trachea with suture over the canal of the throat and do not touch that; raise that and return that to its natural figure, and then strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for some days; and then cure that with poultices in which there is coagulation and excitation until it is healed.
But if the wound already in the bone has made an impression, then strike that, and if in it there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can of them; and what to you is not apparelled, leave that until the wound is purified, and is separated and the discharge of it is relieved.
And if the wound is recent, then pulverize over that the powder which has been recommended to you. But if in the wound is made a fistula, then cure that with that of which the remembrance will come near in its chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a dagger, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider more if from the wound there is windiness when the patient is leaning; then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then you place in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that it is not the blood retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it kills the patient, but place in it attractive poultice, and untie that twice a day.
And if the poultice is not to you present, then you place in the orifice of the wound cotton old so that it sucks that which is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs that which is in it adjusted.
But if already from the wound have passed three days or more and does not occur to the patient spasm nor tremor of heart nor constriction of the throat, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you know that the wound is saved; and therefore cure that with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that already is made a fistula; cure therefore that by its chapter.
And if the wound is by incision of a sword or of a dagger, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with that which is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already has made an impression in the bone, and are already from it incised pieces, then you turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound is purified, that the extraction of them is relieved.
And of the other wounds accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of that which we have said.
Of the wounds of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or little, or medium.
And little disruption is made difficult by another manner, and if it sees that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not try of the intrusion of them to their place as soon as possible, because it opens and is thickened for that the entrance of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best incision is mid-line, because in that one the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that are useful in sutures of other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper are common to the others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia by that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the hernia has come inflammation by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, then you cover that with a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water only, or that you soak in water with squinting, and cypress, and spice, and embrokes with that the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes do this with the one which has astringency, and it is better than the water alone in the resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which is steeped elder and mallows, because by this it is alleviated the pain of it with little cause.
But if the pain of it is excused by this cure, then you split the incision a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and that there is no occupation to dry it up by necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is the form of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is subtle, and not with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and the hernia is out, then it is covered that its reduction be according to the form of it natural, in its proper place, if it is possible above that, because it is better.
But when the incision is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is covered that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place the head of them and the feet higher than the middle parts.
And similarly if the incision is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and your consideration always in this way so that the part in which the wound is is higher than the other.
And thus it is covered that you administer this in the large wounds and in the mid-line wounds.
And in the small wounds, place what is prepared to you, and make it minister between your fingers, which has the incision all with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to the one who sees the suture any cause from another.
And this is the manner of common suture: one that you take the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then lay it from the extremity of the incision of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, or other that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the  cyphac that is left the cord of the parts of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the cyphac, and are made four orders.
And then strengthen with thread double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and then lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in it, and then tie that with thread as fast as the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
And be the needles mid-sized between thickness and subtlety, because the subtle needles lightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to enter into the cord, and therefore for that they must be mid-sized in subtlety and thickness.
And do not cover that the needle be placed in two extremities of the cord properly not, so that the flesh is not lightly incised and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged sutures so that the wound is not prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient's sleep; and place on the suture expanded powders of all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these kinds of suture with needles in this manner is most convenient in the small wounds, because it suffices in the suture of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the cyphac, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
And when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that same part from which you began, so that the thread drawn back from the upper part to the wound, so that the suture is like a suture of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture saves the men.
And with this suture, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been plagued with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than a palm, and it was seen from the intestines around two palms of the intestine of the lower part and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore, I reduced it after that the intestine had been pierced for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he is healed; and after that, he lived for many years, and he was converted to his dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle, for I did not cure him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but I placed on the wound a clean cloth twice a day and diligent washing with honey water until he was healed.
But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of Scripture.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the rope, and you insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the rope and in that middle laceration according to rectum and length of the whole body, and leave the extremity of the chip in which you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the middle.
And therefore, as you have made that penetrate, then you make that penetrate another time in that same extremity of the middle of the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the chip that is in this place, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make penetrate with that one your penetration with which you make that penetrate in the chip in the extremity of the mirror which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
And then, beginning from this same side, sew this with the extremity that is of the chip in the other place, and extract the needle from the rope which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that rope and body the extremity of the chip that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and extract that one from the rope which is of the part of it.
And make this one time and another, and make this one time after another until you sew all that is outside according to this example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with suture of pellicles with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the chip one time from the part of the extremity of the rope, and that you leave that other time while you make it completed.
But the second kind of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of service to it and by it recommended, is that you sew it according to similarity with which some medicants sew it, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what I recommend to you.
Cover that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirror to your own from the outside part, and make that penetrate to the inside part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the chip; and then, turn the needle and make that penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the chip.
And then, turn those each one, and make penetrate each one from the inside part into the outside part in two extremities of the mirror others that are in the opposite place.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and is the suture of which I previously said remembrance.
This is the sermon of Gualia
And more, they said to me, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these each one a thread, and begin with the introduction of needle of that which you must, and make that penetrate into the other place according to suture of those with which they sew the skins in the same way.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other parts of the belly.
But the judgment of medication of the wound is judgment of the other wounds.
Which cause is because when you obtain the recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it and adapt it decently, then it rests upon that carnified powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then it rests upon that some ointments which are at your presence until they make hard and the threads are pulled, and the chip and mirror are consolidated; and then, cure it as is the cure of the other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines, then pause there for a while, because it begins to sweat, old sweat, and changes that two times a day, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medication in many arrangements when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the main limbs, then you must submerge a lion's mane in good quality olive oil, or roasted olive oil, and place that on the area between the armpits and leave the armpits.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their bowels, because many times this happens, then cauterize that with a black stiptic ointment, and more so if the ulcer has reached the intestine and is made an exit, penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the thick intestine is of lighter healing than the one that is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that enters it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of those that are in them, and because of the subtlety of the body of that one, and because of the proximity of that one to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your recipe with which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed to it space and is already made green or black, then you must strengthen that with a file over the area that is discolored from it, so that blood flux comes, because in the cloth are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the file pendant from the side left of the plague wound, so that over you be relieved the attraction of it, you must the removal of the cloth and emission of the sweat of the plague.
Remembering of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
When a disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, because I saw that one who was plagued in his belly by a lance thrust and it was the plague on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and made a fistula, and it was from him passage and flatulence.
Therefore, I thought about the cure of him since he was not confident in his healing, but I continued to subtilize him until the wound was healed and the area was consolidated.
And I saw that the area was already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should avoid accidents of evil in his belly; and he did not happen to any evil because of that accident and continued in his usual arrangements eating and drinking, and then went into the bath and exercised in his limbs.
And already some experienced ones have said that when a plague happens in the intestine, and it is small, then it must be bound in this manner: and it is that you take earthworms of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place an earthworm of those that has the mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it grabs onto those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another earthworm next to the first one, and do not cease doing this with earthworms one next to another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
And then reduce that and cover the plague; and remain those annexed heads in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And it is already possible that the intestine may be bound with a subtle file which is made of the intestine of a beast annexed to it, because it is more in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these files of intestine, and it be well skinned, and then bind the extremity of it with a file of linen, enveloped, and then introduce that file into needles and cover with it the intestine, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this manner of suturing with earthworms is not but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not engendered but subtilization, and it is not the healing of it at all.
Of the cure of zoster and fistula.
Know that every plague and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes old, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and sweats all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula and we call that one zoster.
And fistula according to truth is a hard, white, furrowed nodule, with which there is no pain and which has a cavity like the cavity of a bird's bone; and for this reason, that one is called by some "rizatz," that is, bone.
And it is in some men humid, which sweats; and very soon the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is much, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
I have now shown all those causes, and their symptoms and their cure with medicines in the division.
And so that I may make known to you the cure of a fistula which is made by way of operation with a knife.
And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some of them are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the skull, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the joints composed by composition as such that from the hand and the foot; and those that give to them proximity of the main member and of similar things.
And therefore of these fistulas that are according to this manner are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with that is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach those places that have been said, and you wait and confide in the cure of it, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula goes straight, and you inquire about it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved from the tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having many horrific things, it is not to you possible that you signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice with its orifices, because the humidity by which you cleanse it must go to the other orifices and run from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here has bone or nerve, and if the depth of the fistula is distant or proximate, or if it is a fistula to which there are many orifices and this above all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you must compress it with your hand over the place, and similar to the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
And since you will have stood on all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is fistula apparent proximate or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to that which has been said before in the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the tail and of similar things, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and it is straight, then you must cut that in the preon as much as it is possible for you, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do this with it several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore that with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to that which we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify that, then you inquire about it and dry it according to that which we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it some corruption and blackness, then you root that out until the corruption is hosted entirely; and then cure that with what that flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and throws forth a brac as it was doing, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover it again and exquisitely make the rooting and purification of it with the rear stronger force of you, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not achieved, and therefore to you in that there is born only to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to pull that out, then you pull it out with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those leave none behind with your strength.
But if to you makes contrariety any cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then incision those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not preparation to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that which you can place upon that plague, and leave it until that which is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the plague that it is not consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice submerged in sopre trissat with oil, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, because when they will soften those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those attraction is eased.
But if it is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then remove that with a razor only to the rear as far as the blackness and corruption have remained, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that and to cut it entirely into the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure it inside until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his thigh so that you place that as an example and helper over your operation.
There is a young man, around 30 years old, who suffers pain in his thigh, and the badness from within spreads to the matter of the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not from an external cause.
And therefore, it is extended for a time by the error of the doctors until the abscess has burst, and matter has come out of it, and its cure is approached until the thigh is fistulated, and made in it foul matter which all threw out pus and the humors of the body.
And therefore, the cure took many months of the doctors for about two years, and there was no wisdom in those, but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the matters that flowed from those orifices for a great course; and already the body of that man was totally debilitated and the color of him was yellowish.
And therefore, I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And then I examined all the orifices and found them to lead to all parts of the thigh.
And then I took my knife and incised upon one of the orifices where I described a portion of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a portion of the thigh was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed up what to me was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed up, and I had already drained it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was consolidated.
And then I iterated and discovered upon the bone secondarily upon the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I sewed up what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I fared to perform the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered upon it another time and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perforated the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm of it, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and the section of him, but for the disposition of the fragility of him and for the paucity of his tolerance and fear of death, because to him it happened at all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore, it healed by entire healing, and nothing is in the place of bone, hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of him in his body and returned the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and did not make to him contrariety in ambulation nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already drawn, then when you cut that according to this manner: and that is that you take a ligament and strengthen that in the extremity of that eminent bone, and command to someone that extends that upward; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you stretch the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, for when you do this, it is not forbidden the saw that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And cove that the sawing be upon the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, it abates one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts altogether; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the sawing is continued of the other part.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continuous from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but engine.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, as you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is to you possible, and in each case, let it be rectified to you, when it does not make to you contrariety vein or nerve.
And know which are the saws and the chisels to cut these bones are very much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that whenever you prepare to all species of operation instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the species of the instrument of which you indigeysses; when with you is great study and long and connoisseurship of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of maladies, for that hour already you had by you that which is convenient to him of the instruments to all malady.
And you so to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments the which you will put as simple with the which you will proceed to your prohibition the which you will experiment on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of the awl.
And it does not convene but that with that [the chisel] they be confractured the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the mouth wide and ample.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another saw decently made: let it be made with an arch of it as much as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a boy's dagger decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor which has a concave:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor of curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another, smaller incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the marrow of the bones:
Shape of a chisel which is convenient to the marrow of those bones which are perforated:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of a sharp extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and the serration of the bones.
The extremities can be either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not convene, or sometimes the corruption goes from the member which you do not strike any cause, then when you incis that member into that which the hon acossec the corruption, so that the patient escapes by that of death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of him to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or it may be approached the blackness before the puss of that one enters into that member that it seizes it and that it nourishes all the body; and therefore, take care to incision of that.
And similarly if it is a cause of the corruption by percussion of some venomous causes as well as from a sea scorpion or from a viper or from a similar one.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you incise it from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it nourishes in the wrist of the arm.
And if instead of that, then incise the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if instead of that, the corruption passes and sometimes encircles the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer another cause another for that cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption encircles the toe of the foot, then you incise it into one of the toes.
And if it takes in the heel of the foot, then you incise the whole foot. But if it enters into the thigh, then you incise the thigh into the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no engendered but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part furthest from which you want to incise, and strengthen another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, then a broad spatula, so that all the flesh is uncovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
And so that it be placed cloth of it from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that it comes to the patient lesion adjusted and cauterized abscess.
But if blood flow occurs when working, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place on it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication before it is complete.
And then bind the affected limb to the one convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which befalls a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is that a blackness occurs to him in his foot with a burning that was assembled like the burning of fire.
And that corruption occurs first in his toe before it extends to the whole foot.
And therefore that man prepares himself to put on himself pus that he sees the cure going to the member with the vehemence of it that it atrophies from pain and burning of it, and the insidious foot goes into the joint, and fire heals.
Long time occurs to it that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And therefore it comes to me, and so I am pierced to repercuss that superfluity with what I place over the hand of the medicines, and then the purification of the body of it; and it does not repercuss the superfluity and it begins to go to the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he implores me to cut his hand, and I do not want to do that hoping on the repercussion of that superfluity, and more that I fear that the incision of his hand will be death, because the virtue of the malady was over the case.
And because he departed from me, he returned to his land and I came to know that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except so that it be an aid on that which catches of this malady, and that its signification by which it is signified and according to which it is acted.
Of the cure of the intestines and the quality of clysters with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and pus is extracted from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it is as fine cloth, and it has not reached the back corruption, and has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
But however if the space is prolonged until the corruption presses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that you cut that skin entirely as if it were revolved, and mostly when it is fine and made like cloth, and that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that that corruption has not achieved a posterior consequence, and in the skin there has passed through the front, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of a fetid odor, then you clysterize that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and strong wine and ziniar receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then you extract that with a spoon; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with ash water, when the medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of vitz, and put water over it; and then you boil that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
And if the patient does not have tolerance on the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then clysterize that with water and honey and that it be mixed with crushed ziniar, and clysterize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is superfluity of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already removed, then clysterize that with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of  dyafinic  and dissolve it with roasted oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize that with some medicines and other enguents that have the properties of which I have already written in the treatise of the enguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge that with a small iron little by little, and put in it a poultice enveloped in Egyptian enguent or basilicon enguent until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with sutures and leave of it the quantity in which between the clyster there is addition.
And if the orifice of him from which the arm comes is elevated to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place that is in him so that the arm runs below, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the sinew the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew within the environment of the lowest bone according to your will, then pierce it so that you prepare the limb with the preparation by which the arm runs lightly according to what is fitted to you and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
But that which is over the orifice of the sinew, the which you remove every hour so that what is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if what runs from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinew, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in it an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown over the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or approximates adhesion, then the third day you untie it, and when you untie the poultice, then change the cloth for another and renew the enguent.
But if from the sinew a long space appears a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it approaches, for some men in whom a late generation of flesh in their wounds, and of those it is done the contrary of it.
And if from the sinew after many days a digested arm is emitted, then know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinew is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphana enguent, when in it is adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last of the ones cured, is that you take of diaphana enguent and dissolve it in rose oil, and on it pour a little wine vinegar in its substance, and then mix that with it, and use of that.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphana enguent, honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind all and pulverize it over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it with water over cloth and strengthen that over the sinew; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize it over cloth and strengthen that.
And sometimes are administered with it the long and roots of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of wormwood and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and pulverize them over the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinew is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in the depth of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panari, and ingrown toenails, and the addition of a finger incision, and section.
A panari is an abscess that rises from under the nail of the finger or foot, and it often arises in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prized, or it is an abscess of a caut abscess, or it is corrupted, and throws out a arm until it corrodes the root of the nail, and often corrupts that whole, and often it transmits its corruption to the bone until it is a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is made, and the color of it is made dark.
And therefore when you have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not mix your cure, then you must cut with iron all the superfluity that is remaining from the nail and then cauterize the wound with water, for cauterization is very useful in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already compress the flesh to the sides of the finger, and begin to sting it and let it out, then you must put a fine ray under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and push it up and cut that flesh with ease, and place over that which remains of the flesh of the medicines corrosive comburents until it is all removed; and then cure this with enguent until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you must cut the bone that and extract it, for no time is healed that there is corrupted bone in it.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the wound, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how it is pressed the memory, and then take care of it while it is healing.
But if the nail is struck or rubbed, and there is pain in that area, then when you begin to treat the patient, you dry the nail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse cut from top to bottom, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh that remains under the nail, because you will cause the patient great pain, and it will be the cause of the birth of excessive flesh in the area; and then take care of that place with water that soothes the pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, is very strong in some, very strong in the bones, or very strong in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some of the nuts of the hands. But that which is born in some of the nuts of the finger does not harm, and that which is born in the joints is very harmful.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and that you cut it according to its root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the abscess of it.
But in that which is born in the finger nuts, when you begin to cut the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those saws suitable for water, and then take care of it while it is healing.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers either between the many movements or by the nature of the man who was born that way, or by the consolidation of plague or by the burning of fire, or by similar things, then you must remove that consolidation while the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between their cloths, immersed in oil rubbed with a little, so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead while it is consolidated as it should.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient to the figure of the limb.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are veins convoluted thick and full of melancholic superfluities which come in motion in the limbs of the body, and the major advent of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the travelers and the laborers and the carriers.
Therefore, you must administer purgatives of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it is incised and that black blood is thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The incision of it is according to this manner: first embrocate the leg with warm water so that the thick blood is dissolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then stretch the leg of the patient from the most sovereign part of the groin to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg upwards, and downwards, until the quantity of blood that you want and that seems sufficient is extracted, and which will take the virtue of the ailment.
And then bind it, and command him to abstain from the foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you that raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are movements, and then put it in a bath and embrocate the leg of it with warm water until it reddens and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present to you, until the limb is scalded.
And then cut the vein in the right of it by incision in the long or in the back of it of the knee, or in the lowest part of it of the ankle.
And then open the vein with pincers and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it is of the appearance of it that you see that color declining to blackness.
And then when you evacuate and from the vein you see that white that is cord.
And then you put below it the ray until it is elevated and is taken from the vein, and suspend it with a lion's horn or onion.
And then cut another incision near that one for three fingers, and then scrape the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut it in the back incision of the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it until it is extracted by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or highest of all the incisions, until all is extracted; and then cut it.
And if it does not obey to you to extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong double thread and tie it there and extract it, or introduce it below and turn your hand to every part until it is thrown out. And guard yourself that it not be incised; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient for that harm.
And when that whole aura is thrown out, then place over the area of the plague wool soaked in wine and oil rubbed and oil unrubbed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the gut is contracted having tortuosity in which it is wrapped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then cover that which you do on that whole part of tortuosity of it and the places of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks until you elevate that whole.
And guard yourself that your section that you do not cut the vein and that you do not harm that, for difficult it will be for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incision with which the gut is cut:
It is not to it pointed like the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little humidity and in which there is no grass nor any shrub.
And it is strongly generated in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom is from the intestines of the serpent and worms and scarabs and worms that generate between the bone and the flesh.
And sign of the reception of the advent of it is of this vein that occurs in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that vesication which seems rooted of plant.
And therefore when it appears from him the extremity, then you must wrap around that a piece of lead of which the weight is of a dragon. Within two dragons, and no more, and tie that and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you see of it any cause to the parts outside, cover that with lead and bind that. And if the part is prolonged, then you cut a part of it and cover the remaining; and do not cut that of root until it is out, for if you cut that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes to occur abscess and purulence in the place and bad ulceration.
Because that which must be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it is thrown out from the back of it and no remains of it any cause in the body.
And of this vein is issued in some men that is in their length of v palms and ten and already has come to me that it issued one of xx palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray in the tract of it and perforates that with a long tract with the body, until it is evacuated all that is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many ramps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and it is issued from some orifice ram.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is below said.
Of section above worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine ailment.
This ailment is called in some lands because it often happens to oxen and it is a worm few one which is born between the bone and the flesh, and goes in all the body up and down, and is shown in the feeling of its increase from member to member until it disrupts the bone and appears outside.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if they were worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and has come to the brain, then very strong fever in it and enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by its ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then cover that which is above it and that which is below it with a bandage and constriction strong, and then cut above it and extract that.
And if it is rooted in the flesh and not the other, then you put cauterization with fire on the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If you see that being reached to the head near the ear, then tighten over the eyebrow with strong constriction, and then press on it, and extract it; and because the patient uses modification of their body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and guard themselves from foods that generate putrefaction.
On the section for the ailment of nafir.
This ailment is named in our land nafir, and it is pain which comes in certain members, and then is changed from member to member.
And I have already seen that as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and because it was warm for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was pushing it to this, but more lightly than to be feared, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then it went into the pain of that place and finished in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected in the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that I should turn it over throughout her whole body as I had seen; and it was too marvelous of the mutation of it and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen this before in my own ears in that manner, however, I have seen many that suffer pain to be changed from member to member. But I did not see this in the ears as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be otherwise than that because the woman was old, on whose dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance felt that mutated windiness.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward healing in those who are delicate and with moist bodies of well-covered veins.
And as you want the healing of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent in the ear as we have said, then you tighten over it and leave it lightly and press on it until that windiness is constricted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in your own ears, then you cure it with shaking of the body and with that which you expel windiness, and charm those with foul pills and with pills of serapi and the like.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they lodge, because their diversity is that of those that have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the servant is when it lodges in it an arrow, and it pierces the bone, and it is issued from the cyphac which is above the brain, because it happens through it soda vehement, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the ears, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very strong is cut off the word and destroyed the voice, and it is issued from the place of the wound humidity white like powder, and tears from it like the liquidity of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it lodges in the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels with that which it is lodged in a hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very strong the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the wrist, and running of the wound black blood, and seizes that coldness of the extremities, and sweat cold, and syncope; and therefore know that death descends all over it.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung, so are the spitting of blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck so are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and it expires great spirit much, and demands the attraction of cold air.
And if it lodges the arrow in the ligament which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small of the back, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sighing, and it is not bad all the limbs of the muscles.
And if it lodges the arrow in the stomach, then very strong tears from the wound food some undigested.
And if it lodges the arrow in the belly, and it is lodged in it, tears some wound of the wound, or the membrane, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine is expelled outside, and something proceeds from it to the external parts, and there is much pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
May the other members, as well as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the hip, and the leg and their likenesses of the limbs, be saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify this to your treatment.
The cause is, that in a man a shaft struck the lacrimal of his nose in the root, and you extracted it from the other side, leaving the gray of the ear of him, and he was healed, and did not suffer any harm in the nose.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be retrieved from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head on it, in which there were no ears.
And the Jew healed, and did not suffer any harm in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one that has ears; and therefore I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I subdued it with that, and then I extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, because forty days passed and there was no change in him at all from his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and maneuvered it, and he healed, and did not suffer any harm.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck in his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and because it had been four years, he pulled out the arrow from the root of the hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow struck in her belly, and the wound was consolidated from within her, and it was not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow struck in his face and the wound was consolidated, and he broke the arrow, not finding much pain, and many likenesses to this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was struck in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his treatment after three days of the arrow's strike.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow very strictly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle probe, and I did not feel it; but I felt a prick below the right ear, and then I suspected that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster which has attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place was festering so that it appeared to me the place of the arrow, so that it would succeed upon it.
And he did not suffer any harm in the place, significant that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster upon him for many days and he did not suffer any harm; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and he broke the ailment of the extraction of him for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I placed upon the wound medicine acute corrosive for many days until it opened, and with the probe I felt it, and examined the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted in the appearance of the wound by that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and passed to me time with that for the space of time within four months.
And then because the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and remove it, and not obeying that, I did not cease to subtly maneuver and engineer upon it with manners of ingenuity, until one day I began upon it with manners of engines to hang it with forceps carefully made, according to how they will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the ailment healed entirely, and he did not suffer in it in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification upon what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended by the narration nor do they comprehend them in the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument of the descent of the extraneous causes of the art when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are lodged except in two ways: either by traction of the place in which they are stuck; or by the opposite of the other side.
And that one which is lodged by the place in which it entered, or the arrow proceeding in the fleshy place, and is pulled and removed.
And if it does not obey the easement of the hour in which it is caught, then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it can be softened, and the traction of it and its exit are relieved.
And similarly if it is lodged in bones and does not obey you to the easement, then leave that one for several days and reiterate it with traction and movement every day, and it will be removed.
And if it does not obey your easement after several days, then you must bore into the circuit of the arrow in that bone from every part with a subtle drill until the place of the arrow is amplified, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire about it with a probe, and if you feel it, then pull it out with some instruments which are convenient for its removal.
And if you cannot over it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the shaft, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut on the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears in which it is held, then you cut the flesh in which it is lodged from every part with all the skill that you can do; and engineer over it, if you cannot over the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and torsion of them until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with a twist of your hand with forceps in all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly with the most subtle skill that the arrow is not broken and that it is made for you difficult to pull it and from that extraction.
And if you cannot over it from your hour, then you leave it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of it soften, and then reiterate it because then it is relieved. But if to you makes contrariety flow of blood, then you administer what we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in every manner to your possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do it with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I have told you.
And therefore that you make contrary the arrow so that the patient be according to the figure according to which you must the placement of the arrow in it, because it is more helpful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer what is to you possible by the figures.
But the arrows that are removed by the opposite of the other part, or which already from it proceed some part to the parts outside, or make flexibility the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut over it; and be the section according to the quantity in which the forceps grip; and then pull it, because it is made lighter to easement.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then reiterate it until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you impel it with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and it, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by it.
And if the arrow is entoxicated, then you must concave all the flesh in which it is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for it with what is convenient.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is close so that you touch it with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut over it, then cut over it and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is indigested, and cure it until it is healed.
Shape of forceps with which arrows are pulled.
Let the extremities of them be like a bird's beak that are made like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these, many species are made, large, few, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
As if a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is impelled with that.
Of flebotomy of the veins.
The veins of flebotomy of which it is customary to flebotomize .xxx. of which there are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs which are in the two temples that appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two holes that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are flebotomized in the arms are .v.; because of those one is cephalica, and it is of the wild arm; and the people call “the vein of the head”, and deaf, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalica; and that name the people “vein of all the body”, and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic arm, and it is called “citillar”, and they call that one the vulgars “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it is placed on the focil, and it is that one in which it is flebotomized, and it is that one that appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild arm; and the second is sophena, and the location of it is below the leg of the domestic arm; and the sciatica vein, and the location of it is below the leg of the wild arm; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The use of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and emigranea and sahafati and old bad ulcerations of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that it be shaved the head of the patient, and it be rubbed the head of the patient in the occiput in the location of both the veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage until the appearance of the two and the locations of them near the ears in two depressed locations of the head; and you want that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here it is a test.
Then you take the sharp lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the code until the flebotomy comes to the bone. And then you elevate your hand with the vein and the code to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incident incision. And be the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do this of the blood as much as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already it was preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the use of flebotomy is for ancient emigranea and sode evil and obstinate ophthalmia and course of acute superfluities effused to the holes.
And the quality of flebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck tightly until the appearance of the two veins at the feeling by manifest appearance and be demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you send a test.
And then you elevate the code above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicated, and introduce the incident flebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place on that coat and poultices and tighten that above with strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already is preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the traction in the beginning of the book.
And therefore the use of flebotomy of the vein of the forehead is similar to the flebotomy of the cephalica for old ailments of the face and for emigranea and rigor and fetid ulcerations.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is according to what I have recommended to you; so is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fesser, the form of which is:
Place the point prominent which is at the head of the fesser upon that vein and strike upon it with a penche or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and tighten that until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with phlebotomy, however, no cove that the phlebotomy be of acute extremity as well as the others, rather be of blunt extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and very strong to break it in it the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
But the benefit of the two veins that are in the lacrimals of two heels by scabies of the heel by rogor and sebol in the heels, and to the ailments of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you be standing over the head of him.
And be made the phlebotomy according to the transverse to longitude a little with phlebotomy a little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, very much the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run of the blood as much as is to you necessary, and place upon those cuto, and tighten those for a night, and then untie those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the ailments of the face and emigranea and rogor that accidies in the face, and mostly when it is antique.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and then you take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy subtle long and place that in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you ultimes your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make run of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that for a night, because that is restored lightly.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the two guidegui is to constriction of ale and to the beginning of leprosy and to many ailments and inpetige and bad ulcers corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightens both in his neck with a liament; and be the artifices over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
And then phlebotomize the vein at the long with phlebotomy ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to temperate quantity or according to what you times of necessity that is ad to what; and then make semblance of the other vein.
And then untie the liament and tighten the two veins with a middle stricture so that the patient not be prefabricated, and leave until at the morning because the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the algerich veins, conferreys to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make cezer the patient in front of you, and tighten the neck of him with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of him and regard the two veins of which the one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this more is because in the circuit of those so veins small black; and therefore inscideys each one by inscizio inscident.
But if dubitacio is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you enter to inscizio of the major of those, and of the pus manifesta of those.
And make the semblance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the benefit is to the phlebotomy of the cephalica to prefocacios that are in the guolayro, to the ailment of the uvula, and to ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and regard below the tongue, of the one side of him vein and of the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore phlebotomize each one; and guard yourself that you do not ultimes your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those so arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are in those that corr custom in all the men, and the phlebotomy of them is made according to two manners, or put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive to subtlety declining; or secsar with phlebotomy cutellar, and appeal si alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the patient lie as if he were asleep, and open the concave veins that appear thick and full, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to perform phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle, citrine blood.
But the usefulness of phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extracts the blood of the ailments that are left in the throat and neck, and from which the feet and belly are supplied.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that vein, to guard well and be over-cautious in that area, for there is an artery there, and if he errs and adjusts the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will wound that artery and a flux of blood will occur, so that it is necessary that he does not perform that phlebotomy with a pointed phlebotomy, but rather with a section as if with a knife.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you move to another, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you perform phlebotomy in the place of its end at the arm, for that one is manifest; and cut that one with a phlebotomy knife as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of the median vein, then it is necessary before the stricture of the arm that you touch the place between which you know the place of the wrists, and then place your hand over it with a tension; and then lay the arm and cut the vein with a concave section with a phlebotomy knife as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion does not reach for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you stretch the ligament, an inflammation in the place that you have placed with tension, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as if it were the blood of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you cover and place your hand over it for a long space; and then oppose your hand, and if the blood is severed, for many times it is severed, then you stretch the arm and leave it.
And guard the patient from the moisture of him, and be over-cautious of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not severed, and you see that you must not present medicine to it, then you should wound the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is severed; or that you take a piece of fig, and apply it, and take the one majority and stretch it over the place of the vein at the stricture descending to the ligament and to the pulses within the other day.
And then if the blood is severed, well is it; and if not, then cure that one with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the pulses that are severing the flux of blood.
And the abscission of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the dark vein, the phlebotomy is a usefulness that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and from the part below the body; for that is composed of a branch of the basilica and of a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist that one be over-cautious in the phlebotomy of it, for below that one is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and wounds the nerve, it will cause stupor to him, and the healing of it is difficult, and fortly it is not healed of all; and this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with a section of a knife, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in the length.
The usefulness of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and comforts the ailments of the heels.
And it is necessary in this properly, if you want to perform phlebotomy with a pointed phlebotomy or with an olive phlebotomy; for it is the safest of all veins, for it is not below it an artery or a nerve.
But however, for many men it is an abscess when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice in re that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and in the hope and caution of the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that is in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic, and median cubital; and that phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of repletion appear.
And it should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that three hours have passed from the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, either at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And that a child should not be phlebotomized until he is fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And if someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, he should cleanse his bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's enema, if there is a lot of retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And those patients should not be phlebotomized who are nauseated, acutely ill, or suffering from intoxication until it is removed from them, nor those who are suffering from dropsy, and more that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and near multiplication of coitus, and labor, and exercise of fasting or vigil, and from every cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporal or animal.
And before it, consider in the subtility of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And before it, enter in a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise by some exercise so that the blood is refined.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the foot of the day, that is, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforsa that the foot of him be guarded on that day from all evils of animal accidents, as well as anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as well as labor and superfluous pain and coitus and similiar to them.
And to his bed, make those causes present in the use of which custom of men with aromaticity and scent and with bals and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist over a cushion that is softer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And before it, extract his arm, and rub it with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and before it, strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for the stricture when it is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body of blood ascent.
And before the stricture, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together while the veins are inflated, and declared to the touch.
And before the phlebotomist, anoint his phlebotomy with a little oil properly; and before it, place his left hand index on that vein, below the place where he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein bulge a little, and the percussion be settled because of the veins is the one that atrobas as well as the heart, fleeing the phlebotomy, and of those is that is full of vitality, and when you pause the phlebotomy on that, it is contracted, and the phlebotomist is discovered; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tight.
And therefore, for this, let the phlebotomist be stopped and be solicited in all these causes.
And before the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, then it is good; and if not, then you repeat it another time below that place a little, or over it with a festinacio, if the place is not apostemed.
And if the place is apostemed, or the patient is frightened, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, because it will forcefully pull the abscess caut, nor enter into a bath.
And before it, repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the aperture is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood you want, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the aperture a little, and do it with festinacio before the place is apostemed, because the place is apostemed in most men with little aperture.
But if you see that already apostemed, then do not repeat over it, because it excuses you no cause; and pause on that any part of the incision of oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And seemingly administer a flen of oil in all phlebotomy with which phlebotomists open the veins of the prohibition of the body of blood, and do this tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed on the place, because the blood is subtiliated and is revolvut when it is thick.
And if in the place of the phlebotomy is engendered a great abscess, because many times it happens, and more to him who has not been bled but that time, or in the opening of the vein little, and then you cover, and place on the place a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And cover that it does to the vicinity of the blood of that vein with the complement of it or of another vein.
And if it remains in the place for some days some blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloen and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calament or something similar to it.
And many times abscesses and eminences happen after phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if then you feel softness with your compression over it, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore guard yourself that you place on it any cause of what has been said, because it will flow strongly from the artery blood.
And make a plaster with water in which is stippled, so that the place is endured, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color of the blood according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is ropy; and seemingly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is subtiliated; and seemingly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover that to him who is full and strong and has need of the extraction of blood in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be large.
And in him who is frail, let the contrary of that be done, and cover that you extract that in troops of times, and that the tract be strait.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is customary for syncope to occur after the phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from it a little blood in three or four times.
And if it is a cold complexion, then prepare before the phlebotomy a pa infused in eyewash of myrrh or in eyewash of honey flavored with spices as well as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in eyewash aromatized and with a good odor.
And if syncope occurs after the phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of much blood, then cover that you prepare to drink water of meat and eyewash very fragrant; and use of aromatics with algualea, and be the one's feet lined with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And he who wants to evacuate his arm and dissolve his blood second by second, cover that to him of whom the phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that he evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But he who wants to evacuate his arm, and give it his blood second by second, and his body is strong, then do so about seven or nine hours of the first phlebotomy.
But he who wants to throw the blood of his body to the contrary of the part to which it declines, cover that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, cover that it be given from it blood in one time and be from it thrown a great quantity and be amplified the opening until syncope occurs, because you will have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand on the wrist of it of the blood body, so that it does not end in death in place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And cover that when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the blood second by second, as already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult the emission of the blood, that you press over it with vehemence and curved it be extended slightly, because that is too bad.
Have the let go until it be phlebotomized second; or remove that with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress that with lighter compression until the blood is out.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is drained.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then you bleed him in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "brachial vein" is flebitized in the place of the cephalic or basilic, when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient inserts his hand into cold water until the puncture site reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then it is tightened over that limb with a stricture bandage; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And be the opening wide and be your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize on the wrist a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the vessel of blood is placed in cold water in times of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it leaves it without a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right arm is conferrable to the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that you tighten the limb or with your hand, because you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the viewer; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if it is not incised in its entirety, do not do it again.
And conserve that you do not end your hand with the phlebotomy, because it leaves it with the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then iterate the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And as much as blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be coagulated tightly; and similarly, you must do in every straight vein.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left arm is that it is conferrable to the ailments of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of it as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is to the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the womb, and to the retention of menstruation, and to the ailments of the lungs and ulcers of the thighs and limbs old, and to their likenesses of ailments.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient inserts his foot into cold water and makes friction upon it until the veins appear well; and he lies upon the junction of the foot with a strap; and the place of the vein the talus appears, and from it, it is ramified in the surface of the foot, many ramps.
And therefore phlebotomize the widest ram or below the calf, below the talus of it, because it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize it on the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with the one that you phlebotomize by the transverse, as if you would want to incise it.
And so let the phlebotomy be.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you iterate the foot of him in cold water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then iterate with the phlebotomy in a little, because the place is safe; and do not fear of him malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the talus of the left side.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of it is to pain of the hip when it is by blood caught.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and fastens and tightens the thigh of him from the side of the wide above the talus, above four fingers, with a long, subtle bandage, so that it appears not otherwise than by that.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize it according to each skill that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise it by incision or sec it by section, because the place of it is safe.
And she is in many men well-known; and if you find it, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of it, and it is that one that appears in the back of the foot opposite the little and the ring finger.
And be careful of the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you wish.
Then loosen the stricture and place over the location of the phlebotomy incision and tighten the area, slightly it is healed.
Of ventosa and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas are of horns, or of earth, or of lead.
And ventosa application is made in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventosa without scarification.
And this ventosa application that is without scarification is in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And to the ventosa that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations of the body, of which the one in which ventosa are placed is alnocrati, and it is the rear part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and ventosa of the chin below the mandible past the mouth; and ventosa of the two spatulas; and ventosa of alohoster, and it is above the end of the rib; and ventosa of the two armpits, and it is of the two arms; and ventosa of the two groins.
And ventosa do not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason they do not catch the virtue through those, as it is caught by phlebotomy; nor should ventosa be made with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes ventosa for illness or for continuity, let us administer it at the beginning of every month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and in any time that it may be.
And therefore when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventosa to be made more than it is passed from the day of two or three hours.
And the help of ventosa of the neck is that when that confers gravity in the head and to that which is effused to the eyes; but it is necessary that that be near evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventosa is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalica.
And it is not light that use of it that one who is of phlegmatic complexion, or in which is catarrh, for it gives to that great harm.
And therefore it is not necessary that use of it the old, and in the heads of which are phlegmatic illnesses.
But to that one who over that is continuing over it is made oblivion; and therefore it is necessary that you command the ventosa to pause his hand a little with the ventosa to the parts behind, fearing of the generation of oblivion.
But ventosa of alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and of the basilica: and therefore it confers to asthma, and to the constriction of the ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it is necessary that the ventosa alkehel be peeled a little, for if it is paused behind, it engenders weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventosa of alhagdahan confers to the pains accidental in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and prefocacio, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is necessary that you command the ventosa to not press his hand with scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and accident fluxes of blood.
And ventosa behind the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gingiva, and semblance to those of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the ventosa that is made over the two spatulas confers to caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
And the ventosa of the two parts of the armpits confers help of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, for that one attracts the blood of all those veins more slender that are in the flesh, and those veins slender of the other veins more gross until that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventosa to not process too much in scarification, for the place is denuded of flesh, and behind it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventosa with which is ventosa over the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers further behind.
And command the ventouse to be large and of bronze, for the place needs a strong suction; and very thin and subtle ventouses are to be used, and to be scarified with a scarification.
But smaller ventouses on the legs are less dangerous, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are used for old pains of the lungs and womb, and bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and are used for both hemorrhoids and piles, and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two veins, and they heal, and of two arteries.
But too many weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And the use of the ventouse is proper to the use of the ventouse on two legs.
And the quality of the position of the ventouses is that you place the ventouse at the beginning full and suction moderately, and do not prolong the position of the ventouses, but place them lightly, and move them gently, and that the humors come to the place by equal arrival. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated and that the flow of blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
For that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, you must scarify him once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the ventouse to amplify the scarification and prolong a little, and temper the suction with facility.
And if in the blood there is thickness, then you must scarify twice, for in the first scarification the way of subtilization to the blood and its liquidity is opened. But in the second, the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then the third scarification must be made so that the last is obtained.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, one scarification suffices us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood was thick, then we must scarify by a prolonged scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision alone.
And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the ventouses must be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, as is oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of double almonds, or oil of quince; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of saffron, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, hot, then the oil must be of marigold, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those similar.
But if the ventouse is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it must be prohibited from oil, and it must have the places of the ventouses of its vicinity washed with water or with cold water of a solanum, or with quince water, or with water of burnet, and similar to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, washes his ventouses with sour wine, or with myrtle water and sumac and similar to those.
And of that one whose superfluities are thick, wash his ventouses with old wine, or with water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to those similar.
And the ventouse must be guarded before bathing; bathing must be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and must sleep near the ventouse.
What is necessary to be done to regulate the ventouse before phlebotomy.
You must consider at the beginning: then if the ventouse or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and has a sharp and inflamed blood, then you must pre-medicate with cold causes, such as vinegar, endive with sour wine and lettuce, and secanabin, and syrup, and to those similar.
And pause their foods as much as possible, and meats of served birds, and foods seasoned with acids, and to them similar.
And of that one whose complexion is cold, he must pre-medicate with drinking syrup of althea, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and wine very fragrant between old and new; and that he be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause his foods as much as possible, and of birds, and snails, and sparrows, and small birds, and doves.
And that on the day of ventouse and phlebotomy, the drinking be greater than the food.
And that certain men be given to drink in some hours, tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, which is muscat, or alcelita before the ventouse or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members be comforted and that the blood be subtiliated; and that they do not take that scalfatz.
But the incisions that are made, which are placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and on the hip, because these members do not tolerate incisions on themselves.
And it is not desired for those, but rather traction of blood from the limb, just as one places a cupping glass on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the nose; and use of that so that the cold, viscous cupping glass of the limb is dissolved, just as one places it on the belly and navel; because that thins the limb and warms it and removes the pain that resolves the cupping glass.
And it is already placed on the boils when they happen in their opening or pimple, because by virtue of the strong traction, the pus is extracted and the pimple is eradicated from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is placed on the liver and spleen, cupping glass in those enclosed spaces.
And these cupping glasses are administered with suction alone; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the cupping glass is filled and is larger, so it is water poured alone or water in which herbs have been boiled for the purpose appropriate.
Form of cupping glass administered with fire: its orifice is two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the resin is the majority of a palm; and it is in the place of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the track is small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
Let it be made of a strong, thick, leather, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the limb of its position upon it.
And in the middle of it, a transverse strip of leather or iron, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this cupping glass is larger than the one we have described; and the less of it according to the illnesses and the state of the one who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the infants and the emaciated are other than the cupping glasses of the young and of robust bodies.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the limb is that it extends the fire with wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse strip in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is ignited around the departed so that the body of the patient is not burned.
And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is on the track that we have said, because when we have the cupping glasses and do not indicate that we show the finger and that the vapor escapes through that track, then the cupping glass is immediately dissolved.
And prop it up the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated of it.
But in the cupping glass that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse strip nor track, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping glass as much as it is larger, so much better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in most limbs but in the limbs in which it is not possible to position cupping glasses, because of the smallness of those, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in a limb denuded of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of muddy ponds.
And then they are laid in water in the day and the night until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with cupping glasses; and then the limb of the patient is rubbed until it reddens; and then they are placed upon it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible suction of the place with cupping glass, it is more beneficial in healing.
And if not, then the place is washed with strong wine and then with much water; and it is rubbed and squeezed.
And if the bleeding of the body is prolonged after the placement of the leeches, and this is the result, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place it on top until the bleeding is stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied, then you pulverize on it vitriol trias, or galls and similar to them of the stippling causes, until the blood is stopped; or cupping glasses are placed on the place, and they are laid until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
And however, if necessary, repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the place is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is left in the places until blood escapes; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
And when you want them to cough, sprinkle a little crushed aloe, or salt, or ash, on those, and then cover them.
Thus begins the text of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these foolish doctors and those who have never looked at the books of the ancients or read even a letter from them boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, it is that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you must not forget this at all; and I have not adopted this, but rather through the length of reading the books of the ancients and study over the understanding of those, until I extracted the science from them.
And therefore I turn to experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my best experiments have been conducted; because I have now shortened it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it at the end of shortening; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which a preliminary statement is necessary before we begin the remembrance of fractured and diverse members of each one. Therefore, I say that in the beginning of this chapter, the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artificers are forced and stand on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art, others than you.
And therefore I say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must at the beginning, apply a flebotomy or to drain that, or both at once, if no cause prohibits it, as the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom you encounter is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content in his food of fresh herbs and of birds' meat and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and fill him with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment, thick and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh poultry, and thick fat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture more lightly and better.
And know that the bones that are broken in men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, are not possible to be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
But however, nature adjusts and amnestied over the broken bone of every part any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens that until it is at the same time conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary that you pause the patient's foods, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the other.
Many varieties of fracture within themselves. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their own; for there is made an arched fracture another that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the shaft and stars and additions proceeding and non-proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and is a small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered or proper torment in its restoration according to what will come remembrance of it distinct in its places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by this is known a fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of it, and from that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor is there any feeling made when you touch the bone with agitation, and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
It is possible that it is a small twisting or fissure, in which case you must feel it with your hand and with compression of the whole;  and place on it of the medicines of which a recollection is made at that moment, which convenes to the place; and then be strict with a subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or otherwise that does not happen in it stagnation, as it is remauguda whole part of its comparison, then you must begin from your hour to the rectification of it, having that it happens after pus caut.
And if it happens pus caut, then leave it for some days until the pus ceases; and then bandage it according to whatever manner that you can of lightness and of ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the healing of it is lighter than of the bone in which it happens stagnation.
And then strengthen it according to what will come the recollection of it.
But if in the bone there is stagnation, then it is necessary extension of this broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be the position with which you pause the limb there, engual according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken limb, then you pierce that you make return those additions with ingenuity and according to whatever manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient by your operation pain nor lesion; and pierce yourself according to your power that you apply one bone to the other's companion according to their best forms.
And then you must profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see here any different cause, rectify that and bandage it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such as do foolish doctors that with many times they make happen pus caut by their operation, or make happen contraction in the limb as we have seen that by the operation of their many times.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for that you know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then you must the envelopment be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be envelopment wide and hard, for the wide bandage connects the great limb and strengthens that of all parts with equal constriction, so that in it no macula enters.
And then, as you begin, your evacuation of equation, pause ligament convenient to that, over the place of that fracture with three envelopment or four according to the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
And then see to that at the part pus sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less that no focus your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then lengthen yourself with envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and mollify the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other time over the broken place with envelopment, and then see to the envelopment at the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the envelopment and in the mollification of that according to what we have said in the first envelopment below.
And then pause between the envelopment of stopa leon or cloth with which is equalized the twisting of the fracture, if in it is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause upon it another bandage, and then bandage over these envelopment stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or pus caut, and then pause upon it that which settles the pus and that os the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then you strengthen upon it the stars.
And be the stars of the majority of wide reed race, and well formed wisely; or be of pine stick; or of palm ramps; and be the ample of each star according to this form and this figure:
However, the splint placed on that fracture should be thicker and a little wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how it is laid on the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the splints with another bandage according to your first stricture; and then tie it above with a firm bandage according to what we have said about stricture, and it is that the stricture should be according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is longer, the less the stricture.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and subtlety, and be of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some fools putting their threads of cords of the rope, and it is a great error, when the bandage is not of equal tightness.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to make a good bandage with them, and there should be at least one finger's width between each splint.
And if the patient is said to be in pain at the ends of the splints near the bandage, then place some wool or carded wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague, and an accident happens in the bone, and I will come with a remedy in that in the chapter on singularity.
And know that a broken limb is not immediately splinted on the first day; the reason for this is that the limb, when it is large, should not be placed on splints but rather after about five or seven days, or more, depending on your certainty of the arrival of a boil.
And this is the way of the splints with which the Ancients restored, which were placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
A method of splinting as a way of restoring a fracture, convenient for many ailments and especially for women and children, because it does not allow for heat or cold to reach it; and it is that you take from the powder of ground flour, and it is the medulla of the flour that remains from the movement of the mill on the sides of the mill.
And make it as such, except that you sift it with the album of egg, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use that.
Another way to plaster a fracture, dislocation, and sprain: Take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of each a dragon's weight x; of frankincense and aloes a dragon's weight v; alochil a dragon's weight xx; all to be ground and sifted and mixed with boiled water or with egg white if the patient's complexion is sallow; and then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores bones broken slightly, and confers strength to many men.
Another way to plaster a fracture and sprain: Take migrach and powdered white althea a dragon's weight x; of frankincense and aloes a dragon's weight v; of acacia a dragon's weight vi; of Armenian bole a dragon's weight .xx.
All of them should be crushed in a mortar with much contrition, and sifted, and composited with water or egg albumen and be administered.
A way of splinting to joints and separated bones in their places, and to soothe pain in those and in fissures and fractures: take woolen cloth and submerge it in strong wine and boiled oil and place it over the area.
However, in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it soothes boils and expels pains properly.
Another way of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig tree leaves and wild poppy leaves; pound them together and make a plaster from them.
A way of plaster that, when administered, helps with the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining boil: take root of althea, chamomile and violet flowers, and ground ergot, of all one part. They should all be crushed and composited with wine, if the limb is not pale.
However, if it is pale, then make it with moist coriander water or water and use it.
Another way of plaster, stronger in resolution than the first one, when a hard boil occurs and needs restoration of the limb: take root of althea and seeds of  li, and balm, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, of all one part equal; all should be crushed and composited with  elderflower water or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the rest of its color.
But Ipocras does not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken limb for its restoration, but rather that it should be made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it should be moderate in thickness and subtlety.
But Gualia has seen that they should be placed on the broken limb for its restoration, and the causes in which it is dryness with a little heat are like myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts the lesion and pain: take flour, of chickpeas, of human hair cut or feathers of bird, and of althea, and salt, parts equal; be sifted and crimped and be cooked, and be made plaster.
May the quantity according to which cover that remains the bandage and then be untied, is that you consider if no occurs pain nor tingling nor the bone is broken no is bad of its place, then you no untie of many days. And if there occurs to the place violent pain or tingling or inflammation, then you tie or untie that in the hour, and take the plaster from it.
And take cloth of linen and sponge of sea lion wet, and submerge that in tepid water, and with that wash the place until that tingling and pain be calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place over it wool cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie over it for a night until you are sure of abscess caut, and that rests the inflammation of the member, and be calmed the pain of it.
And then iterate that stricture subtle and plaster small and do not tighten it for your first constriction, and more subtle with that until it be healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the rage and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents already are calmed of all, and indigested of plaster and of stricture, then you iterate that thus as you have done at the beginning equally.
And if there occurs to the member no cause of those that have been said, then you do not untie that but to three days or four or five or seven; and some times all that is left for twenty days according to what to you appears for the unbinding of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the stricture more than in your first constriction all, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to that is preceded the recollection of him.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and extend more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to arrive to that; and therefore embroil that with tepid water you must every time that you untie it; and be that in all three days; and alleviate the stricture a little, and for this operation run to the member the nourishment, and be healed lightly.
But that which do the foolish restorers of the fracture of the member another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to that it should, and it is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straighter that which enlarged the Ancients in their books and they had acted with that,
And I have not seen to any of theirs that do that, for that it is more reasonable that that not be done.
Chapter second: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, for of fractures some is made by percussion of space, and the percussion hinders all the bone within the skull, the which is left the bone, thus as it is done in the shaft, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the space incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision within the back of it; and this species of fracture is called elevation absolute.
And the plague of these two fractures or is great or little, and of fracture that is compression or attrition; and cause of it is percussion with force or falling upon stone, and to their similitudes.
And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches to the pannicle the which is left the bone; or is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or little.
And of fracture is that which is made in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair small, and for that reason this species is called fracture capillary.
And is fracture that is made either by falling or by percussion of stone and to its similitudes, that makes enter some lamina of the bone to the parts within, and is made in the place concavity as it occurs to the payroles of ram when it occurs to their percussion and is part of their entrance to the parts within.
And mostly is done that in the bodies of bones humid, as it is heads of infants.
And to all these species fractures satagias, so are pains as it is stars separated. And I will come with recollection of all that in its place.
And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon those and by inquiry of them with tentacles and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the species capillary is known for that which is discovered upon the bone, and it is abstergit, and lined upon it with tentacle, for the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification upon pain, as it is vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and emission of the heels and rage of those, and similitudes to theirs of the accidents in the major dispositions, suppose that it is not healed.
And if you see accidents not-flowing you hope for health, then you begin the cure of him.
The cause is that if it has come to you the afflicted at the beginning as it is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study the condition of the bone before the 14th day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must study the bone before the 7th day, because that which is left of the bone should be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and attrition, then you must insert the minute and rubbed piece, according to what I will recount to you.
And you raise the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner as you are possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flows of blood or pus, then you oppose it with what you have, and that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the plague rest until the pus is seated, and it is sure of the flow of blood; and then you begin in the circuit of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor this one, a little wider than that; and this is the form of it:
And then administer more the incisor wider than the second.
And you must have you a number of various incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use of them with facility in percussion upon the incisor so that it does not strike the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you must perforate in its circuit before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-profund drills.
And they are not called thus but because those do not reach the term of the bone of the skull to that which is near it, because the drill has a round extremity or margin on that which is left the head of it sharp resembling a margin or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a large number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone, so that it be to you present in all tests of the skull the extremity of which be acute, the quantity in length and shortness be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill on the bone and revolve that with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause that which is between all the tract the quantity of the thickness of the ray or about that.
And then insert with incisors that which is between each tract of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can over that in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared to that, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
And you must guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the brain.
And therefore, as you will have circuited the bone, and if it is continued with it, and you will have that extracted, you must raise and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with another instrument resembling an incisor, but however, you must have it more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if any pieces of the small bones and splinters remain, then take that with facility with that which you must of the instruments; and then cure the plague with liniments and ointments which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: Necessary is to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and light of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is lion and do not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two parts forward in length, as sometimes; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the brain with the face of it inciding acute in the bone.
And then strike upon the incisor of a part with a small mallet until you insert the whole bone with facility as it is revolved, and you are sure of the panniculus that no accident occurs in it that you fear in any way, and if the medicant14 were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Now if there is any cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in certain places of the bone, cut that of it with the extremity of the lens-shaped incision, and deliver that of it with ease, for it is delivered from it its pain and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is cut or taken from the bone is its fascia, and there remain in it roughness and subtle stitches, then when you remove that roughness and eradicate those stitches with subtle razors, with which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer those in every place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are directing your operation of that broken bone and its figure.
And when you administer in your ratio with which razors you root the bone at the beginning the most blunt of those razors, and then use the most subtle of it, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you reach to administer the most coarse and the most subtle of all those.
But in any of the other fractures, petited capillary and subtle fractures, when you administer care according to what you direct to the rectification of it.
And it is a cause that it is not befriended over all those who have studied in that art. And stick on what we have written have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is cut when you eradicate the bone, then when you take cloth of it according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge that in rose oil, and place that over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not hurt the scalp; and then administer over that bandage, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has so only.
And leave that with this care for a day or for two until you are sure of the pus cauter; and then untie that and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, as such as root of flax and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and of similar to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is pulverized over the wound, as such as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which it is that it abstergesca and do not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in it filth of rinsing nor other; nor let add virulence in it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and you can that, and it happens over the patient as much as evil malice.
And it happens in the scalp of the head, as of it is modified the bone and most when it is less cared for, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious its whole adoption.
And if it does not happen blackness but of the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then when you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts iii., and in those lines a cloth, and then place that over the scalp; and then cure that with the species of cure that convenes until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken but two parts together, or one of those some times, for that in it you have two bones, for the partition left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then when you introduce the said little one into its nose, and that you equal that fracture within with your said index, and with the said point outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And be done that by you with ease, and guard yourself that no cage by that your operation over the patient pain.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to that, then when it be equal with the extremity of the ray in which it is little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And guard yourself with the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then the vii or x of days the rest of the pus cauter.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the splint thickness of so much quantity that fills the trough of the nose.
And I say some of the ancient restorers that the splints be enclosed in border, and be changed in every day, but it is not seen to me; it ought to be that the piece be enclosed in album of comfit with powder of moli; and then leave the one until the bone be joined and be hardened the cartilage.
And some times be introduced into the nose, in place of splint, a pain of auca pus that is enveloped of cloth of lion; and be that already you the fracture of the nose more vehement and that the patient not be prohibited of inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do that.
And if another abscess happens after cauterization, apply a plaster to the nose with cerot or with a cloth soaked in strong wine and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if no abscess happens after cauterization, then cover that with a plaster of sesame flour and powdered quince seeds with egg white; and place a linen cloth on top of it, and do not touch the nose with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are splintered, then cover those, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for those; and close the fissure, and cure that with what hardens and consolidates, and with plasters suitable for that.
And if plague happens in the nose, then cover that with cauterizations and administer lead tubes while it is entirely healed.
Chapter .iiii.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with plague, look then if the fracture is only outward, and not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then the knowledge of it is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, that you introduce your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then introduce the right finger; and push with that the looseness of the fracture inside with ease to the outside parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and with that decently equal that.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is already separated in two, then cover that you administer extension of two parts according to rectitude while it is possible the equation of it.
And if there happens concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and place on the broken jawbone cerot, and place on top of it a doubled cloth, and place on top of the cloth a large splint decently made, or a piece of sole equal in length to the jawbone; and tie that underneath according to how you are prepared the ligation of it and that which is convenient the application, while it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use of rest and tranquility, and place the food of him soft and lean.
And if you estimate that already is altered the figure in any manner, then you get it and untie that on the third day; and then rectify that which is already altered of it and plaster it with powdered wool, with egg white, or with sesame flour, because that you will have removed the cerot of it, and place on top of the plaster wool.
And therefore, as it stands annexed and adjusted that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave that, that you do not untie it while it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time happens abscess after cauterization, then administer that which we have said many times in the sedation of it while it is healed, and be cured that abscess.
And if the fracture is with plague, then consider if it is a piece of the bone separated or splinters, then you subtilize that you remove those splinters with that which is convenient for it in the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is strait, then you enlarge it with the fleubotomist according to the quantity of your necessity.
And after you will have removed those splinters, and of those there is no remaining cured, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place on that one of the plasters that is convenient for it and harden that, while it is healed.
Chapter .v.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three manners.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated in two parts other that do not happen splinters; and it is easy to the restoration of it; or it is thus that happens in it splinters, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is thus that the fracture is with plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with plague, is that you make be present two ministers, so that one has the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And after engulfs the fracture with your fingers until it is made the form of it according to what you cover, and it is not in it little eminence nor concavity.
And if you indigeysses more of extension, then cover under the patient's collar of cloth or wool, and be the greatness of it according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the clavicle and  bind the collar with your hand while you engulf the fracture according to what you cover.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle to the outside parts, because it is reached to the preon, then cover that the patient be resupinated over his neck, and place on top of the muscle of it a cushion medium in greatness.
And the minister presses the muscle of him at the sides below until the bone of the collarbone is elevated which is in the shoulder above, and then you rectify the fracture and engulfs that with your hands.
But if you feel splinters of the collarbone and they are bad, then do what you do on that and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have prepared for this, because you have placed below the collarbone the instrument that serves the chisel; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form of it:
And it is similar to a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it be according to what is to you possible in the operation; that it have two extremities as thus, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plaque which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is sure of pus caut, then you adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture.
And if the disruption is little, or you fear pus caut, then you plug the plaque with rags and powders according to the quantity of the cut of the plaque.
And if it happens pus caut, then you put a rag in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on that.
And all, that it not be bad the tile above the broken bone; and for so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or sees the tile already be remauguda, then you rectify that and strengthen the liament.
And then place the sleep of the patient on the neck of it, and place below the nipple of it, the sleep of it at night a little cushion; so that with that it be elevated the auxiliary of it from the side of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to the neck of that.
And do not untie the liament if you do not happen in the place prusiment or pus, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it be restored and be coagulated the fracture of the collarbone.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men it is done in less time of that.
Chapter .vi.
Of the restoration of fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the side of it and not broken of it but its margins.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known but by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of engen the which is to you possible.
And then place on the place powder of mill with album of egg and linen cloth; and then place powder of cloth duplicated; and then place on it tile lada of subtle board according to the quantity of the spatula whole or may a little.
But if below the tile is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you engulf that concavity with linen cloth, and then put the tile according to equality.
And then strengthen above with humidity long with constriction decent and with firmness of the tile until it not be remauguda of its place.
And consider the liament in every day; and all times that it be softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the tile if it be remauguda of its place.
And keep the patient on its side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the liament, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the cominicio is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone pes and put below the code, then you scindeys on it, and take it out, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of sadacio of pus caut if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a broken foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of it and that is bad; but the extremities of it must be moved that they may be cicatrized and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken, it is that it declines to the parts within and accidents to it great pain, and difficulty in the walk, and cough, and great heat and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be laid the patient upon his back, and place between the spaces of it a cushion; and then press upon the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtilely in the operation of it and in the equation according to every manner that is to this possible and that convenes to this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place upon it plaster and lint and place above the table of fine cloth of gauze or of calig and of their likeness in levitat, because that you envelop that in cloth; and then subtilely in lian that upon the broken bone that it not be harmful; and go with binding according to roundness to the back sometimes, and strengthen that with stricture decent; and then consider the binding in every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the dismemberment of that, you must corrode or pruziment, the pain, the abscess that accidents in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which accidents by that with manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if times to the face; and adjust to it stricture until that it be healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Know that fracture of the back does not catch but in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the part in front, it does not accident to those contricio but because that they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden to the feeling, it must be the inquiry of it with the said.
And the restoration be thus that you equal the fracture with the said according to the manner possible, until that it be engulhat according to that cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if it is needed of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts within, then accidents to the patient great pain and puncture, as well as puncture that accidents to him that has pleureci, and because that the bones put the veil; and accidents to it difficulty of hanelit, and cough, and vomit of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antixs so ingenious in that with motz engientz.
And of them so that say: cove that you place foods of the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, for that the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
But we should not avoreys that for that it not be cause leugiera to generate abscess caut, if it does not accidents; and if already accidents, then it already helps to that.
And they would say some of them that it be laid upon a windpipe and then that it suck with force; and it is seeming to ratiocinacio, but however it is feared that the windpipe drive the superfluities to the place by the weakness.
And they would say some of them: cove that the place be covered with wool that already is submerged in hot oil, and that pulvils be placed between the back until that it be filled, that it be the binding equal when it envelops that according to roundness; and then be cured the patient with cure of pleuresi of food and of medicine.
And if vehement cause constrenh the patient which does not suffer, and the bones put the veil with puncture ledent, fear over the patient, then cove that they cut upon the place, discover from the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the rememoracio of which is preceded, and that they inscidam the bones with facilitat, and extract that.
And then that they adjust the two lips of the plague, if it is great, with sewing, and cure that with plasters until that it be healed.
And if accidents within abscess, then you cut and enfond pulvils in hot oil and place over the place, and that it be cured the patient with that which cove to the abscess within.
And be laid upon the back upon which he sleeps, until that it be healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of a fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes it happens that fractures to the bones of the neck, and it is bad to their attrition, and seemingly to the vertebra of the back. And as this happens to some and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, because if sometimes their hands are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot more those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrenges those with your said or prick those with needle and no feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the worst of dispositions it is mortal.
And if those are placed and he feels in those constrictions with the fingers and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient recovers with cure.
And if you see in the vertebrae of the neck the appearance of that and you want to know if it is healed or not, then consider the feet of him.
Then if you see that they are already softened, apply to those what is applied to the others, and as soon as you place him on his back, he will have wind and defecation according to his will, and sometimes he is rolled back on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in the cure of him.
But if you do not apply any cause of those, the cause is better and less serious.
And the cure of him is that you perforate the seat of the abscess cauterizing it and place on the affected vertebra olive oil or a poultice of herbs; place on it some days until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it on it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
And if it happens that the bone is separated by the fracture or any cause that is already separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and that you hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment of the herbs, until it is healed.
But if the lower end of the bone of the heel is broken, and it is the end of the foot, then cover that you put your left hand into the anus, and that you align the broken bone with the other hand as soon as possible according to the second equation; and then place on it a plaster and a splint, if you need those, and then strengthen it.
And if you feel broken splints in it, then you cover it, and hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the foot.
The bones of the feet are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but communication in the extremities of those and are cut in the length and incline to the parts of the fingers; and happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is over the fracture as is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it alone, then you align it according to how it is apparelled to you by equation align until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long one or which already declines to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on his belly until it is prepared to you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have aligned it, place on it a plaster, and then place on it a splint of wood or of bandage, and strengthen by stricture on which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And align the concavity with that which fills it until that presses the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if it happens abscess cauterize, then you cease from extension of it and of its restoration until it is cauterized the abscess, and place on it what seats it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as you cover.
And if it happens in the bone splints or they are comminuted, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Arm is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is one that you take a piece of wood of medium thickness according to this form:
And be tied in two extremities two bandages, and then be suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm on the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle part of which is annexed the curvature of the splint.
And then suspend on it some heavy cause, or let the minister extend it to the lower parts; and then the doctor and he who the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient be rolled back on his neck and suspend the arm of the neck with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the lower part of it; and each of them extends to his part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then cover that the half of the bandage be placed over the citillic and the other below the fracture of the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the hip, then it should be placed the ligament over that area and over that hip.
Wrap that with ease and work it, and as soon as it is wrapped according to what is said and applied well, then strengthen that if it does not happen abscess caut.
But if an abscess occurs, then leave the constriction for the seventh day, and place on it wool soaked in wine and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then you strengthen that.
And the way to strengthen that is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm be in place of stars, if no prohibits this any cause of the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place over the fracture that star that be pus wider and pus stronger of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and be the length of the stars according to the break with addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the constriction which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your constriction over the location of the fracture be pus straight. And as much as is lengthened the fracture be the constriction lesser.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the constriction as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear abscess caut, then you leave the constriction and the stars for the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place proximate or inflammation; or it is prohibited the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of constriction; and therefore rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are over confidence that it does not happen any cause of this, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And be the sleep of the patient on his back, and his hands on the stomach.
And place over the support a cushion full of wool wrapped, and consider in all hour of the night or of the day that not be undone nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that be the ligament softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have before said, so that the food be subtle at the beginning until it is commenced strengthening; and then cover that to thicken the food of him.
Because of custom of the support and of the cloth of him is that they be strengthened in 40 days; and then cover that they be untied and be administered bath and be medicated with ointments the ones which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid a little, then you do not untie of that the ligament and the stars within the days or within two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of restoration of fracture of the arm.
Arm is composed of two bones the ones which are called two forearm; of which one is small, and it is that which seizes the little finger, and the other is great and it is that which is placed below the little finger, from the part pus of behind.
And strong leu is broken the major forearm only, or the small, and strong leu son broken together.
And when is broken the small forearm above, then the restoration of him is lighter, and the healing of him is pus lighter.
And when is broken the forearm of him below the fracture of him is bad, and the healing of him is difficult.
And pus bad of that is when son broken two bones together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small forearm above, then it is convenient to the physician, ofves the restoration of him, that place small extension with ease until that be wrapped.
But if the great forearm is that which is broken, then cover that to place extension pus vehement.
And if the two forearms are together broken, then cover that you place the constriction mot pus fort.
And cover that you place the figure of the hand ofves the restoration of him and the extension of him extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand to the parts above, pus aut than all the other fingers, and the little finger be pus bas of the other fingers, and the patient be cezent on a well-fallen cushion.
And be a cushion in front of him in the altitude or upright of him, so that the patient does not encorra work.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part pus of behind with his hand or ligament, and other minister extends above similarly.
And then the physician wraps the bones until he reduces that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the facture of the bones so splinters, then you perforate to reduce all piece in their place with your virtue.
And if a separate bandage appears in it that presses the groin and is not your hope in the restoration of it, then you put it on it and remove it in the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a plague, I have already made a special chapter on that, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if an abscess happens at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and make it between a thickness and a subtlety, and strengthen the cloth above it with a subtle structure until the abscess is ceded; and then remove the cerot and place a prepared plaster of powdered clay mixed with egg white, and then place stars; and let the star be the one placed over the fracture, pus harder and stronger.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm is six in the major dispositions, or the fracture in one focus or in two foci together.
And place your structure over the location of the fracture, harder and more vehemently, and as much as the structure is higher on the parts above the fracture or on the parts lower than it, place the structure a little softer according to that which is preceded the recollection of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture be soft and moist cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened be of its proper measure between subtle and thick, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any cause happens of which rectification is necessary, as much as prudently the one which happens to the limb, and then cover that you embroil the limb with warm water until that pruziment ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the structure is already softened and the bone is already rejoined and seems like those, then rectify all that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb by superfluity of structure, for then cover that you soften it a little and let it for a few days until it runs to that nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not happen any of those causes that we have said, then cover that it not be dislocated for about twenty days or thereabouts.
And then let the arm of the patient be suspended by its virtue of movement agitatius, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or perhaps sooner it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the finger of the hand and of the digits.
Know that in the finger of the hand and in the joints of the digits, tart end should fracture, and it does not happen to them but attrition many times.
And when a fracture or attrition happens to the hand, then cover that the patient follow straight and in front of him lies the cloth according to equality, and then place the hand of him over that extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them until they are conjoined with good conjoining.
And then cover that you place plaster and lint, if no abscess happens; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in a cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the palm, and then make a semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with his palm fractured; then be strengthened with a long cloth.
And let the star be of leather with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to that which cover.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then cover that you place stars above and another star from the lower part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the structure, as much as the hand is revolved to the ratchete between the fingers with joints.
And if a fracture happens to one of the joints of the digits, then if the finger is put, be aligned according to that which cover and then be strengthened with the palm and if you want, place a small straight star to it so that the fracture be elevated and not be harmed.
But if the fracture is in the other digits, as in that of the middle location, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the annular, then be aligned and tied with the finger that is adjacent to it; or be all tied according to continuity, and it is better; or place upon it a small star, as much as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and upon that, the disposition of abscesses caut and oppose — with your operation — to that which cover when any cause of those happens, according to that which is iterated the narration of it.
Chapter .xiv.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip many times is broken and is declared to the feeling according to that which is converted to the part in front and to the most sovereign.
And the restoration of him is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is left below the fracture, and the patient is prone on his belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its end according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is situated at the root of the thigh, then the ligament is pulled down to the bottom of the pelvis, so that the extension falls on it, and the other ligament is left below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is situated at the hip, then the ligament is pulled down to the hip, and the extension is made to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bones with both hands while reducing it according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by a good connection; then, cover it with plaster and a splint, if not, the abscess will occur in the limb. But if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for a few days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
The splint is made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And introduce a long piece of felt between the thigh and the leg from the hip to the lower parts, and bring the ends of the felt from the sovereign part of both parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what is superfluous of the bandage.
And then place on the thigh in the location of that fracture splints, and place one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the vacancies between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the splint is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong splint in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you move away with the ligament from the location of the fracture, your splint should be smaller and lighter and softer.
And then extend both ends of the felt to the lower parts until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the splint on it, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or swelling or anything like that to the limb; and if any of those things occur, then cut it from it, and rectify what has happened again, according to what we have said many times.
But if the bone is broken in such a way that it is difficult to align, then cover it and remove it, and cure it with what precedes the recollection until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with other splints, just as we have said in the arm and the leg.
But however, in the restoration of it in this way, do not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, then apply another splint to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp on the one that is always.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all this is according to the diversity of the conditions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
Know that a fracture of the hip joint is very difficult, but it often happens.
But if this fracture occurs, then it is not more than a fissure or crack in its parts, and this is with a plague or a few plagues, and above all, it is all affected with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that what is broken of its parts is aligned with the fingers until it is joined and conjoined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place a round splint on it, if it is necessary; and tighten above with a splint as is convenient.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as abscess or anything like that, so that it opposes all accidents to what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called by the name of the tibia; and the other is thin, and it is called fibula.
And there happen some kinds of fractures that happen to both bones of the leg, and for that reason, the restoration of it is done like the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the front parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it is thrown below, and it is one of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension, flexion, and rotation of the bones according to that alignment.
But however, if the fracture of the leg is recent and has many fragments, that the extension be less and more gently, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and when you align the bones and that completes your entire operation, then you take pieces of wood from the palm tree which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made of palm branches; some of those which are of small thickness, and are not of the handles, and the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the heel.
And then envelope each piece in two envelopes according to their length, and place one on the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they be from the knee to the heel.
And then tie the two bones in three places of two extremities and in the middle place, for with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left side, and it stays in good position.
And already is administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and be placed on it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
And most importantly, that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is properly treated.
And then consider every day the leg and study with that by behind study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when it happens any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary before it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and of the digits.
To the talus, fractures do not occur often; but to the bones of the foot, fractures occur sometimes; and to the digits of the foot, few fractures occur, and they do not occur to them but attrition in the middle of the disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot, a fracture occurs and sometimes those bones be elevated above each other, then the patient places their foot on the prepared ground as if they were going.
And then place one foot upon that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on them, and press, and align them until they return to their places.
And then place plaster and stopa above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which there are two ends.
And then strengthen that with the foot in a downward structure, because you have enveloped that with cloths and other causes of which you have indigeys.
And when three days or four have passed, then you untie the ligament, because you have found the bones aligned, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as you know.
But if some digits are broken, then restore those, and align them as I have told you in the restoration of the digits of the hand. And then place on the broken digit a splint according to the length of the digit, and be a little wider than it; and below the foot, this table which I have told you about, and strengthen that with a decent structure.
But if that which is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each digit a splint of their quantity enveloped in lion's cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the ends of the table, the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with what is necessary.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip bone of the woman and of the thigh bone and of the groin of the man.
When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a bedridden position, and then incline that to the part of the back a little, and be held behind.
And then the woman places the hip bone with cotton, and be done on the hip of her as she hopes; and then the woman be  comforted, and elevates the back of her little by little, because all that is thrown away until it is in front of the hip as she hopes and the broken bone returns.
And then place powders on the back of her, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you have seen that at the beginning, and then return to her first powder.
And do so for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen over the back of her a tube of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the hip of her, and then puff into the tube with virtue until the bladder is inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.
And then be filled with cotton and stay for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the pelvis of a man or a woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have recounted in the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these proper fractures and which few have learned, especially to him who has some study and use and understands my book well; for that fracture means to you in the greatest dispositions of the straight line in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the thigh of a man when it is broken, take a wrapping of cloth, and put the thigh in it; and then place over it a wrapping of cloth, and have it wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or about those, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when it is accompanied by a plague.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture occurs with plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize him as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to the retention of it as much as you pulverize over it three times, if to you another cause is not present.
And then as you begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not happen after a boil.
But if you happen a boil, then you let the restoration of it until the ninth day, until it is given the boil, and do not approach it in the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause to happen bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the hip uncovered, then you must take care to perforate to reduce it and stitch it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not to you prepared and the equation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or of eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary to the physician that he prepares of those three or four according to the quantity that you indicate to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And be round, and be in it little thickness so that it not be doubled of the compression over it in the hour of the operation.
And be of sharp extremity to which be margin in its extremities; and be the underside of it to thickness tending, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is the little shovel.
Because you must take care that the extremity of it comes elevated over the extremity of the bone prominent.
And impel it in one movement until it returns the bone, and be stitched with some equation.
And therefore strive to stitch the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it broken is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with what we have recounted, then incise it with what you convey to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it be to you possible.
And then ratze those that remain in the bone of roughness and of small splinters.
And as the bone is reduced, and then the reduction the patient feels violent pain, then you know that the bone is not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great help.
As is completed your restoration which you make to the bone, and then submerge cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the plague anything nor other cause in which there be oil, so that it not cause in it to happen putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you incise the tract with forceps and uses of wrappings according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to happen over their patients death or sickness corroding or ulcerated, so it is healed. And if your stitching is lighter, soft, different from the stitching of the other fractures.
And if the plague is large or is a bad plague, and you fear over it some bad accidents which we have recounted, and feel pain in the place, then you must not put over it stelas, but make to it an enveloping of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
And as soon as one day or two times already the plague begins, that in it be engendered a brac, then you remove from under the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer poultices, ointments with which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, as ointments tetrafarmacon and similar to it.
And it is necessary for you to untie the ligament and consider the plague on each day morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and so that the member is prepared in such a manner that the pus runs from it to the parts below with facilitated.
If many days pass to the plague, and it is not consolidated nor is it separated from it the arm, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones for which you should examine the plague with a probe. And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that of them are not separated and put the member and make it ache, pierce you to inscise those according to you that is possible.
And if it happens to the plague to become cheesy or elephantiasis, it is a kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should put on each of those with what is necessary to you of the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
And of this in which you should know the best and you make present your peace: when the bone is broken, elevate on the member as the bone of the thigh and the helper and similar to those of the large limbs, and that you do not presume traction from it, nor the extraction of it for many times happens through this death; have left that within until you can heal, because very likely it will fall by itself after about twenty days or thirty. And then cure the plague if to you is seen, and if not leave that.
Chapter .xx.
Of the cure of the node that happens in the trace of any fracture.
Many times happens this node in the trace of the healing of a fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and it is marred by it the figure of the member; and very likely prohibits the member of its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the node is recent and administer in that those medicines that have stipulated as it is aloen, and ensis, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; in this way that you take from that some or all, and comfrey those with vi stiptic, or with album of how, or with vi agre, and place that over the node in cotton, and constrain those over it for good constriction.
And leave the constriction that you do not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until that is removed the node; or strengthen over that lamina of lead descentment, because lead has the property of removing all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the node already is in worse converted and tight is and necessity provokes to put that together, and then split that by the part sovereign of it, and incise that the superfluity and eminent, or rat that with some rezoris until that is removed; and cure that until that is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
Of the restoration of fracture when it is restored and then that which remains the member subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then that which remains the member subtle and frail, then that is not done sino for many causes: of which one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligation of it made not according to what is necessary; or by superfluity of constriction of the ligaments until that the nourishment is prohibited to run to the member; or by multitude of superfluous embrocation; or by superfluous movement not in its hour; or by paucity of blood in the body of the patient and by weakness of it.
And the cure of that is to give to the patient to eat and make the heart of it tender until that the blood is multiplied in it; and administer baths; and intermet joy and levity over it.
And then place a poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation of it with tepid water, until that the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter .xxii.
Of the cure of the broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibits the operation of them of that which is necessary.
When it happens to the member already restored during the healing of it from crookedness and eminence of the broken bone and node, and it is for that feeded of form of the member, but however the member is not prohibited of its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of that one who existed that member be of novel broken.
But already there are stood many foolish physicians and restorers the ones that have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable losing to great fear the sign of which is mortal.
But if lameness and node are recent, then you should have them embrocated with tepid water in which are contained softening herbs, as it is the leaves of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made a poultice with mollifying poultice as it is diallaquilon well made; or that be prized mucilage of root of altea and be contused with gray of guanine or with oil of ceram, and be emplastered with that; or that be prized figs fat and be trissated with dove's fems, and similar to those of the medicines that are named amermans consolidation.
And some times is dissolved with assiduous light friction that is with the hands humid, and be administered movement of the member to all part in all hours.
But if the curvature has already been added and is made strong and turned into a worse situation and necessity for its cure with iron arises, then when it is the most swollen and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised that which superfluously of the knot of that part with the bone with subtle scissors, and is administered facility in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints of the limb, so that movement is prohibited, and the figure of the limb is altered, and it brings upon the patient pains and great injuries.
Therefore, when an accident occurs to a dislocation, then it is necessary to immediately try to reduce it, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason, one should not be bad or stretched during the time of inflammation, because often it brings spasms and intense pains.
But when this happens, then you must apply a poultice to the patient's limb, and let it rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be wrapped with warm water and oil, and then it should be reduced with facility.
And every limb should be treated with this so that the memory will come back to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what was previously said in fractures; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most inferior.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So the two jaws are dislocated if not tard; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that they are pulled back to their places by little movement, and softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and complication, so that they are softened at the junction where the saliva of the patient flows and that it cannot hold it nor be able to close its mouth, and the tongue of it be enveloped in its word.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the greater dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it must be administered reduction of it gently, and not delayed at all.
And that the minister has the head of the patient, and meanwhile the doctor puts the tip of one of his hands in the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from inside his mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he puts both of his hands together, if the dislocation is of both parts, and the others of his hands are outside with which he pushes; and commands the patient to cease his jaws and release those to go from each part; and the doctor pushes the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and most of all if both jaws are dislocated together, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made easier and the reduction of both is not delayed at all, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are set, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place on them powders of cloth with cerot, and make it of wax and oil rubbed; and then it should be lined with facility with soft linen.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that he does not hurt either to the right or to the left; and do not let him chew for any cause; having his food be forbidden to him, until the pains are reduced and the jaws are well-set, then let him chew as he wants.
And this should be administered with facility, and do not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient, for eating and drinking and speaking, until the jaw is well-set and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and are not converted to their places, then often this happens fever and continuous sweat, and very much is alerted the belly of the patient, and very much and vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is dangerous; and often dies he to whom this happens within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place from inside by its continuation with the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with strong pressure, so that it will return.
And then place on that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
But the extremity of that which is tied and continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it should be reduced and set according to what has been said and according to what is your equipment.
And then place on that plaster, and powders, and stricture, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three manners, of which one is that it is dislocated from the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated in the part below the muscle, and that is done hard; and it is not dislocated in the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the parts in front by the nerves.
And most commonly it is dislocated and protrudes in the parts below the thigh, and most in those whose flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is protruding with difficulty.
And often it happens to some men by percussion or fall, and the muscle of him is inflamed with abscess, and it is cured because it is already dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you know this before you are over-confident about it, and then you shall proceed in its cure.
And it is known the dislocation of it when it is in the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find between those a manifest difference; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the thigh of the touch of the head of the muscle as if a hoop, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his armpit, nor move that by all movements.
If it is dislocated below the foot or above, and you then find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates his hand to the parts above; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates his hand, and extends that upwards; and then places that below as it returns slightly.
But if for what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and administered a poultice that softens and liniments as if it were with roots of elder, and fennel, and melilot in water, and it be administered.
And then the patient be laid on his back and placed below the thigh of him waiting for a wool that be between light and tightness, and the physician places his hand on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it not be moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it not be moved to the parts below, because that instantly returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce it this way: and it is that you make a man present who is longer than the patient, and is on the side of that leg, and interposes his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates his thigh to the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of his belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him that other cause be suspended, so that the heavy one, because the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that a long rod be placed on the ground, the head of which be rounded in figure, as if a mortar, that it not be thick nor thin, and then it be placed below the patient; because being placed on the head of the rod cloths are laid, and the patient stands according to the length of the rod, and then the hand of him is extended to the parts below of the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place with velocity.
And if it is difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use of this cure: and it is that you take a rod the quantity of which be in the length of two arms, and its width be of four digits, and the thickness of it be eased in the preon of the thigh according to this form:
And on the rounded head be laid cloths of wool so that the rod does not hurt the patient.
And then it be placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm be extended on the rod within to the parts below, and the rod be tied on the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm be placed on a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other body be suspended from the other part, because the joint enters instantly.
And as the entering of it is completed in whichever manner that is possible to you, then it is necessary that you place below the thigh a wool sphere of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powder of meal with eggs and album of egg over the whole muscle, so that it be rolled upwards, and then strength below the thigh with decent tightness; and the ligament be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to the neck of him, and be left, and not be moved the hand of him for seven days.
And cover the patient's food lightly, until the limb is comforted, for it is lighter to the healing of it.
And then give the food more, near wine or beer, and exercise movement; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or by another cause, then it is necessary that in that one be administered cautery with three tracks, according to what was said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the constriction are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot elevate that arm to the upper parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made of the foot and the shoulder or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And administer in that one the other constriction, and cure that one until it is healed.
And if it happens that near healing gravity falls in the limb and slowness in the movement of it, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is alleviated and that it returns to its first nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and that is dislocated to all parts, and more so to the front part than to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not easily cured because it is caused by the place or by the touch according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the hand, that is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that one its muscle.
And cover that hip, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a cautery abscess, because if it comes to a cautery abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not healed of all; and especially when it is to the back parts, because it is worse of all the other kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they leave to that one death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the doctor be on the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands together, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns as if it bends the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the ministers so that it not be remauged from the extension.
And then be revolved the arm from every part, because it is enveloped cloth folded long over the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that one with some oil so that that is those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and then push the joint with impulse vehement until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, cover that one to be laid on that plaster in which there is stypticity and execution with album of egg, and be extended with a descending constriction, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave it.
And if sometimes the joint does not become tighter, then you iterate the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and after loosen it.
But if it happens to it gravity after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer humectacion in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause on the joint alleviated, so it is a case of greasy motion; and after be tied, and leave it over the bones the day and the night. And after that, and put that in bath; and when it is dry, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and after iterate over that alleviated, so it is a case of greasy motion, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already reached the inside of the tooth while it is still in the mouth.
And if you want, pause on that wound of cow humid and scalded with border and stren on that one; and do that some times, because that one is humid and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the malassen, so it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen of the hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is lighter, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however cover that it be velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is apostemat or that it happens in it apostema caut.
And the reduction of the dislocation of that is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the minister extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it in while it returns to its place.
But however, it must be considered if the palm is already stayed in the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table, above the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent, then the back of the hand, the position of the hand of that one intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor lies on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore, if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that with a poultice, yielding the abscess and leaving it; and do not repeat this, because if not, do not endure nor can you perform the reduction of it more than days pass.
But however, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not engendered in it except that it be strengthened with a cautery near the place of it and firmly you confer any cause.
Therefore, when the mallets is returned, then place on it the poultice which you have recomposed, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and then it is removed and left, and the hand of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and there occurs in it any gravity, then gently that with water cauda and with friction some times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated of those to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it be healed in that its day.
And when it will be night, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that at night; and do this for some days until it be straight.
And do similar with this, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it be healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When there occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck a dislocation complicated, and the moved vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death seizes the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside its will, and it cannot retain that; and many times are softened some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times is made the removal of those to four parts.
Therefore, that is already removed to the parts behind and is named gelbozit.
But the cure of it is that then consider if the gelbozit occurs from puerility, because then in that there is no cure nor of that there is healing of all.
But in that which comes from a blow or from percussion or similar to those, already said the Ancients the ways of cure with sermons prolixs, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I have already and abbreviated of that of which the little excuse of the trop of it, for the my better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with the which I have this exposed and formatted ex instrument divers of that with the which I will show this and expose that.
And of those there is no cured except that which occurs in the back properly with that which I have recomposed.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face upon a bed  near a wall, and be extended behind him a soft instrument so that the feet of him be not lifted.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the bed near the head of him, and another stick in the opposite extremity of the bed under the feet of him.
And the minister holds the stick, and it not be fastened in a ditch; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then envelope over the head of the patient and behind the little limbs lion firm; and extend the extremity of the limb to the stick which is above the head of him, and tie that in it; and then strengthen the other ligament over the hips of him the denols of him, and below the legs of him; and then adjust all the ligaments and tie those in the other stick which is above the feet of him.
And then the minister, having casqued, extends the ligament to the part of the shaft, and do not be removed the two shafts and ligaments from their places in which they are placed, but however do not be stopped as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while it returns, or that which places on that a table, and then that adjust on the table his feet while it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the latitude or longitude is in average of three brasss, and carve in the wall of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which enter the extremity of the table. And then place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, and tightens well while the spine is shortened and that it returns to its place.
And if you wish, open with a turn the which is revolved with the hand; and is that you place on the ground the head of the patient in the rear of the pug two shafts, the longitude of which is of an arm, and place the head of him in the rear of the pug also two shafts; and be the longitude that is between each shaft a palm, and already is made in each shaft a groove in which runs the turn, and each one be stopped on the ground so that it is not moved.
And be also a shaft round in which is the turn, and be revolved in the two grooves of the two shafts.
And in the extremity of it is a groove in which is formed the shaft, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other shafts is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened in the feet of the patient in the groove which is of the head of him, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of him in the turn which is of the feet of him.
And then place each turn and stay a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned and the place is aligned, then cover that you place a poultice of dried album of egg, and then cotton; and then place on the poultice a board of which the latitude is of three digits or around those, and the length of it is the quantity that engulfs the place of the hollow, and on the part of the spine as well.
And then tie with the ligaments which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment while it is healing.
And if there remains any prominence in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that medicines be administered which soften and lubricate with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a sheet of lead.
And some times an accident happens prominence in the rear of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already protrudes because it is not to be done proscription to it with this medicine, for very strong it will make you to happen death.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be dislocated only, and accidents do not happen to those that happen to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the back parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the front parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the front parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot with the leg, and it is the place that if the leg is dislocated, it is postemated of cautery, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation is to the back parts, is that the accidents of it are contraries to this accident.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the front parts is that it expands its thigh according to completion, but however it does not bend that part of pain that is in the thigh, and if it persists to go and cannot above that to the front parts; and the urine of it is retained and the groin of it is postemated, and it walks on the crutch.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend that part that bends the groin, and the thigh of it is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is of that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, that it is already attached with that, then you administer reduction of it and remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it is not to be done proscription in that.
But in the case of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then take hold of it so that you turn the joint and extend it to the inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will return quickly and does not need other care.
But if it does not return in this manner, then have you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the rear part, or by his hands, or by a bandage which is tied above the knee; and another minister extend the hand of him from below so that he puts his hands behind the heels of him; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the groin, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And the extension of him or from the inner part to the angle of the shoulder, or from the rear part to the part of the back.
And the extension of all those at once while the patient be elevated with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of the proper, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, then have the patient be laid down on his side; and then place the ligaments on the root of the groin in that place which is between the head of the groin and the place which is below the shoulder; and then extend the ligament above the part of the shoulder to the highest part of the collarbone.
And then another minister firmly grasps the arms of him, and embrace the thick part of the groin of the patient and extend to the outer parts by vehement extension, for that returns to its place.
And this kind is of the lightest cure with which this member is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused upon you and do not obey the entrance with this kind of cure of all, then have the two legs of the patient be tied together with a strong, light bandage, on both the ankles and both the knees.
And the length of each one of them by the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient be suspended over the head of the pole, and that be in the middle; and the length of him from the ground the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to press the head of the groin, and be suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man presses the groin with strength impelling, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is in the outer part, then have the patient lie on his stomach according to what we have recounted in the having flatulence; and be tightened the ligament over the leg of the patient properly and over the feet of him.
And then two poles be placed, one at the feet of him, and the other at the head; and then be placed poles adjusted in the middle of the groin laid upon which damp cloths be enveloped, so that the patient be not harmed because the pole be between the thighs of him, for that the extension to the rear parts not be pulled.
And then each minister extends his part, and the physician with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then have the leg be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about groin; and the physician places the palm of his right hand over the groin of the patient, and then shortens that with the other hand, and with that shortening pauses that extended to the rear parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then have the patient not be extended to the rear parts, and be elevated above the ground; have it be placed upon a hard cause, as it is commanded if the dislocation is in the outer parts, according to what we have said of the placing of him upon two widths; and it is upon his face and the ligaments be extended, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
And have compression be administered with a table upon the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what is commanded — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the two legs of the patient, and when you see those engulfs and the patient extends his leg and expands that his excuse, then you know that the member according to what is commanded is returned — and then you adjust two thighs and pause poultice and extend with bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Now, if you see those bumps in the clothing, then you know the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster it, and stretch it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then unwrap it, and make him delay in walking for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the parts behind, to the parts in front; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can over that; adhere your two to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the knee of it to your palms, and hold those between your fingers on the knee of it with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of the return of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh with lightness without labor.
And then plaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those immediately with a bandage for three days or for four, and then unwrap them.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is dislocated by small movement, and some times it is dislocated according to compliment, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the dislocation of it is of lightness reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be bandaged while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, cover that you make the patient straight, and hold that one minister strong and valiant of the back part of it in the middle place of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part most behind of the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and you push the foot of the foot with the right, so that the leg works.
And do this two times according to that we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the leg the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot bandaged, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, for that it returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of it with that which we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a small piece of cloth on the ground firmly, and that it lie between the thighs of it, and you have already enveloped over it cloth so that it does not harm the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the leg with its hands or with ligaments that lie on the collar of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of its part, and the cloth be extended between the thighs of the patient, holding it, so that the body of it is not pulled to the behind parts, according to its extension.
And then the physician bandages the dislocation with its hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the behind parts, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause plaster and stretch that with ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with ligaments to the leg.
And cover that you fear or guard yourself of the nerves which are behind on the ankle, so that the ligament over it not be vehement and harm it strongly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch it.
And then unwrap it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for 40 days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not made secure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted over it, and then that it does not receive cure.
And if it happens to it a boil, then cover that you administer in the reduction of it that which I preceded our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes.
So that the one that is dislocated be straightened with little extension of his work; and that which is not difficult, raise it lightly.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then make the patient place his foot on a level surface of the ground or on a table, and be standing thus as if he were going.
And then stand beside the patient, and place your foot on that which is above the joints, and press it with your foot with force until it returns, and that you see it straightened and does not appear in the area prominence.
And then place under the foot of the patient a table that supports the whole foot, which has two ends, and strengthen it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and make the patient rest from walking for many days, until it is straightened and its return is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of them together.
When any of those causes happen, and you are engaged in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times death occurs.
And for this reason, you should not presume on the cure of it, but rather he who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not bold nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses, only so much, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of the disease, and in which you see some hope. And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms.
And therefore, if the member returns as we want, then administer the regimen which causes an abscess and cures the plague with what is convenient to it of the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and happens in the bones that are separated, then you pierce the ligament of them, and do in that what we have said in the simple ailments of this which is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to what has preceded me in your teaching; for this is better to you, you should owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which may God be the benefit. Amen.
