I have written this book for you, my sons, having completed it as a part of the medical science of medicine in its entirety and having reached the goal of clarity and elucidation therein. I saw fit to complete it for you with this chapter which is a part of manual surgery.
For manual surgery is much practiced in our land and time, such that its science was nearly lost and its trace vanished. Yet only scant drawings remain in the books of the ancients, which have been obscured by hands and marred by errors and confusion such that their meanings are concealed and their usefulness is lost.
So I thought to revive it and compose this chapter upon the path of explanation, elucidation, and abbreviation, and to include illustrations of various surgical instruments and other tools needed for clarification.
The reason why there is no skilled practitioner of surgery in our time is that the profession of medicine is lengthy, and it is necessary for its practitioner to be versed in anatomy, which Galen has described. Until he stands on the benefits of the limbs, their functions, temperaments, connections, and disconnections; knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, exits, arteries, veins, and their locations.
And so it is said that many are doctors in name but few in deed, especially in the practice of surgery. We have touched on this briefly in the introduction to this book.
For whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned regarding anatomy will inevitably fall into errors that kill people, as I have seen many who claim to be proficient in this science without genuine knowledge or skill.
I once saw an ignorant doctor who incision a sebaceous cyst in the neck of a woman and severed some vessels in her neck, causing her to bleed profusely until she died before him.
I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a large bladder stone from a man by pushing it out through the urethra, but he ruptured the bladder in the process. The man died three days later, and I was called to remove the stone. Upon seeing its size and the patient's condition, I deemed it impossible.
I saw another physician who earned his living among some commanders of our land in medicine.
He quickly, out of ignorance, splinted the fracture on the wound with bandages and splints tightly without letting the wound breathe.
Then he released him to his desires, left him for days, and ordered him not to remove the bandage until his leg and foot swelled and neared destruction.
So I was called to him, and I quickly removed the bandage, and he found relief from his pain except that the corruption had already become severe in the member, and I could not save it.
And the corruption progressed in the limb until it perished.
I saw another physician who cauterized and burnt a cancerous growth, but he removed it after many days until his patient became severely harmed, for if the cancer is pure black, it should never be treated with iron.
Unless it is in a limb that can be entirely removed.
Therefore, my son, know that manual work is divided into two categories: one accompanied by safety and one associated with harm in most cases.
And I have warned throughout this book about the actions that involve risk and fear, so you should avoid them and reject them.
So that the ignorant may not find an excuse for speaking ill or criticism. Therefore, be cautious and careful in treating your patients with kindness and certainty.
And follow the best path leading to safety and good outcome. Avoid difficult and dangerous diseases that you cannot treat.
And keep yourselves away from what you fear may bring doubt to your religion and worldly life. It is better for you and will elevate you in this life and the hereafter according to your capacities.
As Galen said in one of his maxims, 'Do not treat evil diseases lest you be called bad physicians.'
This treatise is divided into three sections.
First Section.
The first section discusses cauterization with fire and sharp drugs, arranged from head to foot, including illustrations of instruments and kinds of cautery, and all that is needed for manual work.
The Second Chapter
In the treatment of wounds and swellings, bloodletting, cupping therapy, surgeries, extraction of arrows, and related matters, all arranged in an orderly manner with illustrations of tools.
The Third Chapter
In the treatment of dislocations, sprains, and related conditions from head to foot, arranged in an orderly manner with illustrations of tools.
The First Chapter
On Hemorrhoids
Before mentioning its treatment, it is necessary to mention the method of its benefit and harm, and in which constitution it is used.
I say that discussing the manner of benefit and harm of hemorrhoids is a long conversation, a subtle science, and a hidden secret about which many sages have spoken.
And they differed in their views on this topic, but I have summarized some of it to avoid lengthiness.
I say that hemorrhoids benefit generally for all constitutions with matter and without, but especially in two constitutions without matter: the hot constitution without matter, and the dry constitution without matter.
As for the dry constitution with matter, there was a disagreement among them. Some said that hemorrhoids are beneficial in this case, while others argued that they are not suitable because heat and dryness are contraindicated.
It is impossible for a hot and dry disease to be treated with a hot and dry remedy. But the one who says that hemorrhoids can benefit a hot and dry disease occurring in people's buttocks is correct. For whenever you add the body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you make the body cold.
And I say that he is correct, for experience has shown me this many times. But it should not be imagined that anyone can comprehend this matter except one who has practiced and been extensively trained in the treatment of hemorrhoids. And he stopped at the different constitutions of people, the conditions of diseases within them, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
And as for other constitutions, there is no fear of them, especially cold and moist diseases, for all physicians agree on their benefit from hemorrhoids without any disagreement.
Know, O sons, that cauterizing with fire is preferable to cauterizing with a burned drug because fire is a singular substance whose effect is limited to the member it burns, and it rarely harms another connected member.
And cauterizing with a burned drug may extend its effect to nearby members, and it might even cause illness in the member that is difficult to treat or perhaps kill, but fire, due to its nobility and excellence, does not do this except when it becomes excessive.
And we have found this to be true through experience gained from long practice and careful attention to the art, and by observing the facts of the matter.
And I have omitted lengthy discussion, although it would not be fitting for this book of mine to conceal from you the secret of fire and its manner of action upon bodies and its repulsion of diseases with philosophical arguments that prove beyond doubt.
Know, O sons, that they have differed about the time suitable for cauterization, and they considered the best time to be in springtime.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times because the harm caused by time can be counteracted by the benefit derived from cauterization. Especially when cauterization is for a necessary, severe, and urgent pain that cannot be delayed, lest worse mischief should ensue than the slight harm caused by time.
Do not think, O sons, as common people and foolish physicians do, that cauterization which cures a certain disease will never recur again, considering it to be a lasting remedy.
For cauterization is nothing but a drug that alters the temperament and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain.
Except that cauterization is preferable to drugs in its swift effectiveness, power, and severity.
And the disease may sometimes return, depending on the temperament of the patient, the nature and strength of the disease, and what is prepared in his body due to the abundance or deficiency of humors and other such causes.
O Lord, let not the disease for which cupping is employed be a mild one, and let it be in an organ that has little importance or moisture. Like treating toothache with cupping, it may happen that the pain does not return, which is preferable.
And as for the common saying that cupping is the last resort in medicine, this is true only insofar as they believe that nothing else can help after cupping has been performed.
Indeed, what is meant by 'cupping is the last resort in medicine' is that we have tried various treatments for a particular disease and they did not work, so we used cupping as our last resort and it was effective. Not according to the meaning understood by the common people and many ignorant doctors.
It was mentioned earlier that cupping with gold is preferable to cupping with iron, because of the warmth and nobility of gold's substance. They said it does not cause blisters at the site of cupping, which is not true.
For I have tried it and found that gold causes blisters in some areas but not others. Cupping with gold is better than iron, as they said, except that if you heat the cupping vessel made of gold in fire, you will not know when it reaches the desired temperature for heating gold.
Because it cools quickly, even if you increase the heat it will melt in the fire and the craftsman will be confused by that. Therefore, cupping with iron is quicker and more correct for us to use, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on cupping into sections, starting from the head to the foot, so that the student may easily find what he wants, God willing.
Chapter One.
For cupping of the head, use one vessel.
This cupping relieves excessive dampness and coldness in the brain, which are causes of headaches, frequent colds from the head to the ears, excessive sleep, toothache, and sore throat. In summary, this cupping is beneficial for all diseases caused by coldness, such as palsy, epilepsy, shivering, and similar ailments.
Firstly, command the patient to evacuate with a purgative medicine three or four nights prior, according to what is suitable for their strength and age.
Then, command him to shave his head with the razor, then make him sit before you cross-legged, having placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your little finger at the base of his nose between his eyes where your fingertip ends, mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the brass cautery [this is its image].
Reveal from the bone as much as a walnut or chickpea, then raise your hand and wait until it cools, then prepare your hand with the same cautery or another if it has cooled. Until you see from the bone what I mentioned to you, then take some salt, dissolve it in water, and soak a cotton pad in it, place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cotton pad soaked in oil to him and leave it until the inflammation subsides, then treat him with the four-component ointment until he recovers, if God wills.
And they said that the more a wound remains open, the better it is for pus to flow out, and the more beneficial it is.
Some mentioned that they cauterize until reaching the bone and press the cautery until some of the thick bone burns, then remove what has burnt from the bone, then treat it.
Others said it is necessary to exaggerate cautery until its effect reaches the bone strongly enough that some of the bone falls like a small ring or button, and they claimed that this relieves pressure from that spot and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then treat until it heals, and I do not see either of these types of cautery except in some people, and leaving it to nature is better in my opinion. And peace be upon you if there is any [disagreement], for the head [is like] a fortress; when its natural connection is disrupted, it will defend itself, as we have seen in other limbs.
Especially when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, so use it with peace and tranquility, if God wills.
Chapter Two
Also in the case of the head
If there is a persistent pain in the head that remains for many days despite using remedies such as cupping, cauterization, and medications made from aromatics or other ingredients, especially if applying the cautery treatment mentioned earlier has not been effective, then examine (the patient). If the head of the patient is strong and well-built, but he feels extreme coldness, cauterize him again with a slightly smaller cupping glass. Then apply cupping glasses to each of the four corners of his head until the skin thickens and the intended bone is exposed, as described. And apply a cupping glass to the back of his head at the spot known as the occiput, but do so gently without exposing the bone, as this will cause severe pain unlike any other cupping treatment. I will mention this cupping procedure in its proper place.
The cupping glasses used for the corners and back of the head should be softer than those used for the middle of the head, and this is their shape.
Chapter Three
On the treatment of non-chronic headaches.
If pain occurs in the temple accompanied by headache and extends to the eye, then the patient should evacuate (the humors) using diuretics for the head and apply other treatments mentioned in the chapters on diseases. If this does not help, then apply cupping to two points. Either use a sharp cautery drug or cauterize with iron.
As for cauterizing with the burning drug, take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off its edges on both sides. Then make an incision in the temple at the site of the pain using a wide lancet so that there is enough space under the skin to fit the clove.
Insert the garlic clove under the skin until it is completely hidden, then make a tight bandage and leave it for about fifteen hours. Then remove the garlic clove and allow the wound to heal for two or three days before dressing it.
Apply a bandage soaked in fat to draw out the wound, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. Alternatively, you can use some of the cauterizing drugs mentioned in the eighteenth chapter on cauterizing drugs.
If cauterizing with iron, this is how it should be done: Heat the brand of this shape:
And it is called the 'screw cautery' because its head has some convexity like a screw, and there is a small groove in its center.
Then place it on the painful spot, grasp your hand firmly while gently turning the iron; let the amount burned be like half the thickness of the skin. And raise your hand so as not to burn the vein underneath which would cause bleeding. Then immerse a wad in saltwater and apply it to the spot, leaving it for three days. Then change the dressing with oil until it heals, if God wills.
If you wish, cauterize this wound with the sharp tip protruding from the brand, taking care not to cut the vein in this non-chronic ulcer.
Chapter Four.
On cauterizing chronic ulcers.
If you have treated the ulcer with what has been mentioned earlier regarding cautery, and if the treatment did not succeed, and you see that the ulcer does not respond to any of the previously mentioned cauterizations by fire or medication, Then heat the sharp cautery until it turns white, having first made a mark on the painful spot about half a finger's length or more. Then grasp your hand once and pull the cautery strongly until you sever the vein and reach near to the bone.
But take care not to touch the jawbone that moves during chewing, lest you burn the muscle or its motor nerve causing spasm.
And beware of the blood from the vein you have severed, for it will gush forth. Especially for those who are ignorant and inexperienced in such matters and leave the work to others.
And the treatment of sudden bleeding from an artery will be mentioned in its proper place in this book, if God wills. If you see that the ulcer does not respond to this cauterization,
Then cauterize in the center of the forehead as we have described, and treat the wound until it heals, if God wills.
If you wish, use the curette that we mentioned in the chapter on dividing arteries with the scissor-shaped forceps; it is better and more effective than this one.
Chapter Five
Earache.
If pain occurs in the ear due to cold and it is treated with purgatives and other remedies mentioned in the section, but the pain does not subside, cauterize the point called "the Point" which has this shape.
Then cauterize around the entire ear or both ears if the pain is in both of them, using the heated forceps. Away from the base of the ear a little after marking the spot with ink, use the curette which is about ten points in each ear or approximately that size. Then treat the spots until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Six
Toothache.
The toothache that is treated with the curette is specifically of the type caused by phlegm, as mentioned in the sections on diseases.
And avoid using the curette for the type of toothache caused by hollows and nerve spasms.
If you treat this type of toothache with syrups, inhalations, and gargles without success, it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three curettes. One at the base of the ear, the second a little below the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your curette from the opposite side of the painful area, as relaxation occurs on the healthy side.
The shape of the curette should be such that one end faces the upper tip of the ear under the horn of the head slightly, and another on the cheekbone. Its length should be approximately the length of a thumb.
Insert the curette with your hand until it burns through about half the thickness of the skin. This is the shape of the forceps, which is a type of scissor-like instrument that was previously shown, but slightly finer as you can see. It is preferable for the blade to be a little thicker. Then treat the spot with what was mentioned earlier until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven
In case of chronic stroke.
If the stroke is chronic and has been treated with what we have mentioned, but treatment has not been effective and there is no fever, then administer four leeches. Apply one leech to each of his temples, one to the middle of his head as mentioned earlier, and one to the back of his head as stated above.
And for cauterization as described above, you may also apply a leech to the mouth of the stomach, and then treat as mentioned.
Chapter Eight.
In case of amnesia.
He who suffers from phlegm-induced amnesia should initially be given large quantities of Aragat and brain-cleansing herbs to drink.
Then, shave his entire head and apply a poultice of mustard seed paste on the back of his neck, leaving it on repeatedly as it is beneficial for this condition.
And do this for the specific nerve mentioned earlier. If he is not cured, then apply three leeches to the back of his head, arranged from the top of his head to the bottom of his neck.
And place a finger's width between each leech, then treat the leeches as mentioned. If you wish to increase the number of leeches and he can tolerate it, apply an additional leech in the middle.
If you wish to further increase the number of leeches, apply them to both temples and treat until he is cured. The cauterization should be performed using a hot iron as previously described.
Chapter Nine.
In case of paralysis and relaxation of all limbs.
It is recommended to first purify the head with Aragat and what was mentioned earlier, then shave the patient's head and apply one leech in the middle of his head, one on each temple, and one on the back of his head.
And three leeches on the nape of the neck. If you need to apply more for a case of relaxation of limbs and the patient can tolerate it, and the condition is severe, then apply four leeches on his back. And cauterize until most of the skin is burned and then raise your hand. Then treat as mentioned earlier until he is cured, if God wills it. The cauterization should be performed using a hot iron.
Chapter Ten
On Epilepsy
The treatment for a person who has epilepsy due to phlegm should first involve cleansing the brain with large leeches and other remedies mentioned in the previous section, provided the patient is adult-sized and able-bodied enough to endure such treatments.
However, if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then use the purgative and diuretic drugs for the brain many days beforehand while improving his/her diet.
Then shave his head and apply a cup on the crown of his head as described previously, then another one at the back of his neck. And place a cup on each horn of his head. If the patient is strong and able-bodied, apply the cupping glasses mentioned in the treatment for paralysis and relax the body by pressing on the nape of the neck and back vertebrae. The cups should be made of gold according to the previously described method.
But if the patient is a child, make the cups mild as shown in this figure.
Chapter Eleven
On Melancholia
If the cause of melancholy is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, apply the cupping glasses mentioned in the treatment for paralysis.
If the cause of melancholy is an inclination towards black bile and the patient's body is moist and impure, cleanse his brain according to the methods mentioned in the previous sections.
Then shave the patient's head, make a tight cap of linen like a crown, and place it on his head while he sits cross-legged holding it from all sides. Then take one ladle of old sheep's tail fat.
Heat it gently over the fire until it is moderately warm, enough to tolerate if placed on a finger. Then pour it onto the patient's head within the cap and let it cool down. Repeat this procedure once a week along with other appropriate treatments, God willing, until he recovers.
If you wish, apply small dry cupping glasses without holding them with your hand but rather allowing them to stick by themselves. This type of cupping moistens the brain moderately.
Then lay on it a linen cloth soaked in sesame oil or chicken fat.
Chapter Twelve
Regarding the watering of the eye.
If you find, at the outset, that water is flowing from the eye with the signs mentioned in the section, then hasten to treat the patient by cleansing his head and face of all moistures, and make him sweat freely in the bathhouse for a few days.
Then pass a bandage around his head, tying it in the middle of his head, and then tie two more on either side if the watering is from both eyes. If it is only one eye, tie it on that side alone.
Then cut with the scalpel all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, ensuring that the incisions are long and wide across the cheeks. Be cautious of blood loss.
If you see any among them, cut it off at its origin with whatever treatment is possible. We will come to the wisdom of tying and cutting vessels later, and we will be cautious about bleeding.
He may also make two deep incisions on either side of the nape of the neck beneath the bones.
Chapter Thirteen
Regarding chronic weeping (epiphora).
If the tears of the eye are chronic and persistent, and if it is known that this is due to veins and arteries on the surface of the head from outside the head, then tie up with the suture described at the beginning of watering of the eye. Make a bandage around the middle of the head, two on each cheek and two below the occipital bones. If more is needed, tie one on either side of the eye's tail at the corner of the eyebrow using a small scalpel.
Chapter Fourteen
Regarding tying off a running nose (epistaxis).
If, after treating him with what was mentioned in the section and it did not work, then quickly treat the patient by cauterizing three times at night. Then shave his head and tie a bandage around the middle of his head with an oily scalpel. Then tie with the cauterizing iron two ties above the eyebrows under the hair, being careful not to cut the artery. This is what the cauterizing iron looks like:
The Fifteenth Chapter
In treating drooping eyelids
If the eyelid droops due to illness or dampness, apply this ironing technique once using a crescent-shaped iron.
And if you wish, apply it twice above the eyebrows on each side, avoiding the temples; let the length of each application be equal to that of the eyebrow.
Do not press too hard with the iron, but only until a third of the skin is burnt; let the shape of the iron be as described.
The Sixteenth Chapter
In treating eyelid inflammation
If the inflammation turns inward, then cauterize the eye in two ways: Either by fire cauterization or by applying a burnt medicine; regarding fire cauterization, instruct the patient beforehand to leave their lashes alone if they usually pluck them until they grow long and even.
Then, when the lashes have grown back and become even, tie his eyes with a bandage so they do not move until they regrow. When they have regrown and become straight, place the patient's head in your lap and mark on their eyelid with ink a sign resembling an almond leaf.
Let the beginning of the mark be near the lashes, then place a cotton swab moistened in egg white or sparrow's saliva underneath the eyelid, and then heat the iron with this shape.
Then cauterize according to the shape you have marked, a little at a time many times until the skin surface burns like the entire shape of an almond leaf. A sign that your work is successful is when the eyelid becomes taut and the hair raises from the eye's flesh.
Then raise your hand and leave him for three days. After that, apply a cotton pad soaked in clarified butter until the burnt hair falls off, then treat him with ointment until he heals, God willing. If any hair returns after some time and the eyelid droops again:
Repeat the cauterization on that same spot as before. If the hair is on the lower eyelid, cauterize until it returns to its natural position without harming the eye's lashes. As for cauterizing with a burnt medicine:
Then, make a paper sheet from paper pulp, then take ordinary soap and un-extinguished lime, each weighing about a dirham or similar amount. Grind them together thoroughly and do this quickly so that it does not dry out. Then, spread the mixture onto the paper pulp sheet you made in the shape of a leaf. Place it on one or both eyelids and put a cotton ball soaked in egg white underneath the eye.
Place your index finger on top of the medication and gently press it while moving it whenever the patient feels pleasure from the medication, as they will find it pleasant like fire. Once the pleasure stops, remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
And observe, if you see that the eyelid has lifted as it does when cauterized with fire or cut, then repeat the medication on the spot where it did not take effect until your work is complete and the eye is cauterized. Then place cotton soaked in butter on it until the inflammation subsides.
Then treat it with the yellow ointment or another one until it heals. And when performing this procedure, be very careful that nothing of the medication falls into the eye, as if the eyelid droops after several days and some hair gets into the eye.
Then apply the medication to that spot where the eyelid drooped, especially as you did initially. Then treat it until it heals. This is a leaf of paper pulp.
Know that people's eyes differ in size, so adjust your cauterization accordingly. This is the correct method for those skilled in this craft.
Chapter Seventeen.
On the removal of a splinter from the eye socket.
If treating the splinter as mentioned in the sections on diseases did not work, then proceed with cauterization in this manner
Tell the patient to place their head on your lap and have a servant hold their head firmly between their hands so that it does not move or shake.
Then place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or the saliva of the medicinal leech on their eyes, then heat the cautery instrument which has this shape.
This splint is curved like the shaft of an eagle's feather from one end which is used for plastering. If you wish, it can also be open at the other end; if not, it should be closed like a reed.
Then, if it is open, you squeeze the bandages and remove the excess material. If it is not open, you open it and extract its content. Then you place a hot iron on it, being very careful that your hand does not get burned until you reach the bone.
Move your hand slightly away from the eye towards the nostril so that your hand does not make a mistake or disturb the patient, lest the iron fall on the eye's fat and damage it. If you have reached the bone in one attempt, proceed; otherwise, repeat with the iron if necessary.
Leave it for three days, then apply a lint soaked in fat and treat it with the dried ointment until it heals. If it does not heal after forty days, apply the strong corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, as will be mentioned later in its chapter, if Allah wills.
Another method of plastering the nose is mentioned by some early authors: cut a small hole in the location of the splint, then place a thin funnel into the same hole.
Pour into it about the weight of a lead dirham melted, and hold the funnel firmly without moving, so that the molten lead does not flow into his eye. It is recommended to place a damp lint on the patient's eye, soaked in egg white or water.
If the nose is burned by the lead and cured with an amazing cure, then remove the splint and treat it accordingly. Otherwise, it may be necessary to use a nasal probe and reposition the splint into its proper place, as will be discussed later in its specific section.
Chapter Eighteen.
On the treatment of split lip.
Frequently, a tear occurs in the lip, known as 'the hair,' particularly in children. If this tear is treated with what has been mentioned in the section on splits and does not heal, then heat a small, sharp iron in this shape:
The cavity of it should be soft like a razor, then place it warm in the same incision until the wound reaches its depth, then treat it with carrot juice until it heals, if God wills.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In the case of a nosebleed occurring in the mouth.
If a tumor appears at the root of the teeth, in the palate or at the roots of the jaws and it becomes inflamed, bursts open and begins to discharge pus, causing profuse bleeding that does not stop even with treatment, then one should heat an iron on the scale of the bleeding.
Then insert the heated iron into the bleeding hole and hold your hand until it reaches its depth, repeating this once or twice. Then treat it with the remedy mentioned until it heals, if God wills.
If the matter is cut off and healed, then no surgery is necessary. Otherwise, it must be explored and the rotted bone removed as will be mentioned later, if God wills.
The Twentieth Chapter
In the case of a loosened tooth or teeth.
If the teeth are loosened due to dampness, causing them to move despite treatment with medications that have not been effective, then place the head of the dental key into its socket and heat the iron (whose shape is shown below) after placing the funnel over the tooth.
Then insert the heated iron into it, holding it gently until you feel the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth. Then raise your hand and repeat this process as many times as desired. Finally, fill your mouth with salt water.
Then hold it for a moment and spit it out. The loose tooth will become fixed and the relaxed gums will become firm, and the rotted dampness will dry up.
The Twenty-First Chapter
On toothache
If the toothache is caused by cold or has decay and treatment with medications has not been effective, then there are two methods of treatment: either using fat (semen) or using fire (fire).
As for toothache with fat (semen), take beef fat and heat it in an iron spoon or shell. Then take a cloth, dip it in the melted fat and place it on the painful tooth quickly, holding it until it cools down.
Then repeat it several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, you can dip a wick or cloth in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth, then put the heated iron over it until the heat reaches the bottom of the tooth.
To cauterize it with fire, take a copper or iron tube and heat it until the mouth of the sick person feels hot. Then take the ironing comb that comes with the tube and place it on the same tooth while holding your hand until the comb cools down. Repeat this several times.
The pain will either disappear on the same day or on another. After cauterizing, the patient should fill their mouth with good butter and hold it for a while before spitting it out. Here is the picture of the ironing comb.
You can cauterize with either end at whatever angle you prefer, here is the picture of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Second.
On cauterizing boils.
If the boil is caused by phlegm and cold dampness, and does not respond to drugs, then heat the hollow cautery iron whose shape is shown here with both ends open.
To make the smoke come out of the other end during cauterization, place the iron on the boil once or twice, depending on its size. If the boil is small, use a smaller iron.
Then leave it for three days, and then apply a cloth dipped in butter until the burnt part heals. Then treat it with ointment and bandages until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Three
On cauterization for hoarseness of voice and difficulty in breathing.
If the phlegm has affected the trachea, especially if accompanied by coldness of temperament, the patient should first take expectorant drugs. Then cauterize with a hot iron at the notch of the neck at the base of the larynx in the lower position.
Be careful not to cauterize the larynx itself, and only burn a small area of skin. Then cauterize again at the junction of the neck at the end of the sternum using an iron with a shape as previously described.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned until he recovers, if God wills.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On diseases of the lungs and coughing.
If coughing and lung disease are due to cold humors, without fever or chill, and the condition is chronic, apply two cupping glasses over the lower chest near the empty spaces under the armpits, and another one in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the cupping glasses should be of the shape mentioned earlier, or if you prefer, use the cupping glass called "al-Niqita" whose image has been shown earlier in the treatment of earache, using about thirty points.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned until he recovers. You can also use a three-chambered cupping glass with this design to hasten the cupping process, as you can apply it in one session to three glasses. This is the image of the cupping glass:
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On cupping for headache.
If the shoulder dislocates due to slippery humors or does not stay in place despite attempts to keep it there so that it becomes a habit and dislocates at the slightest movement, do not first reduce the jawbone. Then have the patient lie on his back or on the sound side, and lift the skin inside the armpit up towards the top with fingers of your left hand if the joint has dislocated inwards.
Then heat the two-legged cupping glass which looks like this.
Then apply the cupping glass to the skin until it reaches the other side, forming four points of suction. You can also use a three-legged glass, resulting in six points of suction with the legs on the soft tissue.
This is the image of the three-legged cupping glass:
You can also add one more leg to make eight points of suction. Then apply warm compresses with crushed onions and salt, wrap the patient in blankets, and keep him quiet without moving the limb until it heals. Dislocation upwards rarely occurs.
Apply a cupping glass over the shoulder joint once, using an incision and bleeding profusely, or use several glasses in succession. The joint will become stronger, moisture will disappear, and the patient will recover.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
Regarding the stomach.
If much cold and moisture accumulate in the stomach, causing it to deviate from its usual state and frequent attacks occur, despite treating it with various methods without success, then the patient should lie on their back, extend their legs and arms, and apply cupping three times. Apply a cupping glass under the breastbone, using an earpick-sized incisions. Apply two more glasses below each hip joint, so that the cups form a triangle shape, keeping some distance between them to prevent joining if they become inflamed. The depth of the cups should be about one-third the thickness of the skin.
This much is sufficient without addition.
If you wish, apply a single large cupping glass to the center of the stomach in this manner.
The cupping glass used for this single cup should be circular, like this shape.
Alternatively, apply cupping to the stomach successively by first marking spots on it with ink at desired intervals using a pen, then applying multiple bleeding cups, and treating it with the aforementioned remedies until recovery.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
Regarding cold liver cupping.
If the liver suffers from pain due to coldness and moisture or excessive wind, causing it to deviate greatly from its natural state, despite treating the patient with the previously mentioned remedies without success. The patient should lie on their back, and mark three spots with ink at this specific shape and size on the liver, below the shoulder blade where the human arm ends.
Each cup should follow after another, with each being one finger's thickness apart. The cups should be applied lengthwise along the body without pressing too hard on the cupping glass.
The cups should heat to about half the thickness of the skin, no more. The patient should stand upright on their feet; if they cannot stand, they should lie down with legs extended and arms raised. This is the shape of the cupping glass.
These cauterizations can be performed using a scissor-shaped cautery iron if you are gentle and skillful in its application, taking care not to persist too much with the cautery lest you burn all of the skin and reach the intestines, for the skin there is thin; know this.
Chapter Twenty-Eighth.
Cauterization of a liver tumor in the abdomen.
If a liver abscess appears and you want to know whether this tumor is in the liver tissue or in its capsule, know that if it is in the liver tissue, it will be difficult and painful without limit.
But if it is in the capsule of the liver, there will be severe pain, and you should know that its treatment has baffled physicians. Therefore, the patient should lie on their back, and you should mark the warm spot with ink.
Then heat the cautery iron in fire; it is the one that resembles a sickle, which looks like this: And cauterize with it once until you burn all of the skin and reach the capsule, releasing all the pus. Then treat it as you would an abscess until it heals.
And this type of cautery should not be attempted except by someone who has extensive training in the art of medicine and has performed this operation many times. Only then may one undertake such a task, and I advise leaving it to them.
Chapter Twenty-Ninth.
On cauterizing the uvula.
I have mentioned the cautery of the protruding cold uvula using the roots of frankincense in this manner: take a long, dry root of frankincense as thick as your little finger, dip it in oil, and heat it in fire. Then cauterize once between the thyroid cartilage and the larynx, two small cauteries below the Adam's apple slightly tilted towards the chin, and two large ones above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
And two more between the fifth and sixth ribs tilted slightly towards the back, one in the middle of the chest, another above the stomach, and three behind, one between the shoulders, and two lower down on either side of the ribcage below the cautery that is between the arms.
It is not permissible to insert your hand into the wound with a hook, but rather at the surface of the skin, you should rub it externally. Some early practitioners mentioned that some people use an iron spoon resembling a slope for this purpose.
The duration (of the procedure) is as we have mentioned for liver abscesses. In cases of intestinal obstruction with a hook, the patient either dies immediately or develops non-healing wounds at the site.
Chapter Thirty
Regarding spleen injuries.
If treating a spleen condition with the methods mentioned in this section does not succeed, then cauterize it in three ways: either with three or four evenly spaced hooks along the length of the spleen.
These hooks should resemble the shape of liver hooks and be spaced evenly apart, with a gap between each hook approximately the thickness of a finger or slightly more. The description of the cautery iron for liver hooking applies here as well. Do not insert your hand into the wound, and have the patient lying on their back.
The second method involves the elbow and entails lifting the skin opposite the spleen where the left elbow ends, with the skin lift being wide enough to span the breadth of the body so that the hooks lie along the length of the body.
Then insert the iron spoon protected deeply until it penetrates through to the other side of the skin, then remove the spoon so that there are four cautery points. If you wish, use another spoon with three tines instead.
Then treat the site of cauterization after leaving it to discharge pus for many days; this is the most effective of all the treatments mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-One
Regarding hydrocele hooking.
Hooking is beneficial particularly for acute hydrocele. If treating a hydrocele with the methods mentioned in this section does not succeed, then cauterize it with four hooks around the scrotum and one hook on the abdomen.
And another hook on the liver, one on the spleen, and two hooks behind the back between the buttocks, one facing the chest and the other facing the abdomen. The depth of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the wound open to discharge pus for an extended period.
No medicine should be delayed after injury. What is necessary for treatment should be brought together quickly to hasten recovery. The iron mangle used for the back has a triangular shape as previously described, and the one used for the back is bronze.
The Second and Thirty-third Chapter.
On Injuries to the Feet and Legs.
If the swelling reaches the ankle and fills with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the space between the big toe and the second toe.
And hold your hand on the mangle without twisting it, then raise your hand without returning it again, for yellow water will ooze out and the mangle will be of this shape.
Then cauterize on the legs twice on each leg, once above the knee and once below it towards the middle of the thigh. On each buttock, cauterize twice.
Leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time until yellow water oozes out, then treat it with the rest as mentioned.
The Thirty-third Chapter.
On Cauterization for Diarrhea.
If diarrhea is due to cold and dampness such that the powers of retention and digestion in the stomach and intestines are weakened, despite various treatments it has not been cured, and you see the patient is suitable for cauterization, then cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach. As mentioned earlier, cauterize the stomach with a circular mangle and four cauteries around the navel using a thin triangular mangle. Also cauterize once on the pubic region or twice.
If you find that dampness is abundant and the patient is suitable for it, cauterize once on the pubic region and once on each armpit. You may also add two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one if necessary. This treatment is successful and will not fail to bring benefit, if Allah wills.
The Thirty-fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Hemorrhoids of the Anus.
If there are chronic, many or single hemorrhoids in the anus that are hard and cold, or of corrupt dampness, and they have been treated with what was mentioned earlier without success, then cauterize the patient three times below the tailbone slightly like triangles.
A plaster under the chest like two fingers, and if it is estimated that his stomach has cooled and his food is not digesting, and his face is seen to be pale, apply a large plaster on the stomach as mentioned above, and a plaster on the liver. And another with an ironing press on his forehead and leave the plaster open for some time then treat him until he recovers, if Allah wills.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
In plasters for warts.
After cutting it off, if the mole is cut, heat the cauterizer that resembles a wedge until it becomes hot. Then insert its tip into the same hole and press your hand strongly until you reach the mouth of the vein from which blood flows. Repeat this once or twice.
If the warts are many, apply each one with a plaster as described above and treat them with appropriate ointments until they heal. If cauterized with a large cotton plaster, it is more beneficial.
Chapter Sixty-Three
In plasters for haemorrhoids that are in the anus and its surroundings.
If the patient does not respond to the method and treatment described in its place and is reluctant, he may recover with a plaster. If one of the haemorrhoids becomes enlarged and pus and corrupt fluids flow from it, first measure it with a fine probe
Then determine its size with the probe. Then heat the cauterizer that resembles a wedge until it becomes hot. Insert its tip into the same haemorrhoid in a straight line along the depth of the haemorrhoid and the length that the probe entered, and apply the plaster on it until those corrupt bodies are burnt entirely once or twice or three times according to your need.
And beware of burning the nerve if there is one, or a large vein. And if the haemorrhoids extend to the bladder or rectal wall.
And beware of these places altogether, but only do this if the haemorrhoids are in a place of fat and you estimate that it is not prolapsed. Then treat the place until it heals. If the place becomes sealed and the materials stop flowing from it and remains like that for some time, know that it has healed completely.
Know that if the discharge does not cease, it may be due to a broken bone or a deep, decaying ulcer, or something similar which will be mentioned in its proper place.
The Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
About Kidney Stones
If pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or strong wind, and sexual desire decreases, it is advisable to cauterize with irons on both sides of the affected kidney using the triangular cautery described earlier. It may also be useful to use three cauteries placed symmetrically on each kidney for better efficacy.
The Thirty-Eighth Chapter
About Cauterization of the Bladder
If weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder due to coldness and fluids such that the patient cannot control urine, cauterize with irons below the pubic area on the bladder where pubic hair begins, also cauterize on the right side of the scrotum and another on the left side.
And after cauterization from each side, cauterize according to the size of the thumb joint. Cauterize once on the lower back or twice if necessary, using the triangular cautery described earlier.
The Thirty-Ninth Chapter
About Uterine Cauterization
If coldness and fluids occur in the uterus preventing pregnancy, damaging its lining, or causing pain upon intercourse, cauterize with three irons around the vulva as described in cauterization of the bladder. And cauterize once on cotton below the back or twice if necessary using the triangular cautery.
The Fortieth Chapter
About Dislocation of the Hip
If wrong fluids enter the hip joint causing its dislocation, and the leg becomes elongated when pressed against the other, with a hollow at the site of dislocation, cauterize on the hip itself using an semicircular iron.
After drawing around the joint with ink as it rotates so that the joint itself is in the center of the circle, use the cautery depicted for the stomach if available. Otherwise, cauterize three times using a large circular iron.
Cut deep into it according to the thickness of its skin, then treat it until it heals, if Allah wills.
The Forty-First Chapter.
In the armpit sweat.
If pain occurs in the hip joint due to coldness and dampness, and treatment according to what was mentioned earlier did not prove effective, it is advisable for the patient to thin out thick humors by taking barley soup or senna pods, etc.
Then cauterize it with one of two methods: either cauterize with medications, or cauterize with fire. Cauterizing with fire has many forms; one form is to cauterize three times on the hip itself, each like this:
And make each cautery go to a suitable depth, leaving about the thickness of a finger between each cautery. Use an iron cautery. You may also cauterize once in the center on top of the hip bone itself, making it four cauteries. If you wish, you can cauterize with the circular cautery mentioned earlier for dislocated hips.
So that the circle surrounds the entire hip and burns all of its skin thickness. This is the description of cauterization for armpit sweat when the pain is confined to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, cauterize twice on the thigh at the point indicated by the patient's pain. Cauterize once above the armpit, four fingers towards the lateral side a little. Use a scalpel cautery with depth equal to the thickness of the skin.
If the pain extends towards the toes of the foot, cauterize with a point cautery three or four times, or more if necessary. If it is indicated under the knee towards the leg, cauterize once there with a scalpel cautery.
And be careful in all your cauteries not to burn any large nerve or artery, as this would cause the patient harm or damage.
I have seen one and two who cauterized above the armpit excessively, causing swelling in the leg reaching up to the foot. It became blackened, ruined all of the leg, then diarrhea and death ensued. If pain is on both sides, cauterize according to this description only.
Some wise scholars have mentioned in the treatment of hip dislocation that its shape resembles a cup made of iron, with a diameter of half a cubit, and at its mouth there is a thickness resembling a date stone or slightly less. Inside this cup there is another cup, and within that, another cup.
And the distance between each of the cups is like the breadth of a thumb, and they are open on both sides, with a height of about one or two fingers. A clamp made of iron is prepared for them, which is fitted into the cups; this is its appearance.
Then it is heated in fire until it becomes red hot and emitting sparks. It is then placed on the hip socket, with the patient leaning on their healthy side, while three circular motions are made simultaneously in one go. Then it is left for three days, smeared with butter, and the wound is kept open for several days.
After that, it is treated with ointment until it heals. The author of this book says that this method of dislocation is rarely used due to its harshness and unpleasant appearance, and because few people can endure it except for those who are able to bear it.
As for dislocation by means of burning drugs, a cup resembling the collar through which the door bolt passes is made. It should be made of copper or iron.
It should be about two fingers high, with a thickness like that of a finger between them. Both the bottom and top openings should be open, and they should fit together in this manner.
Then it is placed on the hip socket while the patient lies on their healthy side, gripping their hand with a cloth. Hot water mixed with niter is poured between the two circles. The patient should endure this for an hour and a half, despite feeling a sensation like fire.
Until the sensation subsides, then remove your hand with the tool and wipe off the hot water from the hip with fresh water. Leave it for three days, applying butter until the blackness of the burn fades. Then leave it open to discharge pus, as this is most beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make him a plaster as you would for the hip, using this sharp water which I have mentioned in my treatise on the correction of remedies.
Take equal parts of salt and un-slaked lime, grind them together and place them in a new pot which has been pierced at the bottom with a small hole according to the thickness of the spout. Then place another pot under it.
Pour fresh water over the salt and lime until they are moistened, pressing them down with your hand. Allow the pot to sit until the sharp water has collected in the lower pot, then gather all of this water together and pour it onto more fresh lime and salt.
It becomes very sharp at this point, having great use in many medical applications and for cauterizing various parts. Among the remedies used for the hip are Thapsia, bdellium resin, lime with soap, all ground together.
Galienus relates the story of an old man who was cured of hip pain and sciatica in one application, claiming that no other treatment was needed.
So much so that it is said a man entered the bathhouse carried, and exited healed. To use this remedy, take fresh green copperas. If not available, use fresh yellow coppers instead, grind them with some lard and apply to the hip where the pain is felt or in the leg or thigh.
Apply it firmly and leave for three hours or until the patient feels no more burning sensation. Then enter him into a warm bath, and when he is heated, have him enter a cold one. If the pain does not subside, repeat the application after ten days.
If Allah wills, it will heal. Know that these cauteries should not be used unless the bowels are emptied beforehand. Dioscorides mentioned that burnt goat hair is beneficial for sciatica when applied as a poultice.
The catgut should be like this: take some wool, soak it in old olive oil and place it on the deep wound that is between the thumb of the hand and the wrist, closer to the wrist. Then, take a dry sheep's sinew.
Heat it with fire until it becomes a coal, then place it on the wool and leave it until it extinguishes. Then take another one and continue doing this until the sensation reaches halfway up the arm to the shoulder and the pain subsides, with God's permission. This type of catgut is called 'burqi'.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
On the stitching of backache.
The pain in the back may occur due to many reasons such as falls, blows or excessive discharge and similar causes. The catgut is used only in this type of case.
When the discharge is cold, after the patient has excreted with lovejuice or similar substances, catgut should be sewn on his back where the pain is in three rows across the width of the handspan. Five or more sutures should be made in each row according to the physician's assessment of the patient's tolerance and strength.
The stitching is done with a fine needle, using three or four sutures per point if desired. A moderate-sized, pointed awl may also be used.
The Third Chapter.
On the initial catgut stitching of the spine.
This ailment often affects young children. The first sign in a child is difficulty breathing upon standing and movement, with a protuberance appearing at the end of the spinal vertebrae protruding above the others.
If you see this and wish to stop it, stitch with a needle that is circular in shape like this: Take the stitch on either side of the vertebra evenly. If desired, sew around the vertebra with a fine needle in two or three rows, keeping the points close together. Then treat the area until it heals as mentioned.
And beware of using catgut on the spine where there is nerve constriction,
Chapter Forty-Four
On the treatment of gout and joint pains.
If joint pains are due to cold humours collected in any part of the body, if these pains occur in the legs, physicians usually call it gout specifically.
If the cold cause of gout is treated with various methods mentioned in the section and the pain does not subside, then use cupping around both ankle joints many times, using a medium-sized earthenware cup.
If it is necessary to cauterize the face, do so with a cautery cup. If the pain ascends to the knees or other joints, which happens frequently, then apply cupping on each knee three or four times from both sides using this earthenware cup.
If more cupping is needed, apply it without deepening your hand with the cup but rather like the thickness of skin only. If the pain ascends to the buttocks or back, use what was mentioned in its chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands, cauterize around both wrists like two circles. If the pain remains in the fingers, cauterize each joint and the palm of the hand. If the pain ascends after some days to the elbows or shoulders.
Then apply cupping on both from all sides, and do not neglect good diet and taking medicine. For if one improves their food and evacuates phlegm, they will recover with this cupping, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Five
On Cupping for Abscesses
If an abscess appears in the scrotum, with some intestines and bowels prolapsing into the testis, especially if it is recent, do not order the patient to fast that day. Instead, make them use laxatives to expel feces from their gut.
Then, the patient lies on their back before you. Order them to hold themselves up until the prolapsed bowel or intestines appear, then push it back with your finger. Then mark around the abscess on the pubic bone using ink like half a circle, with its ends pointing upwards towards the body.
Then warm this iron and shape it.
Until it becomes white-hot and emits sparks, then return the vessel or container to its place. Then a servant puts his hand on the site so that the vessel does not slip out while the patient's legs are opened and a pillow is placed underneath them. Another servant ties the patient's legs.
Another one holds onto his chest and takes his hands, then the iron is brought down on the same mark while standing upright. Press it until it reaches the bone or use it again if it did not reach the bone at first.
Be cautious not to let the vessel protrude while pressing, lest you burn it and cause either death or severe injury to the patient. Know that if the iron does not reach the bone, your work will not be successful. It is preferable for children's irons to be suitable for their size, and likewise for adults.
Then treat the cauterized area with butter three days later to remove the ash, then apply other ointments until it heals. Keep the patient lying on his back for forty days until the wound scabs over.
During his treatment, make sure the patient's food is soft to prevent the iron from protruding during excretion or urination. After forty days of lying down, use a bandage tied around his waist for another forty days to reduce pain and discomfort from eating, drinking, and excessive coughing.
If this procedure is followed correctly, insha'Allah, the patient will be completely healed. I will mention the treatment of hernias by incision in its place, insha'Allah. As for the hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and was initially prolapsed, if you wish to prevent it from increasing, cauterize its opening with a round iron suitable for its size. Burn only about one-third of the skin around the hernia, then treat it as mentioned earlier. Insha'Allah, this will prevent its increase. Some early authors have mentioned cauterizing hernias with a triangular iron shaped like this.
After drawing on the hernia with ink and making two lines perpendicular to each other across it, use one smooth iron cautery at its center for the first burn. The first cauterization is easier and preferable, insha'Allah.
Chapter Sixty-Four
On Fractures
If a fracture occurs in some member due to fall or blow, and pain persists for a long time without relief from medication, then it is necessary to reduce the fracture using tongs. The reduction should be done according to the size, strength, weakness, and power of each member.
If the pain and fracture are alleviated by this reduction, then recovery from the first reduction is achieved. Otherwise, repeat the reduction process because it is common for these pains to spread to nearby members. Therefore, continue the reduction until the patient is healed.
Chapter Forty-Seven
On Treating Leprosy
As for lepers, they benefit greatly from cupping (therapeutic bleeding), especially those with leprosy caused by corruption of phlegm and black bile.
If you decide to perform cupping, especially when leprosy is in its early stages and has been treated with the previously mentioned methods without improvement, and you fear that corruption will spread throughout the body of the patient, then apply five cupping procedures on the head. One cup should be placed in the center of the head, another lower down towards the forehead where the hair ends, two cups on the temples, and one behind at the nape of the neck. Press firmly with the cupping procedure until it slightly affects the bone.
Remove the cups and scrape off the scabs to facilitate the expulsion of thick phlegm. Then perform cupping on the spleen as previously mentioned. However, if leprosy has persisted in the patient and is visibly apparent, do not perform these head cupping procedures that have been mentioned. Perform cupping on the tip of the nose, two cups on each cheek, two cups on the angles of the neck, six cups on the back, one large cup at the lower end of the spine and another above it on the same level, and two cups on the hips, one on each side. Two cups on each knee, two on the elbows, two on the shoulders, and two on the chest ribs. Perform cupping on all joints of the fingers and toes, as well as on both heels and soles of the feet.
Protect the nerve that is behind the heels lest you burn them, for it also branches to the pubic bone, another to the mouth of the stomach, and another to the liver. Know that the more you preserve this branch, the better and more beneficial it will be.
Know that the sick person does not feel pain in the branch as the healthy one does, because his body is numbed. Therefore, the splints should be made of large and small sizes according to the members and joints mentioned earlier.
Then treat the branch with powdered frankincense mixed with honey and other treatments until it heals, if Allah wills.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
In the case of numbness of a member, if medication and ointments were applied without success, then bandage the numb member with splints according to its size. Make sure that the splint is slightly thicker than the skin.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals, and for some numbness that affects the hand or foot in the spine near where the nerve that moves that member exits.
And this should only be done by someone who is knowledgeable in anatomy and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On bandaging for leprosy.
If leprosy has progressed and no medical remedy has been effective, then bandage it with a splint of moderate thickness according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with ground lentils mixed with virgin honey and the juice of the mullein plant, pigeon blood or hedgehog blood, one part each. Mix all together and apply on a cloth to the affected area until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On bandaging for cancer.
If the cancer is newly begun and you wish to stop it, bandage it with a circular splint around it like a ring. Some wise men have mentioned that a strong splint should be placed in its center, but I do not recommend that because I expect it to become gangrenous, as I have seen happen many times.
It is correct to stitch around it with a circle as mentioned earlier, or with many sutures.
Chapter Fifty-One
In the treatment of dropsy
If dropsy occurs in one leg and its resolution is delayed, either due to the excessive fluid or because of the patient's advanced age with diminished blood flow, or due to the time elapsed, and you wish to expedite its resolution, stitch around it with many small sutures closely spaced.
Then leave it; it will speed up the resolution of the dropsy. If you wish to cauterize, use the cautery that has this shape.
And apply it in the center of the dropsy until it penetrates the skin, with the cautery being below the level of the skin to facilitate the discharge of pus. Then treat it as necessary until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Two
On the treatment of ulcers
Ulcers are corruption that spread in the flesh, eating it away like fire consumes dry wood. If you find an ulcer in a location suitable for cautery by fire, prepare many small and large iron cauteries according to what is appropriate for that spot where the ulcer is located.
Then cauterize around it on all sides until the corruption is entirely removed, leaving no trace of it. Leave it for three days, then apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas to remove all scabs and remaining corruption.
Then treat it with flesh-generating ointments. If after three days you find that the flesh is growing back correctly without corruption, otherwise repeat the cautery on any remaining corrupted areas. The ulcer can also be treated with caustic drugs.
This serves as an alternative to fire and is quicker in its benefit. I have mentioned the treatment of ulcers using caustic drugs in the relevant section; you may refer to that when necessary.
Chapter Fifty-Three
On the cautery of ingrown and non-ingrown nails
This condition often occurs at the bases of the feet and is very painful for the patient. The treatment can be either cautery by fire or cautery by caustic water.
For heating with fire, take a hollow iron mold resembling the feathers of an eagle, shaped according to the size of the screw on all sides and thin at the edges. Heat it over the fire until it is very hot, then place it around the screw while turning your hand around the screw until the mold reaches the depth of the screw.
And leave it for three days until it produces pus, then dress it with powdered common salt bread and leave it overnight. If it detaches from its roots, treat the wound site with the ointment that brings forth flesh until it heals, if the screws are not reversed.
Frequently, inflammation occurs on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet. Thus, it is necessary to take a tube made of copper or iron or eagle feathers, place it over the screw or boil, then pour a small amount of strong vinegar into the tube.
And hold your hand while turning it slightly with a wink, so that the edge of the tube affects the root of the screw and the strong vinegar finds its way into the depth of the screw. The patient should endure for a short moment the sting of the strong vinegar.
Then leave it alone, for the screw will detach at its roots. Do this one by one until all of them in the body are removed, then treat their sites with flesh-generating ointments after they have detached.
Chapter Forty-Five
On cautery with a hot iron.
If someone has a chill or fever of half a day or more, cauterize them four or five times on the back vertebrae, once between each vertebra, and once on the chest. And cauterize his abdomen with an oily iron mold, for chilliness will subside and the cold disease will mature quickly.
Chapter Fifty-Five
On cautery of a boil on the body.
When painful boils appear on the body due to cold, thick, and corrupted materials, it is necessary at their first appearance to cauterize the head of each boil with a gentle burn using a wooden stick ignited at its tip by fire or using an iron mold heated over long pepper roots or an eyeglass mold.
Initially, the blood vessels may bleed profusely in this manner; however, the effective cure will not increase nor dissipate until after the patient has been drained of excess fluid through bloodletting.
The Fifty-Sixth Chapter.
Regarding bleeding that occurs during the cutting of an artery.
It often happens that a cut or wound exposes an artery externally, or during the excision of a tumor or other similar procedures, causing bleeding which makes it difficult to ligate.
If such a thing happens, quickly place your index finger on the mouth of the artery and press it gently until bleeding stops beneath your finger. Then, heat several small and large copper forceps in fire until they become very hot.
Then, take one of the heated forceps, either small or large depending on the wound and the location where the artery has opened, and apply it to the same vessel immediately after removing your finger quickly. Hold the forceps until bleeding stops.
But if bleeding resumes when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and the forceps cools down, quickly take another heated forceps from those prepared in the fire and continue doing so until bleeding stops.
And beware not to burn the nerve that may be present there. Know that it is impossible to ligate an artery from which blood is flowing, especially if it is a large one, except by cauterization as mentioned earlier or by excising it if it has not been already cut. For if the artery is ligated, its ends will retract and bleeding will stop. Otherwise, it should be tied tightly with sutures or medications that can cause blood coagulation and constriction of the vessel using bandages.
However, attempting to ligate the artery with a tie or by compression using cloths or application of hot substances and similar methods does not usually result in complete cessation of bleeding. If such a situation occurs and neither a doctor nor any medication is available, then quickly place your index finger on the mouth of the wound as described earlier.
It is necessary to tightly bind it until the bleeding stops, and then remove the bandage along with the wound and artery. Do not remove it with cold water alone; rather, use very cold water continuously until the blood congeals and hardens, causing the flow to stop. Meanwhile, check what remedies or medication are needed.
The Second Chapter.
In regards to incisions, cauterizations, surgeries, and similar procedures.
Al-Halal has already mentioned in the first chapter all diseases treatable by cautery and burning medications, their causes, reasons, tools, and instruments.
I will follow the same method in this chapter to make it easier for the student to understand his requirements..
Before I begin, you should know that this chapter is more difficult than the first one on cautery.
And therefore, the warning in this chapter must be greater, for the work involved is extensive and there is often much bleeding, which is essential for life, when opening an artery or performing a surgical procedure to remove a tumor, boil, abscess, or stone, or extracting an arrowhead, and similar procedures, all of which carry great danger and fear, and many of which result in death.
I advise you to beware of anything doubtful, for there are different types of people in this profession with various ailments. Some may have become weary of their illness and wish for death.
There are those who complain bitterly and have long suffered from their illness, but whose condition does not necessarily indicate death. Some may offer you money in the hope of recovering their health, but do not accept it, for their ailment is often fatal.
And let your caution be greater than your desire and eagerness. Do not proceed with any treatment until you are certain of its outcome, and always begin by explaining to your patient the nature of the treatment and warning them of any potential risks.
For in doing so, you will gain praise and fame, and may Allah guide you, O my sons, to the right path and grant you success. Indeed, success is in His hands alone; there is no god but Him.
I have arranged this chapter in sections following what has preceded in the book on fracture of the leg and foot, so that your desired request may be facilitated, if God wills.
The First Chapter.
Regarding the treatment of water (hydrocephalus) that collects in the heads of children.
This condition often occurs at birth among infants if the midwife presses the infant's head roughly, and it may also occur due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
I have not seen this condition in anyone other than infants, and all those I have seen it in quickly died. Therefore, I considered leaving it untreated. I have also seen an infant whose head became filled with water to the extent that its head grew larger every day. Until the child could no longer sit up due to the size of his head and the increase in fluid, until he died.
This fluid collects either between the skin and the bone, or beneath the bone on the diaphragm. The procedure for this is: if the fluid has collected between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, then make a single transverse incision of about two fingerbreadths in length in the middle of the head to allow the fluid to flow out.
If the fluid is greater and the swelling is larger, then make two intersecting incisions as shown here:
If the fluid is beneath the bone and its sign is that the sutures of the head are open on all sides, and the water flows downwards when pressed with the hand. In this case, do not make an incision in the middle of the head but rather make three incisions as shown here:
After making the incisions, all the fluid will come out. Then close the incisions with bandages and dressings. Leave it open from above using wine and oil for five days. Then release the bandage and treat the wound with stitching and ointments. Do not leave the head tightly wrapped, but rather feed the patient dry, non-moist food.
Until the member (head) becomes strong and heals. Another method of incision is to look for where the bone of the swelling appears and where the water collects, as it may be more in the back or front, right or left.
By the opening, it is meant where the tumor has appeared and the watery fluid has filled. You should incise it as much as you can while being cautious not to cut a vein causing bleeding that could lead to death of the patient due to this bleeding along with the discharge of moisture.
The Second Chapter
Sectioning of the two arteries behind the ears known as the 'Hassisin'
When severe attacks occur suddenly in the eyes or chest, and persist without improvement from medicinal treatment, then inform (the patient) that the remedy for this is to cut these two arteries.
It is necessary, when you wish to cut them (the arteries), to shave the head of the patient with a razor then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the artery appears. Then bind the neck of the patient tightly with his garment and look for where the pulse beats and the two places that are hidden behind the ears, which in some people may be somewhat concealed.
Then trace upon them with ink and cut them with a sharp scalpel until the bone is reached. This can be done by exposing the head, or if you wish, insert the scalpel underneath the artery and bring it out on top in one continuous cut, about the length of two folded fingers.
When the artery is cut, blood will flow pulsatingly, dripping onto a cloth continuously. If the artery does not become apparent to touch, then measure three fingers' breadth from the ear, trace with ink and cut to the bone. What is intended is.
Send seven bandages at once to the wound, and perhaps more or fewer depending on how much blood is flowing, according to the strength of the patient and the fullness of his arteries. Then examine the wound, if there is any peritoneum remaining on the bone, cut it off.
Lest a hot tumor appear, then bind the wound with a strip of linen cloth and treat it with ointments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
Concerning the sectioning of the arteries in the temples.
If a person suffers from chronic migraine, sudden acute attacks due to hot and humid fluxes in the muscles of the temples or severe chronic headache and similar ailments, and has been treated with various medicinal remedies without improvement, we have tried in these diseases to section the arteries of the temples or their branches as described.
The operation on the temple involves shaving the hair from where the pulse can be felt, and aiming for the visible artery in the temple. One can determine it by its pulsation; hardly anyone lacks this except a rare individual.
If the pulse is not felt due to extreme cold, then let the patient tie his garment around his neck to warm it up. Then, you should rub the area with a cloth or apply hot water compress until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the lancet that has this shape: Then gently cut the skin with it until you reach the artery. Then, insert tweezers and pull it outwards so that it comes out of the skin, freeing it from any surrounding fatty tissue on all sides. If the artery is thin, then grasp it with the tip of the tweezers. Then cut off a section of it according to how far apart its ends are and how much it contracts, without causing bleeding. For blood will not flow unless it is severed completely. Then express the blood from both ends into three vessels.
If the artery is very large, then tie it with a strong double thread in two places. Let the thread be either of sinew or tendon to prevent putrefaction from setting in before the wound heals and causing bleeding.
Then cut off the remaining portion between the ties. You can do this immediately or later, as you wish. If you prefer, you may cauterize it with a hot iron to burn its ends, which serves the same purpose or even better.
Except if the patient has a fever or is prone to moodiness, for cauterization helps to dry up humidities. After tying off the arteries, pack the wound with boiled cotton and apply proper dressings. After healing, treat it with drying medications and massage until it heals, God willing.
If bleeding occurs from the artery during your procedure, promptly cauterize it with heat or pack the area with salt and press with your hand until the bleeding stops. If this is not sufficient, then insert your finger into the wound to block the flow of blood.
The wound should be soaked in very cold water until the inflammation subsides, and the artery should then be ligated with ease. It is simpler and easier to cauterize the vein using this tweezers after marking the locations with ink.
And heat it very well until it reaches the bone and the vein is severed at both ends so that its two parts do not join together, for this is an image of the tweezers.
The blades of the tweezers are like two small points, but they are much blunter than a knife, for if they were as sharp as a knife they would cool down quickly and the flesh would not be severed quickly. Therefore, there should be some bluntness in them to retain heat.
And cut the flesh quickly, for this is the best and easiest work. Let there be between the blades a thickness equal to that of a finger.
Chapter Four.
On treating continuous hot tearing of the eyes.
If the tears are continuous and their flow is from the vessels on the forehead outside the head without any benefit from medical treatment with drugs, and you find that the patient's face has become pale. If he feels a crawling sensation on his forehead like that of ants, and his eyes are sunken with wet rims whose corners have become inflamed and whose edges have become reddened from the abundance of tears, so that some have resorted to this procedure in treating it, which they call 'sword treatment,' namely ordering the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then incise three parallel cuts on the forehead, each about two fingers in length, one in the middle of the forehead parallel to the length of the nose, the second a little further away from the temple muscle, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut the arteries on both sides. Keep your hand away from the junction of the jaws, and leave a space of three folded fingers between each incision. Have with you prepared sponges or many dry rags to absorb the blood.
Then insert this sharp-pointed probe whose image is shown here: From the groove that lies next to the temple to the middle groove, and strip off all the skin that is between the grooves along with the peritoneum that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle groove to the third groove, then remove this scalpel. And insert into the first groove also another tool called a chisel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other, its shape is like this.
And make its sharp side face upwards towards the flesh adhering to the skin, and its flat side towards the bone, pushing it until it reaches the middle groove, cutting all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without reaching the outer surface of the skin.
Then do the same from the middle groove to the other groove, and after a moderate amount of bleeding has flowed, squeeze the places where the blood clots have formed. Then place in each groove a wick of cotton moistened with rose water, oil or vinegar and oil.
So that a hot swelling does not occur. On the third day, dissolve the sutures and use plenty of lukewarm water for irrigation, then treat it with Basilicum plaster mixed with rose oil and other wound treatments until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five
In treating epistaxis and headaches referred to the eyes.
Whenever someone suffers from frequent, sharp, burning headaches, with the eyes appearing sunken and small, vision weakened, eyelids inflamed and lashes falling out. And there is sharp, painful headache deep within the head and continuous sneezing, know that these symptoms and headaches come from many deep vessels. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave their forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is sharp, painful headache deep within the head and continuous sneezing, know that these symptoms and headaches come from many deep vessels. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave their forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly across and start the incision from the left temple to the right temple, making it reach the bone and keep your hand away from the chewing muscles of the temples until the bone is exposed and all the blood is wiped off with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the incision with moistened cotton or linen threads, then tie them from above with bandages and moisten the bandages with rose water and oil so that no hot swelling occurs. And when it has healed, if you see that a hot swelling has broken out, do not scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with the dry plaster that causes flesh to grow, like when two parts of fine wheat flour and four parts of colophony are taken and a liniment is prepared from them, which is used for the growth of flesh in such wounds.
Chapter Six
In treating what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is of four kinds: either a mineral stone or semi-stone like iron and glass, or a plant matter like chickpeas and kernels etc., or liquid things like water and vinegar etc.
Or an animal, so if a stone or a kind of stone that does not breed in the ear falls into it, then receive the sun's rays with the ear. If you see only the stone, grease it with some blackberry or juniper oil, then try to remove it by moving your head or sneezing with condiment powder. And close the nostrils at the onset of sneezing after putting a bandage made of rags or wool around the ear and pulling it upwards. Often the stone comes out this way, but if not, then try to remove it with a gentle hook of this shape:
If it comes out with the hook but not otherwise, then try to remove it with a gentle straight tweezer. If that does not work, then make a copper tube and insert its tip into the ear canal gently.
And close what is around the tube with softened wax mixed with oil so that there is no way for the wind except through the tube, then pull it out with a strong jerk. Often it comes out this way, but if not as described, then take some Nabatene pitch or prepared pitch used for birds from its tip.
After wrapping it tightly with gauze, then insert it into the ear canal gently after drying the ear from moisture. If it does not come out despite all these methods, then proceed to incision before heat and swelling occur.
The prescription for incision is to bleed the patient in the vein first and remove as much blood as his strength allows, then seat the patient before you, tilt his ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear at its fatty part in the lower place.
The incision should be elliptical in shape until it reaches the stone, then remove it using whatever tools you have at your disposal. Then suture the incision quickly and dress it so that it heals.
And if the matter that has fallen into the ear is one of the swellings that have grown and become inflamed, try to remove it using what was mentioned. If this does not succeed in removing it, then take a fine, thin lancet of this shape.
Then use it to cut that type of growth that has fallen into the ear. You should do this only after you are certain that the growth has been moistened by the ear's vapor, causing it to become very small pieces. Then remove them with a fine spoon or tweezers, or using suction.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove them. And regarding the water that enters the ear, one should not try to blow their nose first, but rather fill the ear with a piece of soft cotton while lying on the side with the water in it until it comes out.
If not, take many small round stones and heat them gently over a fire. Then insert one of them into the ear canal while standing on one leg on that side and strike it with another stone.
Continue doing this with each stone until all the water has been removed. Alternatively, take a feather or a straw and insert one end into the ear while holding the other end near a fire until it burns, then replace it with another one.
Do this repeatedly until all the water has been removed or drawn out using a tube as previously mentioned with regards to stones. And regarding removing any animal that has entered it, if it is small like a louse and similar creatures, treat it with what was mentioned in the section on insect bites.
If its body is large enough to be seen, try to remove it with tweezers and spoons. Its removal is easier than any other thing that enters the ear. And regarding removing worms that are produced in the ear, if you have treated it with what was mentioned in the section on otalgia without success.
It is necessary to look at the ear in sunlight, if anything appears of worms remove it with tweezers or soft forceps. If nothing appears, take a pipe shaped like this.
Narrow the bottom, widen the top, insert the thin end into the ear as far as the patient can bear, then suck with a strong syringe several times until all worms are expelled. If they do not come out, plug around the pipe with wax as I mentioned to you regarding the concretion.
If they do not come out as mentioned, use the cupping glasses that I have described and which were tried by the ancients in killing worms. You will find this in the treatise on cupping glasses. The appearance of this instrument is:
As you see, it is made of silver or bronze, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top. If you wish, make the cannula inside the pipe of well-smelted copper, or take a reed and wrap its tip with tight cloth.
Then place the oil or serum or whatever medicine you want into the pipe while it is in the ear, then insert the reed with cloth from above and squeeze gently with your hand until the oil reaches inside the hearing passage and feels hot.
Let this be done while the patient is lying down, and let what you pour into the ear have been warmed slightly in fire, and beware that it not be too cold or too hot, for the ear does not tolerate that.
Chapter Seven
On treating sudden deafness of the ear.
Some children are born with their mothers' wombs and the ears of their hearing not pierced.
Also, some people may experience blockage in the ear canal due to injury or flesh that has grown there, and this blockage may be deep within the ear canal, invisible to the eye.
And sometimes it may appear slightly outside the canal and can be seen, but that which is deep within the ear canal is usually difficult to remove. But that which can be seen should have the patient's ear placed in sunlight. Look into it, and if you see an apparent obstruction, open it with a soft lancet shaped like this:
Some of its tips may have slight, limited damage, others may be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. If there is a plug made of flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it gently with a fine forceps and cut it off slowly until all the flesh is removed.
If the blockage is deep in the ear, take a thin, smooth probe and heat it gently in fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the obstruction and the patient experiences heaviness in hearing, withdraw it gently.
Be careful not to injure the ear drum. Then, insert a wick made to fit the size of the hole into the ear canal. Soak it in Egyptian wax for several days until the wound heals, or use a wick moistened with powdered pitch.
If you see that the ear is inflamed and hot, do not remove the wick but replace it with another one smeared in rose oil to calm the inflammation until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear. Then proceed with the other treatment mentioned in the chapter on fractures.
Chapter Eight.
On treating warts appearing on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be moist or dry. Do not grasp them with forceps or cutters and remove them from their roots using scissors. Then apply powdered pitch to the site.
If bleeding occurs, cauterize it with a fine brass instrument and press it firmly afterwards. Often, it returns if some of its roots remain. If cauterized with fire, the roots will be burned and it will not return.
Chapter Nine.
On treating sudden inflammation of the eyelids.
It often happens that something resembling coldness and stiffness appears on the eyelids.
It is called 'cold' because of the accumulation of coarse moisture in both upper and lower eyelids. If the coldness appears prominently on the surface and moves to all sides, it is easy to treat by making a transverse incision on it.
Then strip it from all sides gently until it is freed, then hang it on the hook and cut it. If you are unable to cut it until the eyelid has pierced through with the cut, this will not harm the patient at all. If the slit is large, close it with stitches and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there is no harm in leaving it as the salve will close it and adhere to it. If the eyelid turns inward toward the inner surface of the eyelid, flip the eyelid and hang the eyelid on a hook without needing to cut it and trim it from all sides.
If the eyelid has pierced through with the cut, this will not harm at all. Then wash the eye after cutting the eyelid with saltwater and treat the area with something that adheres until the patient heals.
Chapter Ten.
On treating the inflammation that appears in the eyelid.
Sharnqah" is a swelling that occurs in the upper layers of the eyelid, and it is more common among children. It causes heaviness of the eyes and leads to frequent colds during winter, making them unable to look towards sunlight. because tears flow rapidly from their eyes.
Therefore, they are always seen leaning on their faces and sleeping with their eyelids underneath the eyebrows wet and puffy due to the swelling of sharnqah being evident. When you press the area with your fingers, you can feel the sharnqah between them. The procedure is for the patient to place his head in your lap.
Then take a cotton cloth and prepare from it a wick. Make a circle with this wick according to the size of the sharnqah, then place it on top of it and press gently with your fingers from all sides to gather the sharnqah in the center of the circle.
Then make a transverse cut in the center of that wetness using the sharp scalpel, with the cut not being wider than the one made for bloodletting. As for its depth, do not cut all the skin until you reach the sharnqah.
In most cases, the sharnqah will come out through the cut like a white piece of fat. Pull it out using a cloth wrapped between your fingers while turning your hand right and left until it is completely removed. Be careful not to increase the cut so that the scalpel does not slip into the eye and harm it.
If the sinew does not appear at first in the cut, do not increase the cut too much gently until the sinew appears, then draw it out as mentioned before. Then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the site and pull it with force, some people use crushed salt.
Then place it inside the cut to dissolve any remaining moisture, then treat it until it heals. If inflammation occurs at the site, treat it with musk incense until it heals.
The Eleventh Chapter.
On Kinds of Eye Diseases.
If supernumerary cilia grow on the eyelid, outside the natural course and below the normal cilia, it will harm the eye and cause various diseases such as continuous tearing, drooping of the eyelids, whiteness, and thickening to the point of causing blindness.
The eye can be inflamed in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or by applying a strong medication as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery, or by cutting and stitching, or by using a probe as I have described.
It is necessary to hold the patient's head in your lap, then flip the eyelid with your left hand. If it does not flip over, insert a needle into the lower part of the eyelid with thread attached and pass it through from above near the hair, then pull the thread upwards with the eyelid.
Flip it back with a probe, then cut the excess hair from inside the eyelid using a fine scissor from the larger angle to the smaller angle. Then pass the thread through and place a small cotton pad or cloth underneath the eyelid, then mark on the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of an as leaf, except that the shape should be according to how much you want to raise the eyelid, for people differ in this regard. Some may require cutting off a suitable amount from the eyelid according to how much it droops.
Some may require less cutting according to the degree of drooping, then cut along the two lines you have marked using a fine scissor starting from the larger angle to the smaller angle. The cut should be close to the natural hair with the thickness of a probe.
Then the probe is inserted into one of the corners of the skin, and all of it is split open. Then the lips are sewn together with a fine wool thread using a needle, and blood is wiped away. The remaining threads are attached to the eyebrows with some ingenious substance.
If you wish to do this, proceed; otherwise, no harm will come of it. Then the stitches and threads remain for about three or four days before they are removed. If you wish, you may leave the wound unstitched and treat it with something that dries and constricts. For when the wound heals and closes, the eyelid will become raised; however, stitching is preferable.
This method of cauterization has been mentioned by the ancients, although it is burdensome for the patient and is not preferable due to its difficulty. There is another method of cauterization which involves teaching the eyelid to assume a shape similar to that of an oak leaf, as described. Then lift up the eyelid using three probes, spaced apart or grouped together in this manner:
Then cut off the remaining part of the eyelid with small scissors evenly, like so:
If you cannot secure the probes, take a needle with thread and insert it into the center of the shape. Then insert another thread near the larger angle and a third thread near the smaller angle. Gently gather the threads between your fingers and raise them evenly.
Raise the entire taught skin as described, then sew together the edges of the wound and treat it until it heals. If there is an inflamed swelling upon cutting or slicing, soothe it with camphor and similar analgesic ointments.
Sometimes the lower eyelid may also turn inwards, in which case the methods mentioned earlier such as cutting, stitching, cauterization with fire or harsh medications should not be employed, as they are more burdensome and harmful to the patient than the condition itself.
Cauterization with a hot wire is performed as follows: turn the eyelid inward, make an incision inside it as described, then prepare two thin wires or rods of equal length to the eyelid and width less than that of a lancet.
I have cut the corners of both sides where the threads adhere, then gently brought them together over what remains of the eyelid and tightly pulled both ligaments from both sides, leaving it for some days. If the skin is too tight, it dies and turns black and rots.
Until it falls off by itself, if delayed, cut it with scissors and treat it until it heals. If it adheres, raise the eyelid without damaging the eye lashes. This is the shape and size of the ligaments.
Chapter Twelve
Regarding raising ingrown eyebrow hairs with a needle.
If one or two hairs are causing the problem, take a fine needle and thread it with a thin smooth silk thread. Then gather its ends and tie them with a very loose knot, letting the length of the thread be about a span.
Then take another fine thread and insert it underneath the first one, tying its ends if desired. Place the eye near a light source to see clearly as this is delicate work. Then insert the needle with the thread under the unwanted hair at its root.
And quickly pierce the eyelid with it until you bring it out from above the natural hair. Then pull the thread upwards and insert that hair into the needle loop if there is one or two or three hairs at most.
Then pull your hand gently until the hair comes out with the needle loop from above the natural hair. If only the loop comes out without the hair, pull the thread downwards until the loop exits from the upper hole.
Then put the hair back into the loop and pull both until it comes out of the upper hole and you see it with your eye. Then cut the loop and thread and remove them, and leave the eyelid stretched for two or three days until the flesh grows on the hair.
If the hair is short, either attach a long natural hair to it so that it comes out with it, or leave it until it grows longer later on and then remove it.
Chapter Thirteen
In the treatment of eyelid spasm.
This spasm is called blepharospasm and may be either natural or acquired. The acquired type occurs from an injury, scar tissue, or tumor, etc.
The procedure is to excise the scar tissue and separate the eyelids, then insert a cotton thread between them and tie it until healed. Avoid using drying or constricting agents in treatment.
If you do this, the spasm will return worse than before. Instead, use relaxing agents like fenugreek seeds ground with water mixed with tragacanth gum and linseed oil, melted diaphoretic ointment, moistened with olive oil, and applied to a cotton thread for treatment.
The goal of treatment is to prevent the eyelids from adhering as they were originally. The procedure mentioned earlier is one way to partially repair the spasm, not to completely restore the original condition.
Chapter Fourteen
On treating lower eyelid spasm
This type of spasm at the bottom is called entropion, which may be natural or acquired. The acquired type occurs from injury, scar tissue, or tumor, etc.
The procedure is to take a curved needle with double thread, insert it into the flesh and pass it from one angle to the other until the thread appears at both ends of the flesh, then pull the flesh upwards using the needle and cut it with wide scissors.
If the eyelid does not return to its proper shape, take a probe and place it on the incision site, rotate the eyelid with it, then make two incisions inside the eyelid at both ends of the cut, so that they meet to form an angle. Until it looks like this shape:
Resembling the Greek letter lambda, remove excess flesh from the sharp edge below the eyelid, then suture it with two silk sutures. Treat it with relaxing agents and cotton threads as mentioned earlier until healed.
If a frenulum has appeared due to a cut or stitching or circumcision, then it is necessary to make an incision of moderate depth without hair on the skin above it as mentioned before, and then separate the lips by twisting as described.
The general principle in treating a frenulum, whether it is above or below, is to perform the operation according to what seems feasible based on its appearance, for it may differ greatly in shape. The skilled surgeon will find a way to manage any situation.
Until the form returns to its natural state or approximates it, the same disease will indicate what operation and tool are most suitable in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
On adhesion of the eyelid to the mucous membrane or the cornea.
This adhesion occurs in many people, where the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye preventing it from easy movement and hindering its normal function. It is necessary to insert a blunt tip underneath the eyelid.
And lift it upwards or extend it with forceps, then cut the adhesion using a fine scissors not sharp-pointed to avoid hurting the patient during the procedure and damaging the eye.
And expect that once the eyelid returns to its natural position and the adhesion is completely healed, you should then instill saltwater into the eye to wash it or apply a solution of Indian bdellium dissolved in water using cotton wicks to separate the eyelid from the eye.
And place a bandage moistened with egg white on top of the eye, and after three days use padded splints until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
On cutting the foreskin and circumcision.
The foreskin may be of two types: either nervous, resembling a thin, hard serous membrane, or non-nervous, resembling a solid, white fluid that becomes stuck when touched by an iron tool or forceps.
And neither type becomes fixed with forceps. Both begin from the glans penis and gradually extend until they cover the eye and prevent light and movement of the eye. The procedure for cutting it is to place the patient's head in your lap.
Then he opens his eyes and lifts the eyelid with his hand, then he takes a hook with little curvature and inserts it into the angle of the eye, then he takes a needle and threads it with a horse or cow hair, and a strong thread, bending one end of the needle slightly, and inserts it into the center of the prolapse.
And pushes it in with the needle and ties the prolapse with the thread, pulling it up, then he scrapes off the side of the prolapse that is behind the cornea like he is spreading it with the hair to its end, then cuts off the rest at the root of the sac with fine scissors or a small knife and leaves the natural flesh of the sac.
Lest he expose the corner of the eye to constant weeping, and so he pulls out the prolapse with the hook alone or with the thread as mentioned earlier, then scrapes off its smooth-edged tip with a pair of scissors, the shape of which is like this:
And he should be careful not to touch the cornea with the scissors lest it cause a rent and prolapse of the eye, then after cutting he applies some powdered salt or Indian incense into the eye and leaves it for another day, then treats it as necessary until it heals.
If the prolapse is not nervous and he cannot insert a needle into it nor fix a hook, then this type of prolapse is often treated with medications until it heals as described in its section, but if you wish to cut it, open the patient's eye.
And take fine smooth-edged scissors like this shape: And peel off the prolapse with it gently from above, if you see that it becomes loose and falls apart and only peeling has affected it, then drop some Indian incense or red incense or powdered salt into the eye and leave it for another day.
Then prepare to perform the operation until all of it is gone, unless you encounter a hot swelling in the eye, leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals, then continue the operation until it heals, as for the remaining flesh of the sac.
If the thread causes severe eye pain, suspend it with a hook and cut off some of its length without delving too deep lest bleeding ensue. Then apply red saffron or ginger to the eyes until healed.
Chapter Seventeen
In cutting the pterygium and any excess flesh that grows in the eye.
Sometimes, red flesh grows over the eyeball in some people's eyes, covering or approaching or overflowing onto the eyelids. In severe cases, the eyelids may invert outward, resembling pterygium.
The procedure is as follows: The patient should lie down on their back and open their eyes wide while you use appropriate tweezers to pluck out all the red flesh.
Alternatively, grasp it with forceps or a needleholder and cut the flesh bit by bit until all of it is removed. Be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure. Use either the scissors we described for cutting the pterygium or small scissors. Like those used for plucking eyebrows, as shown in the illustration in the following chapter.
After removing all the pterygium, fill the eye with finely ground salt or apply red saffron powder and other suitable medications. Then cover the eye from outside with a cotton pad soaked in egg white to prevent inflammation.
If some pterygium remains and bleeding is profuse, fearing inflammation, leave the eye alone and treat it with medications that reduce inflammation. Then perform the procedure again until it heals. Do likewise for any excess flesh that appears in the eye of this type.
However, do not attempt this procedure on weak eyes or those with corneal scars. Avoid using cautery or performing any of these operations unless you are confident that the eye can tolerate them.
Chapter Eighteen
In plucking eyebrows from the eye.
Eyebrows are red veins that grow around the eye, obstructing vision and weakening the eye over time. Therefore, first examine the eye to ensure it is strong and free from other diseases besides the eyebrows.
Then, the patient should place his head in a hollow [scalpels' stand]. Then suspend those vessels using one or two hooks according to your skill. The hooks should be bent like this:
Or they may be two double hooks in one body like this:
Then, using fine forceps gently sever those vessels until you see the eye clear of them and blood ceases to flow. Be cautious not to harm the eye with the tips of the forceps. Do this for half a day facing the sun.
And be precise in your work so as not to cut anything other than those vessels. Once done, cauterize the eye with green or red wax until it becomes numb. If you cannot complete all of this at once, apply something that alleviates eye pain.
Leave him for some time until the pain subsides and the heat of the inflammation abates, then resume working on it in this manner until the eye is completely healed.
And leave him [with his head in the apprentice's stand, preventing tears from flowing, ensuring clear view of the eye and maintaining its position]. The basis of the operation is to open the eye using tweezers or a triangle held by an assistant.
And the head of the patient should be in the apprentice's stand, preventing tears from flowing and ensuring clear view of the eye. You may start the operation either from above or below the eye, but it is preferable to begin by severing two vessels at the upper canthus; one at the outer angle and the other at the inner angle.
And hold them with the middle finger and thumb, then suspend hooks underneath. Hold them with the index and middle fingers and gently elevate the skin until all the vessels are visible. Then sever the smaller branch of the temporal vein either with scissors or a fine knife.
And pull the cheek downwards until all the vessels rise above the orbital margin without cutting the lacrimal gland, for tears and blood may blur your vision.
Then cut with scissors what is above and below the canthus until only that near the cornea remains. If possible, lift it off the cornea with hooks using a gentle motion of the cheek; this is preferable.
If it is cut off, it may become inflamed for some days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling decreases; then resume treatment.
Chapter Nineteen.
In returning the reed into the nose.
The physicians call it 'nasorah' when treating it with heat or with the sharp cauterizing medicine mentioned above without success. In this case, there is no remedy except to incise upon the boil at its maturity and extract all the fluid or pus within it.
Until the bone becomes visible. If the bone is seen and there is decay or darkness in it, scrape it clean using this tool shaped thus:
It is called 'al-kharshah al-ra's' and it should be made from Indian iron with a rounded head like the tip of an arrow. Engrave it finely with marks for measuring, either MBD or SK, so that you place it on the decayed part of the bone and rotate it gently between your fingers while squeezing your hand slightly until you feel that the decay has been scraped away.
Repeat this process several times, then apply dry constricting medicines to the area. If it closes up and flesh grows over it without recurrence for forty days with no discharge or other incident occurring, then it has been cured.
Know that it has been cured. Otherwise, there is no other remedy except to return the 'nasorah' to its original place in the nasal passage by uncovering the bone again with iron or a sharp medicine. Then take a hooked needle shaped like this:
The tip of the needle should be triangular and its shaft should be conical, tapering towards the tip as shown. Place it on the bone itself, near the root of the nose and slightly away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the hook until you feel it pierce the bone and the patient feels it.
So that the patient feels wind coming out of it when they hold their hand over their nose. Then apply dry constricting medicines to the area as mentioned earlier. If flesh grows and the place becomes firm, then the matter that was exiting will return into the nose, which will be easier for the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty
Inflammation of the eye.
If the whole eye is inflamed without any damage to sight or loss of vision, it should be cooled down and then bound with a bandage. Then place a hot compress on the back of the head without insistence, and suck out some thin mucus through a narrow tube.
Then apply to the eye a poultice made of onions, myrrh, honey and egg-white. Then bind the eye from above with many layers of bandages. The recipe for the bandages is as follows: take soft cotton strips, each folded into four layers, and make many such strips.
Then place these layers one on top of another according to the size needed for the eye. Then tie them tightly with a strong bandage and reapply the hot compress without insistence. Then remove the compress and leave the eye bound for a day and a night.
If the bandage loosens during this period, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and a night as mentioned before. If the eye has not improved, repeat the process of binding and compressing until it improves.
Chapter Twenty-One
On cutting the optic nerve.
If a prolapse occurs in the layer of the optic nerve, causing it to protrude outside the eyelids like a grape and disfigure the face, and it is desired to cut it, then proceed as follows:
First, insert a needle into the base of the prolapse from below upwards. Then insert another needle with a double thread from the side of the attachment and pass it through. Leave the first needle in place.
Then cut the loop of the double thread and tie some of the prolapse around the needle. Tighten it gently, then remove the needle and place a piece of wool moistened with egg-white on the eye until the threads and prolapse fall off. Then treat the eye with something that strengthens it.
Until the wound heals, tie the prolapse from all sides with a bandage to reduce inflammation. Then cauterize it gently with a thin probe that reaches the depth of the eye to make the egg-white moisture flow down and dry up on the margin of the eye until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Second
In treating fractures.
This ailment called fracture, in fact, is a union of parts in the eye like flowing water without any break. The procedure for this is: Have the patient sit on an upright chair and then grasp his head with both hands from both sides.
Move him until you see the fracture drop down with your eye, then stop and do not let go, and light will be released and the patient will see things as he did before. If it does not drop down, know that it is water. If moving the head does not cause the fracture to drop, repeat the procedure several times until it does so.
If not, seat the patient in front of you and then take a fine scalpel and cut it slightly above the conjunctiva near where the fracture touches the conjunctiva in the cornea until the matter comes out.
If it comes out, pour warm water mixed with barley or hot water with cumin and barley into the eye, then treat him with other remedies until he recovers.
Chapter Twenty-Third
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification, and which one is suitable for use in irrigation has been discussed extensively. So take it from there according to the patient's condition. Then seat the patient facing you near a light source close to the sun.
Tie his healthy eye and pull it gently, then raise the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand if it is the left eye or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the dropper near the cornea, pressing firmly while maintaining eye white level. Then push the dropper with force while turning it with your hand until you feel that it has reached an empty space inside the eye.
The dropper should penetrate into the depth equal to the distance from the pupil to the edge of the cornea. Then bring it back up towards where the water is located.
Then press it down repeatedly until the water flows out immediately. If the patient can see again, then let go a little. If the water rises, push it down again without removing the dropper.
If it has settled and not risen, gently remove the probe while turning your hand slightly, then dissolve some pure salt in water and use it to rinse the eye from within; afterwards, apply a compress of wool or linen soaked in water externally around the entire eye.
If it is white and red and its whites are tied together, we and the people of our time apply ground cumin with egg-white; but if the probe does not enter the eye due to its hardness because some people have very hard eyes. It is necessary to take the instrument called "al-bird" which has this appearance:
You should only pierce the flesh of the joined parts with it and not go deep into the piercing, but rather just touch the probe gently on a soft spot then insert the probe as mentioned previously; once you have completed your work prepare the patient to lie down comfortably in a darkened room.
He should abstain from all movements and coughing, and his food should be what is soft according to his nature; he must not move his head to the right or left at all until the third day, when the bandage will be removed in that darkened room and his sight will be tested.
Show him objects, then replace the bandage until the seventh day; do not do this during treatment or immediately after the probe has been removed, but rather avoid it before water rises quickly due to excessive sight.
If there is an inflamed tumor, do not remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with something that calms the inflammation until it subsides; then release his sight and place a veil over his face to shade his eyes while he remains in that dark room for some days.
He should gradually leave the room and attend to his affairs, know that the probe cannot be dispensed with by the learned without repeated observation; thus, he may proceed with the operation when ready. I have heard from some Iraqis that they use a blowupeprobe in Iraq which sucks up water.
I have not seen anyone in our land make that or read it in any of the ancient books, perhaps it is a recent innovation. Here are pictures of various types of probes for reference.
It is made of copper specifically and its tip should have this precision with a triangular sharp edge.
Chapter Twenty-Four
In the treatment of flesh growing in the nose.
There may grow in the nose different kinds of superfluous flesh: some resembling many-legged spiders, others being hard, cancerous lumps of livid color, and still others being soft and not livid.
As for those fleshes which are soft and not malignant nor cancerous, it is necessary that the patient sits before you facing the sun, opens his nostril, places a hook in those fleshes, draws them outwards, then cuts off what can be reached with a fine sharp lancet from one side.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, and if any remains which you cannot cut off, remove it with one of the gentle instruments without causing harm. If blood flows profusely or a hot inflammation appears,
If it is one of the malignant tumors, hasten to cauterize it until bleeding stops and all the flesh is removed. Then rinse the nostril with water or drink afterwards. If the nostril opens and moisture reaches the throat.
Know that he is cured if moisture reaches the throat as it should. If not, know that there is still flesh growing inside the hollowed-out bones which the instrument could not reach. In this case, take a thread of coarse linen
and tie many knots on it, leaving the space of one finger or less between each knot. The patient should insert one end of the thread into his nostril gently or as far as he can after making it like a probe and draw it out through the other nostril until it reaches the pharynx.
The patient should then bring out both ends of the thread through his mouth and collect them together. This procedure is often done by boys in schools as it is easy for those who wish to do so. Then, bring together the two ends of the thread
and use the knots on the thread to remove the flesh, continuing until all of it has been cut off by the knots. Then remove the thread and rinse the nostril with Egyptian ointment for three days or more.
Until the salve consumes all remaining flesh, then the last thing in the nose becomes a lead pipe. Sometimes it heals, but if further treatment is needed for drying, that may be used.
This is the picture of the dropper used to instill medications into the nose:
Place gently or copper like a small open lamp with its channel likewise.
If you wish, make the pipe closed like a straw and flatten the salve dropper.
It has a handle at its end as shown to grasp it when heated or for any other liquids or thin substances.
Chapter Twenty-Five:
Regarding the warts on the tip of the nose.
It often happens that a wart grows at the tip of the nose, becoming larger and swelling over days until it becomes unsightly.
Therefore, it should be cut at its first appearance and completely removed. Then cauterize the spot with either a cautery iron or a burning medication that serves its purpose. If cutting is delayed until it grows large, observe: if it is hard, solid like madder's color and slightly sensitive.
Do not apply the iron to it if it is a cancerous tumor. I have seen many instances where this tumor was cut off, resulting in great harm to its owner. However, if the tumor is soft and not madder-colored, cutting is possible. So have the patient sneeze and cut it off without caution or delay. Then treat the spot with something that dries and contracts until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six:
Regarding the suturing of the nose, lip, and ear. If its connection is separated due to an injury or similar, know that when such separation occurs in one of these cartilage tissues, little can be done except for some people.
If any of these tissues is injured, observe if the wound is fresh with blood. Then suture the wound edges and treat until it heals. But if the separation has completely healed with clear edges, then scrape off all edges with a thin skin blade until they bleed.
Then the lips are joined by stitching and drawn together, and powdered frankinense and myrrh are placed upon them. A poultice of fresh honey or another adhesive ointment is then applied over the bandage, and it is left bound for two or three days before being removed.
And the dressing is changed until the stitches fall out on their own, then it is treated with ointment until healed. For stitching, one should disperse the connection either by needles as we have described for abdominal suturing or with thread as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Twenty-Seventh
Regarding the extraction of cysts that appear on the lips.
Many people may have small, hard tumors resembling raisins or smaller and larger ones inside their lips. One should flip the lip over, cut around each tumor, and then hook it out with forceps.
And cut around each one on all sides, then fill the place after cutting with powdered bdellium to stop the bleeding. Then rinse with vinegar and salt, and treat the wounds with bindings until they heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eighth
Regarding excision of excess gum tissue.
Excess tissue often grows on the gums, which ancient writers called epulis. One should hook it with forceps or hold it with tweezers and cut it at its base, then let the time bleed out, and finally apply powdered bdellium to the site.
Or use one of the dry ligatures if it recurs after treatment, cut it again and cauterize it so that it will not return.
Chapter Twenty-Ninth
Regarding scraping teeth with iron
Sometimes, rough and ugly scales accumulate on the surfaces of teeth, both inside and outside, between the gums. These may become blackened, yellowed, or greened causing decay in the gums and making the teeth unsightly. Therefore
One should sit the patient before oneself and scrape the teeth with iron, removing all rough scales and sandy matter until nothing remains. Do likewise for blackened, green, yellowed, or other discolored areas to clean them thoroughly.
If the toothache persists from the first cleaning, repeat the procedure on another day, secondly and thirdly until you achieve your desired goal. Know that a tooth requires various types of cleaning based on its shape.
For the instrument used to clean a tooth from inside is different from that used for outside, and the one used between teeth has another shape. Have all these various instruments ready.
Chapter Thirty
On Tooth Extraction
It is preferable to treat a tooth from its pain with every means and delay extraction as much as possible, for there is no recourse if it is extracted, as it is an esteemed organ. However, if it must be extracted,
If the patient decides to extract a tooth, make sure that you have the painful tooth ready at hand. Often, a patient may be deceived by pain and think that it is in the correct tooth, extracting it, only for the pain to not subside until they extract the actual diseased tooth. We have seen this happen many times with barbers.
If you have correctly identified the painful tooth, then it is necessary to circumcise around it with a sharp lancet to loosen the gum from all sides. Then, gently shake it with your fingers or gentle forceps little by little until it becomes loose.
Then firmly grasp the tooth with large forceps and have the patient sit between your legs, supporting their head to prevent movement. Gently pull the tooth straight out, taking care not to break it. If it does not come out, use one of those instruments and gently insert it underneath from both sides, then wiggle it as you did before.
If the tooth is hollow or loose, it is necessary to fill that hole with a piece of cotton and secure it tightly with a thin silk thread to prevent it from breaking apart when pulling with forceps. It is also important to circumcise around the gum on all sides very well.
Be careful not to break the tooth, as leaving a part of it would cause greater pain than the original complaint. Avoid doing what ignorant barbers do when they rush to extraction without following these instructions.
Frequently they perform great injuries upon people, the easiest of which is for a tooth to break and its roots remain whole or some of them do. Or else some of the jawbones are extracted as we have seen many times, then they rinse their mouth with wine or vinegar and salt afterwards. If bleeding occurs from the place, it happens frequently; therefore crush some Frankincense at that time and apply it to the place.
Otherwise, if Frankincense does not help, the shape of the mercy tongs used to move teeth should first be long in the tips and short in the handle, thick so it does not bend when you grasp it for a tooth. And this is the shape of large tongs.
It should be thick in the grasp so that it does not give itself nor bend. It should be made of Indian iron or high-quality steel, with sharp edges at its tip that fit into each other tightly when grasped.
The tips can also be made in the shape of a probe to make them strong for gripping.
Chapter One and Thirty-Three
On extraction of tooth roots and removal of broken jawbones.
If a tooth root remains broken after extraction, apply a cotton pad soaked in fat for one or two days until the area relaxes, then insert the forceps or tongs. Whose tips resemble the beak of a bird called "al-balaryja", like this:
If it is not possible to extract with these tongs, then grind the root and uncover all the flesh around it using a scalpel. Then insert this small crowbar-like tool whose shape is like this:
Short, thick but not too much to avoid breaking. If the root comes out with this tool, otherwise use these other tools whose shape is like this, with some thickness at the tip.
Another beautiful three-pronged shape:
And we can also use this two-pronged tool whose shape is like this:
And other tools and chisels mentioned in the chapter on teeth, we can also use this large fishhook-like tool whose shape is like this.
Prepare a curved probe, slightly blunted to prevent breaking and not too pointed. Know that there are many instruments for teeth extraction, as well as other tools whose numbers cannot be counted. A skillful craftsman may invent his own instruments according to the requirements of the task at hand.
For some diseases, no instruments were mentioned by the earlier authorities due to their varied nature. If a bone of the jaw or one of the facial bones breaks or becomes infected, search for it in its location using any suitable instrument or forceps mentioned earlier for extracting roots.
And we rely on this image:
Have a slight blunting on it to hold the bone firmly so that it does not slip out, and apply appropriate medication to the site. If there is mild decay in the bone, remove its decay and darkness until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Two-Thirty.
Regarding the extraction of teeth growing upon others.
If teeth grow in a direction other than their natural course, this mars the appearance, especially if it occurs in women or slaves. If one tooth has grown behind another, it should not be extracted.
If its extraction is not possible nor its reduction, then remove it. But if it is firmly attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument whose image is this:
And it resembles a small beak and should be made of sharp Indian iron, with many teeth for cutting due to the hardness of the tooth. And if the tooth is protruding but still firmly attached, reduce it using this instrument whose image is as follows:
It is entirely made of iron, with its tip being very thinly engraved like a needle-making file. Use it to cool the tooth gradually over several days, gently so as not to cause the tooth to fall out prematurely. Then, remove it completely using some tweezers.
If a tooth has broken off, causing discomfort to the tongue while speaking, it should also be smoothed down gently until the sharp edge is gone and it no longer causes irritation to the tongue or interferes with speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three
In fixing loose teeth with threads of silver or gold.
If the front teeth are loose and shaken by a blow or fall, so that the patient cannot bite anything without them falling out, and they have been treated with binding drugs without success.
The procedure is to draw them together with a thread of gold or silver, gold being preferable because silver tarnishes and decays over time while gold remains permanently unchanged. The thread should be moderate in thickness according to the space between the teeth.
The method of tying is to take the thread and insert its bend between two sound teeth, then sew it through the loose tooth or teeth until the sewing reaches a sound tooth on the other side.
Then repeat the sewing back to where you started and pull gently and wisely so that it does not move at all, pulling the thread at the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out. Then cut off the excess ends with scissors, gather them together and tuck them in between the sound tooth and the loose one.
So that it does not harm the tongue, then leave it tied like this indefinitely. If it breaks or loosens, reinforce it with another thread which will remain thus forever. This is a diagram of the teeth and the method of tying in two sound teeth and two loose ones as shown here:
It may happen that a single tooth or two fall out and return to their places and be tied as described, but this is done by an experienced operator who may carve a bone from ox bones in the shape of a tooth and place it in the space left by the fallen tooth. And he ties it as mentioned above and it remains thus.
Chapter Thirty-Four
On cutting the frenulum that prevents speech.
The frenulum under the tongue may be either natural, present from birth, or acquired due to an injury that has healed.
The procedure is to open the patient's mouth and tilt their head back, raise their tongue, then cut the frenulum horizontally until the tongue is released from its restraint. If it is somewhat hard and complex due to scar tissue from a healed injury, use a scalpel to incise and sever the frenulum horizontally until it is completely detached and freed.
Beware that the incision is deep in the flesh, for it may cut a blood vessel there and cause bleeding. Then, rinse after cutting with rose water or vinegar and cold water. Finally, place under the tongue a piece of cotton held by the patient each night.
If it should not adhere again, then if bleeding occurs, apply powdered tragacanth to the spot. If it continues to bleed, cauterize the place with an appropriate eye-glass. Then treat him with other remedies until he is healed,
Chapter Thirty-Five
In the removal of a toad born under the tongue.
It may happen that under the tongue there appears a tumor resembling a small toad, preventing the tongue from its natural action and perhaps even filling the mouth. To treat this, open the patient's mouth towards the sun and look at the tumor.
If it appears red or black and hard, causing no sensation to the patient, do not touch it for it is cancerous. But if it inclines towards whiteness with moisture, prick it with a needle and cut it out with a delicate lancet from all sides.
If bleeding occurs during your work, apply powdered tragacanth until the bleeding stops, then resume your work until you remove it completely. Then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat him with other suitable remedies until he is healed,
Chapter Thirty-Six
Treatment of tonsillar tumors.
And if other tumors appear inside the throat, resembling those outside called tonsils, and they are not cured by the treatment mentioned in the previous sections,
If the tumor is hard, dark red and insensitive to touch, do not treat it with iron. If it is red with a thick base, also do not treat it with iron due to fear of bleeding. Leave it alone until it matures, for it will either atrophy or burst on its own.
If it is white, round with a thin base, this is the one that should be cut. Before operating, ensure that its heat has completely subsided or somewhat decreased.
Then sit the patient facing the sun with his head in your lap, open his mouth and take a spatula in your hand, and press his tongue downwards as shown in this picture:
Make it from silver or brass, thin like a blade. When you press the tongue down with it and see the swelling appear on the tonsil, take a needle and stitch it into the tonsil, then pull it outwards as much as possible without pulling any of the surrounding tissue.
Then cut it with this instrument, its shape resembles a scissor but both of its ends are bent so that each of its two sharp edges faces the other. It is made from Indian iron or Damascus steel:
If you do not have this instrument, then cut it with a knife shaped like this:
Sharp on one side and blunt on the other. After cutting one tonsil, cut the other in the same manner, then gargle the patient with cold water or vinegar and water.
If there is bleeding, gargle with water in which dried figs or oak leaves have been steeped until the bleeding stops, then treat it until it heals. Other growths may appear in the throat besides the tonsils, cut them as mentioned for cutting tonsils.
A woman was treated for a growth that had appeared inside her throat, striking the epiglottis and causing difficulty in swallowing. She could barely breathe through a narrow passage and was unable to eat or drink.
And she was on the verge of death if left for another day or two, when suddenly a portion of the growth protruded from both of her nostrils. I quickly inserted a needle into one of them and pulled it out, removing a suitable piece.
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nostril, and did the same for what protruded from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth, pressed down her tongue, inserted the needle into the growth itself, and cut off some of it without much bleeding.
So the woman's throat was relieved, and she immediately began drinking water. She then started eating, but we kept cutting away at the growth for a long time, as it would leave behind a replacement for what was cut.
An abscess appeared inside the throat, then stopped growing and traveled to another side; I do not know what happened to it after that.
The Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
Regarding the removal of a throat tumor.
If a cold descends upon the throat and becomes inflamed and is white, long, and rectangular in shape, it is called a 'column'. But if it is thick at its base and round in shape, it is called an 'apple'. If treated with what was mentioned in the section but no improvement resulted.
I saw a warm tumor that had subsided and was thin; it should not be cut. If it was thick, round, and short with no length, or bloody, purple, black in color, or without sensation, then it is permissible to cut it.
Therefore, it is beneficial for the patient. If you see it with the characteristics mentioned - white and long in shape - tell the patient to sit facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument described earlier, then insert the needle into the 'apple'.
And pull it downwards and cut it with one of the instruments mentioned for cutting tonsils, but do not cut more than what is beyond its natural state, as excessive cutting can harm speech.
After cutting, use what was described for cutting tonsils to treat it until it heals. If the patient is too weak to cut it, do not attempt it without fear or caution. The only way to proceed in this case is with a strong medication: place the patient's head in a vice.
Then press the patient's tongue with the instrument mentioned, take the strong water described in the chapter on cautery, and soak a wick in it without extinguishing it. Make sure it is neither too thick nor too thin, then fill the tube of this instrument.
The tip of the tube into which you place the medication should be like the cup of a spoon. Place the instrument with the medication on the throat while the patient is lying on his side so that saliva does not flow from his mouth into his throat and harm him.
Then grasp your hand with the medicine and squeeze it on the throat for half an hour until you see that it has darkened and the sting of the medicine has subsided. If you wish, you may take a cotton wad, wrap it around the tip of a wand, and dip the cotton in the medicine.
Then insert the wand with the cotton into a tube from above until the cotton adheres to the throat. Do this repeatedly until you achieve the desired level of cleansing, then leave it alone; it will rot and detach after three or four days. If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it.
After cleansing, wipe around the uvula with a cotton swab soaked in olive oil and use it to dry any surrounding medicine. Then gargle with cold water and treat both externally with poultices and internally with gargarisms until healed. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and far from frightening.
The throat can also be treated more gently than cleansing and cutting. It is treated with incense in this manner: take equal parts of fenureek, zofa, saeter, sabsabillah, sheikh, babunj, qaisum, and similar plants. Collect them all or some in a pot and soak them in vinegar.
Then boil the pot gently over a slow fire until the wisdom's tin melts, and make a hole in the middle of its lid to fit the curved instrument made of silver or copper.
Insert the tip with the funnel into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula through the tube, gently warming it. Repeat this several times until the inflammation subsides, but avoid using this treatment at the onset of the swelling.
For steam inhalation is often effective in increasing the swelling. It is preferable to use this method only after the hot inflammation has subsided. If you do not have this instrument, you can use a reed with an egg shell attached to its tip to prevent burning the patient's mouth.
Because the egg shell prevents the hot steam from burning the mouth, making it a safe and effective treatment.
Chapter Eighty-Three
On extracting splinters and other foreign bodies from the throat without causing harm.
Frequently, a bone or fish spine gets stuck in the throat; it is necessary to remove what is visible by pressing the tongue with an instrument towards the sun.
It is necessary for you to discern what is in the throat, and whatever does not appear to you; it is advisable to make the patient vomit before his food settles in his stomach, perhaps the stuck object will come out with the vomiting or the patient may swallow a piece of cloth or a stalk of celery.
Or he may swallow a piece of dry bread or take a piece of soft seawater sponge tied to a thread, then swallow it; if it reaches the place of the splinter, quickly pull out the thread and do this repeatedly.
Frequently, the splinter or bone sticks there and comes out; if it does not come out as mentioned above, then use this lead instrument.
This instrument should be a little thicker than a reed and have a hooked end; the patient should insert it gently into his throat while raising his head upwards, taking care not to touch his larynx to avoid coughing. The doctor may also insert it with his hand,
And the patient inserting it himself is better, as he knows the location of the stuck object; he should push it downwards or pull his hand back upwards with the instrument according to what is easiest for him until it comes out,
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On Removing Foreign Bodies Stuck in the Throat.
If you have treated the foreign body with the medications mentioned earlier and it did not help, then look into the patient's throat at the sun after pressing his tongue with the instrument I described to you.
If you see the foreign body, then grasp it with a small forceps or a delicate hook. If you cannot do this, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the foreign body; then insert a red-hot iron probe into the tube.
Do this repeatedly and let the patient abstain from water all day; then give him a cup of cold water to rinse his mouth without swallowing any, shaking it occasionally with his hand.
If the phlegm falls onto the threshold when it senses water, if it does not come out as described, then clear the throat with urine and use the instrument mentioned in God's book to cauterize the tonsils. This should be done repeatedly until it falls.
As for the procedure with incense, take a suitable quantity in which you have placed burning charcoal from a fire. The vessel should be covered by a lid with an opening at its center into which you insert the tip of the instrument. Then place the incense and make sure the patient places his mouth over the other end of the pipe while closing his mouth so that no smoke escapes until he feels that the incense has reached his throat.
If the phlegm does not fall on its own, then repeat the incense procedure until it falls. The patient should be patient despite thirst and should eat salty food with garlic but avoid drinking water. This method will definitely cause it to come out. Here is an illustration of the instrument used to draw out phlegm from the throat.
And it resembles a crab's pincers as you can see, except that it has this groove which enters the throat and its two tips resemble a bird's beak in their sharpness, so that when they grasp something they do not let it go.
And another instrument used to press down the tongue is a wide iron ring that fits over it, with a size equal to the mouth. It is inserted into the mouth upright on one side so that the mouth remains open against the patient's will and he cannot remove it until it is taken away.
Description of the instrument used to keep the mouth open in this manner.
Chapter Forty.
In it, he describes how to speak about the matter of tumors and their removal.
There are many types of tumors, each differing from the other in their nature and in the liquid they contain.
The second type differs according to the location of the tumors within the body, as a tumor in the head is not like one in the buttocks, and a tumor in the area of heat is not like one at a joint. Each has its own ruling regarding treatment.
And among tumors, some are not to be incised except after the pus within them has ripened and fully matured, while others are to be incised when they are still fresh, before their pus has fully ripened, such as those that occur near joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and continues until it rots around it, perhaps it will damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, thus becoming a cause for lameness in that limb. Or the tumor may be near an important organ.
For if you delay its incision until it ripens, you will harm the main organ or [if it is] near the bladder, then incise it fresh. Indeed, it is necessary to incise the tumor when it is fresh and not yet fully ripe, which occurs near the bladder, lest the wound become gangrenous and penetrate into the bladder, causing it to become perforated.
And it may become difficult to heal, and one should know the appropriate time for incising tumors that have fully ripened: when there is no pain from the tumor and fever has abated, redness has decreased, pulsation has stopped, and the head of the tumor is softening along with other signs.
It is preferable to locate the incision at the lowest point of the tumor, if possible, so that it may be easier for the matter to flow downwards, or in the thinnest part of the tumor and where it is most projecting. And let the incision be extended along the length of the body if the tumors are in the manner of the hands or feet.
And places of muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels, and in general all smooth places that do not bend are suitable for incision. But if the tumor is in a place where there is bending, then let the incision follow that place. And if the tumor is in fatty places, it is preferable to leave it unincised.
Until its ripening is complete, as we have said. For if you incise it before that, the discharge of pus from it will be prolonged and abundant, and its wound may become hard and dirty, and some tumors may be incised across the body when necessary or according to what the organ requires.
It is necessary to use one incision for small tumors and a wide incision or many incisions according to the size of large tumors. Some tumors may necessitate excising the skin and cutting it if it has become like rags.
And sometimes, as in many books and repositories, it has been reported that he died like this. Some have three-angled incisions, others are cut like the leaf of a willow tree for an arboreal tumor.
Among them, the round incision and the crescent-shaped incision are used. For those without a head like smooth, flat tumors, it is necessary to use only one simple incision. If the tumor is large and has accumulated for a long time with putrefaction, do not rush, lest all the pus comes out at once.
But some of it is taken out, then the tumor is tied for another day, and then some pus is also taken out again. This process is repeated gradually until all of it is removed.
Especially if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, an infant, or an elderly person, the animal spirit may be greatly depleted with the sudden exit of pus, sometimes leading to death without any sensation. Therefore, beware of this matter very carefully.
After performing the incision on these tumors, it is necessary to cleanse the wound and observe. If the tumor's cut is small or if there was only one simple incision, then use cotton wool soaked in olive oil for dressing. But if the tumor is large and many incisions were made,
it is necessary to insert a wick into each incision so that they reach one another. If some of the skin or flesh around the tumor has been cut off, it is necessary to fill it with dry cotton wool soaked in olive oil or linen bandages and tie it tightly for three days.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If bleeding occurs during your work, use cold water and vinegar mixed in a linen cloth to absorb the blood and apply it to the bleeding site repeatedly.
If bleeding persists, it is advisable not to resort to the treatments and remedies mentioned in various parts of this book or the sections. If it occurs during winter and the location has many nerves, one should apply poultices made from hot water and oil.
And apply them to the location. If it occurs in summer and the location is fleshy, then the poultices should be applied with cold water and oil or water mixed with oil. All of this should be cold until on the third day, as mentioned earlier, one should remove the tumor and cleanse it.
And employ similar treatments until it heals, for this is the general knowledge of treating tumors. As for specific methods, I have detailed each tumor and its treatment method concisely.
Chapter Forty-One.
Concerning ulcers on tumors appearing on the scalp.
Appearing on the scalp are small tumors, which belong to the type of excrescences contained in sacs. They have conditions such as those resembling chicken cox and are many in number; some are fatty while others contain moisture resembling mud.
And there are those that contain moisture like bran or gruel, and others that are solidified and hard. None of these require cutting and removing unless a blood vessel intervenes during the incision.
The procedure for incision is first to probe it with the instrument called the 'medsus', as shown below, so that you may know its contents. If it contains moisture, then make an incision along its length and in a simple manner as shown here:
And begin the incision from line ~b~ to line ~g~. Once the moisture has emptied, peel off the sac that contained it and remove it entirely; do not leave any part of it behind, as it often recurs if some remains.
Then dip a cloth in the prepared ointment if available, otherwise in saltwater and fill the wound with it. Leave it overnight as it will consume any remaining sac tissue. Then repeat the process with the compress on the second and third days if necessary.
Until you ensure that nothing remains of the cyst, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals. If the lump contains fatty matter, cut it in this manner:.
Make a cross-incision at the mouth of the wound and push the edges apart. Then pull it out from all sides with great effort, ensuring you remove the sac that contains it. If you encounter an artery, do as I have described earlier. Similarly, if the lump is stuck to the cut, do likewise.
The treatment for this is as I have described. The incision on the hard lump is easier because it has little blood and moisture, and some of these lumps in the head may have no moisture at all. For example, if you incise a.
I once incised the head of an old woman and found the lump to be like a hard, dry stone, so hard that it could not be broken even if thrown against something. But other lumps that occur on the head are not like this, such as those that appear on children's heads.
When it comes to the ears' openings, make a simple incision all around and make the bottom of it lower so that matter can flow down easily. Then treat it with an appropriate remedy.
Chapter Forty-two
These tumors often appear in the neck, armpits, and groin. They can also appear elsewhere on the body, sometimes as a single lump or many together, with some developing from others.
Each of these tumors has its own sac, like fatty lumps and head tumors as previously described. There are many types of these tumors: some are hard, others contain fluid, and still others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
I have seen some that appeared fair upon touch, with a color close to the skin's color. They could move in all directions and were not attached to any nerve, lymph node, artery, or vein. They were not deeply buried either. It is preferable to make a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this manner, as indicated by line ~j~ to line ~b:~:.
Remove it from all sides and stretch the skin of the wound with a single or two probes or many if needed, as mentioned earlier for head tumors. Extract it bit by bit, ensuring not to cut any vein or nerve. The knife should not be too sharp.
Lest your hand slip and cause unnecessary cutting, disturbing the patient. If a vein or artery is severed and impedes work, apply powdered bdellium or some kind of drug that stops bleeding to the wound.
Suture the wound and leave it until the inflammation subsides, allowing the wound to rest and heal. When bleeding ceases, return to your work until complete. Then, use your index finger to search for any remaining small worms or maggots, cut them, and remove them.
If there is a large vein at the origin of the maggot, do not cut that maggot from its source. Instead, tie it with a double thread tightly and leave it until it falls off on its own without harm. Then, pack the wound with boiled cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment.
If all the maggots are cut, then immediately suture the wound edges. Ensure that no maggot remains before sewing, for if a bone fragment remains.
If a bone fragment remains, proceed to cut its origin and base. Use sutures as mentioned earlier. If maggots contain fluids, tie them with a simple knot at the point of maturity, allowing the knot to be below as previously stated.
Then, use the Egyptian ointment and similar substances for dressing to consume any remaining corruption until the wound is clean. Then, treat it with healing ointments for flesh until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Three
On Incision of the Throat for an Internal Tumor in the Pharynx.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the throat, but I have not seen anyone perform it in our land. However, those with strangulation should avoid performing this incision, as they do not benefit from it.
To ensure all vessels and lungs are healthy, those with a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if not caused by the trachea, must use a cut to the larynx to avoid suffocation.
If we desire this, we should cut the larynx below three or four small circles of the trachea's rings, not on the cartilage but between two rings, like the incision made in the peritoneum.
Because it is fleshless and its blood vessels are far away, if the surgeon is afraid, he should stretch the skin of the neck with a hook, then cut the skin until he reaches the trachea, avoiding the blood vessels if he sees any.
Then cut the peritoneum we have described, identifying the trachea cut by the mucus coming out of it and the sound of coughing. Leave the wound open for a time until suffocation is avoided, then close the wound with skin stitches.
This method is performed without cartilage, then use drugs that promote flesh growth until it heals. The author of this book said: This phrase we mentioned means only when the patient has blocked his throat with one of these tumors.
When the patient is near death and wishes to die, they go to cut the larynx so the patient can breathe through the wound and be saved from death. They ordered the wound to remain open until the disease passes, which takes about three days or more.
At that time, they ordered the wound to be stitched and treated until it heals. I have seen with my own eyes a servant who took a knife and pierced her throat, cutting part of the trachea. She called for treatment, and when I found her, she was like a slaughtered animal. So I uncovered the wound.
I found that the blood coming out of the wound was little, indicating that she had not cut an artery or vein. Air was coming out of the wound, so I dressed it and treated it until it healed. Nothing else happened to the servant except hoarseness in her voice.
She returned after some days to her best state; hence we say that cutting the throat is of no consequence.
Chapter Forty-Four
In the section on the incision made upon the tumor that appears externally in the throat, known as the tonsil of the throat.
This tumor called the tonsil of the throat is a large growth resembling the color of the skin; it is common in women and comes in two types.
Either it is natural or accidental. If it is natural, there is no remedy for it; if it is accidental, it occurs in two types: one resembling fatty tumors, and the other resembling a tumor resulting from a complication of blood vessels, which carries danger when incised. It is not permissible to excise it with an iron unless it is small and has been probed and searched with a probe, found to resemble fatty tumors, and not connected to any blood vessels; then incise it as you would a fatty tumor. And remove it along with its capsule if it is in one, otherwise excise all of it and then treat the site accordingly.
Chapter Forty-Five
In the section on incisions for types of tumors (growths).
Tumors (growths) have many types, all of which are mentioned in the classification. It is necessary to distinguish here between tumors and boils; so I say that a boil is accompanied by heat, fever, and severe pain until it bursts. And the inflammation ends; at this point, the fever and pain subside. Tumors do not accompany heat or fever or pain; they have a specific serous capsule and appear as small red spots resembling pimples, which then increase in size to resemble blisters and may be larger or smaller than a bean.
They are of two types: fatty or fluid-filled, with various colors as mentioned in the classification. When treating a tumor, it is necessary to probe and examine it first using an instrument called a probe, as depicted in the following chapter.
Determine the size of the tumor, then withdraw the probe and observe what comes out. If fluid of any color emerges, incise it simply as described for other swellings. If no fluid comes out, know that it is fatty.
I made an incision upon it as you were instructed, and hung it from the hooks. Carefully tear the skin from every side, taking care to preserve the contents within if possible.
If the sac tears during the procedure and cannot be extracted intact, often this happens, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains. For if any part is left behind, recovery will be less likely.
If you are unable to remove it all, cauterize the wound with some sharp acid and apply pressure. Cover it with a compress that cools inflammation and treat it with other remedies until healed. If the injury is large, sew up the wound and treat it with a glue.
If bleeding, whether profuse or not, hinders you, quickly cauterize the area with powdered pitch and leave it bound for two or three days until the wound turns black and bleeding subsides. Then return to remove any remaining sac.
Chapter Forty-Six.
In images of instruments.
The tools used for incision and surgery include images of probes, which are of three types: large, medium, and small.
Image of a large probe:
Image of a medium probe:
Image of a small probe:
The probes are made of iron or steel with square, sharp ends to facilitate entry into tumors. These tools are also called borers and come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large borer:
Image of a medium borer:
Image of a small borer:
These probes are used to search for tumors, wounds, hooks, and other cavities containing bones or other objects. They are made smooth and rounded like a pestle from copper, tin, brass, iron, or silver. The best ones are made of brass.
Lead probes can also be made for exploring hooks with twisted interiors, which should bend gently to follow the curve. They come in three sizes: long, medium, and short.
A mold for casting plaster bandages should be made according to the size of each fracture, making its thickness proportional to the width of the splint and its narrowness suited to it.
A medium-sized brass mold:
Small brass mold:
Images of splints, which are many in number because among them are simple ones that have only one hook and are of three sizes: large, medium, and small. Also among them are those without hooks, which are also three types. And there are those with two hooks, which are likewise three types. And among them are those with three hooks, of which there are also three types. All these kinds have their own uses in their respective places. Image of a large simple splint: Image of a medium simple splint: Image of a small simple splint:
Image of a large hookless splint: Image of a medium hookless splint:
Image of a small hookless splint:
Image of a large double-hooked splint: Image of a medium double-hooked splint: Image of a small double-hooked splint:
Image of a large triple-hooked splint:
Image of a medium triple-hooked splint: Image of a small triple-hooked splint:
And these are the images of scalpels used for cutting and scraping off tumors, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large scalpel:
Image of a medium-sized scalpel:
Image of a small scalpel:
Some of its blades are limited while the other ends are not, so that they may be used for scraping off tumors without fear of cutting veins or nerves, and to cause less discomfort to the patient.
And these are images of spatulas, which also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large spatula:
It is made of polished copper, like a spoon with two layers at its head resembling the tongue of a bird. The blade of the probe is concealed within it and can be pushed in and out as desired.
Images of forceps used between the fingers for removing tumors which the patient does not feel, and they are three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a large forceps:
Images of clamps used for stopping bleeding, and they are three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a large clamp:
Made of copper or brass, rounded at the ends slightly longer as shown. They should be soft. It is necessary to have these types of clamps in various sizes to quickly cut blood vessels when needed and when no medication is available.
But these clamps are not used to cut blood vessels in every part of the body, rather they are used in fatty tissues such as the thigh muscle, arm muscle, chest, abdomen, and buttocks.
And others can be made into smaller instruments resembling pistachio shells, like this image:
It is used to cut blood vessels if bleeding occurs from a wound or when cutting nerves or arteries. It can also be made rounded like this image:
Chapter Forty-Seven.
In the treatment of male breast disease.
Some men may have breast development resembling that of women at the time of puberty, becoming prominent and ugly. If one wishes to avoid this, an elliptical incision should be made on the breast in this manner:
From line ~b~ to line ~g~: Then remove all the fat, fill the wound with muscle tissue, close it with stitches and dress it until healed. If the breast becomes pendulous and relaxed, it will appear as in women.
It is necessary to make two incisions in its upper corners resembling an ellipse, each connected at their ends such that the longer line surrounds the shorter one as shown: From line ~b~ to line ~g~, then remove the skin between the incisions and excise the fat. Use stitches and dressings as mentioned earlier until healed.
If you cannot accommodate the intended cut, make one for the sake of the patient's anxiety or to control bleeding. Then pack the wound with cotton soaked in hot oil and leave it until it consumes the remaining fat, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Eight
In the armpit area of tumors.
These armpit tumors are of the solid type, containing a sac and some contain fluid. If any contain fluid, it is necessary to make an incision in this manner
From line ~b~ to line ~g~, until all the contents of the tumor are discharged. Then pack it with hot cotton and leave it for another day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of the type called "cancerous glands," make an incision as mentioned earlier in the case of cancer, whether or not the wound extends and discharges pus, use caustic as previously mentioned.
Chapter Forty-Nine
On incising a tumor appearing due to an artery or vein, called an aneurysm
If the artery is injured and the skin above it becomes adherent, a tumor often appears due to this. Similarly, an aneurysm may also appear in a vein accompanied by swelling and a tumor.
The signs by which it is known whether the tumor and aneurysm are from an artery or a vein: if from an artery, the tumor will be elongated and collected deep in the body. If you press on the tumor with your finger, you will feel as if it has a creaking sound.
A tumor from a vein will be round and appear on the surface of the body. Incising these tumors is dangerous, especially if they are located in the armpit, groin, neck, or other many parts of the body where they are very large. It is necessary to avoid treating them with caustic iron.
As for those that are located in the limbs or head, it is also necessary to avoid treating them with caustic iron. If it is an aneurysm of the facial artery, make a longitudinal incision through the skin, then open the incision with forceps and remove the artery from its sheaths.
Then it is exposed, and a needle is inserted underneath it and passed through to the other side. The artery is tied with a doubled thread in two places as you were shown regarding the arteries of the testicles. Then the site between the ligaments is cut with scissors until all its blood flows out.
The tumor dissolves, then use the treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall off. Then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor is from a laceration of the vein, then grasp as much of it as possible with the skin in your hand. Then insert a needle below the place where you grasped it and pass it through with a doubled thread until it exits on the other side. Then tie the tumor tightly on both sides with the thread ends, as you were taught regarding tying a grape. If you fear that the threads may slip, insert another needle underneath the tumor at the intersection of the first needle with another thread.
Pull the threads in four places, then cut open the tumor in its middle until its contents come out. Then cut off a small piece of skin and leave what was tied attached. Then place a dressing soaked in a mixture of honey and oil on it. Then apply the treatment with bandages and ointments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
Regarding the tumor that results from nerve twisting.
This happens with tumors in arteries and veins, likewise with nerves when there is a blow or extreme fatigue, etc. This occurs more often in the joints of the hands and feet.
The tumor appears in any joint where movement occurs, it is a solid tumor similar in color to the rest of the body. It usually does not cause pain and when pressed firmly, the patient feels a sensation like numbness. The tumor is not concentrated deep within the body.
But it is under the skin and moves in all directions except front or back. Tumors in joints should not be treated with iron as this may cause bruising. Those on the head or forehead may be treated thus.
He lanced the skin with a scalpel; if the tumor was small, he grasped it with forceps and severed it from its origin. If it was large, he attached it with a hook and sliced it off, then removed it and sutured the wound, treating it until it healed.
Chapter Fifty-One
Regarding the removal of hemorrhoids in the abdomen
Many people have a condition called piles, where they develop fleshy growths resembling mushrooms in their anus and other parts of the body. These are often small but can sometimes become quite large, with swollen heads and thin stalks that resemble lips.
I saw a man with two large fleshy growths in his abdomen, resembling mushrooms; they were white and thin-stalked, with lips that had split open and leaked fluid continuously. I removed them, and one weighed about eighteen ounces while the other weighed about six.
When removing them, if the lesion is moist and the color of the polyp is white and wet with a thin stalk, cut it off with a wide scalpel. Keep caustic substances ready nearby in case much blood flows out during removal.
If much blood flows out, cauterize it. If the patient is afraid of being cut with iron, take a strong lead thread and tie it tightly around the polyp that has these characteristics. Leave it for two days, then tighten the lead further each day until it falls off.
Gradually tighten the lead until the polyp breaks off and falls off by itself without pain. If the polyp has a thick stalk, especially if it is in the abdomen, there may be some fear and hesitation about cutting it off completely, but it can sometimes be cut partially or halfway.
Then cauterize it to prevent its return, then treat the wound until it heals. Beware of cutting a polyp that is dark-colored and insensitive to touch with an unpleasant appearance, as it may be a cancerous tumor. We will discuss cancer later on.
Chapter Fifty-Two
Regarding the treatment of anal fissures
The causes of hernia are many, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen which protrudes the hernial ring or the gut, as mentioned elsewhere in cases of fissures, or from blood issuing from a vein or artery, as previously stated, or from wind trapped therein.
If it is due to a rupture of the peritoneum and protrusion of the hernial ring, then the color of the swelling will resemble that of the body, it will be soft without pain, and it will change with changes in posture. If it is due to protrusion of the gut, its position will be more variable than what we have described. If you press on it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return. There may also be a gurgling sound associated with it, and it becomes more pronounced during bathing or severe exertion. If it is due to fluid accumulation, it will feel soft.
If it does not disappear when pressed with the hand, nor increases nor decreases in size, and if it is due to blood, then the swelling will appear dark-colored along with these signs. If it is due to a solid growth of flesh, then the swelling will be hard and fixed in size.
If it is due to wind, it will feel soft, and the procedure in such cases is to observe. If the hernia is caused by arterial or venous bleeding or wind, one should not hesitate to treat it, as there is fear and danger involved, as I have mentioned earlier in the chapter on tumors caused by arteries and veins.
If the hernia is due to the gut or hernial ring, then order the patient to stand upright with their back extended, and mark around the entire swelling with ink. Then order the patient to lie down on their back in front of you, then incise around the swelling with a wide blade at the marked location. Then insert a large sound through the center of the swelling upwards. Finally, tie the incision tightly with strong thread or silk.
The tie should be made in the form of a noose, then open the middle of the swelling above the tie and insert your index finger. If you find that the gut has been taken by the tie, loosen it and push the gut back into the abdomen. If there is only hernial ring, dilate it with a sound.
Cut away the excess, for if you encounter an artery or vein, ligate it properly and return to your task. Take two needles, insert strong threads into them, and introduce the needles into the incision made around the tumor in a cross-like manner. Then pull the tumor in four directions with the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the site until the surrounding flesh rots and falls off by itself, or cut it off if it has softened and rotted. Then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals, especially if the tumor was attached to healthy flesh.
Or, if there is moisture present, cauterize the tumor as mentioned earlier and remove any blood or moisture found within it. Then treat the site with something that will heal it.
Chapter Fifty-Three
In treating cancer.
We have mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat them with drugs, and warned against treating it with iron lest it ulcerate. We also mentioned cancer that arises in the uterus and warned against its treatment.
The first authors mentioned that if cancer is in a location where it can be removed entirely, such as in the breast or thigh and similar organs suitable for its complete removal, especially if it is newly formed and small, but if it has spread widely, it should not be approached.
If possible, try to cure anyone from it; I have not seen anyone else reach this. The procedure is, if it is removable as mentioned, to proceed gradually by removing the black spots one by one, then separate it if it is in a vessel filled with blood.
Then prepare the patient for surgery and cauterize the cancer in all directions along with its skin, ensuring nothing remains of its origin. Allow blood to flow naturally without cutting it quickly.
But squeeze the areas and remove as much thick blood as possible by hand or using tools. If encountering profuse bleeding from an artery or vein during surgery, tie off the vessel until bleeding stops. Then treat with other remedies until healed.
Chapter Forty-Five
In treating boils
He informed us, in the division of types of swelling and how water gathers, and the signs of each type and its treatment with medications. That which is treated with iron is only the serous type alone; it does not approach the venous or flesh type at all.
If that is fatal, then if you have treated this serous type of boil with medications and they did not take effect, look again. If the patient has exaggerated their weakness or if there is another illness besides the boil, such as...
If there is coughing or diarrhea, and so on, then do not treat it with iron for it is harmful. But if you see that the patient is strong and does not have any other illness besides the boil, nor are they a child nor an elderly person, then proceed as follows: make the patient stand upright before you. And have someone behind them press their abdomen with both hands and push the water downwards towards the pubic area, then take a pointed bistoury of this shape:
Short on both sides, long and pointed at the tip like a bistoury except that it has some curve to prevent injury to the intestines during use. Then observe if the boil is forming from the side of the intestines.
It is not permissible to make the incision more than three fingers' breadth away from the nipple downwards towards the pubic area. If the boil has been caused by a liver disease, make your incision three fingers to the left of the nipple. If it was caused by a spleen disease, make the incision on the right side at a distance of three fingers.
It is also not permissible for the incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie down so that the pus does not flow into that weak place. Then prick through all the skin with the instrument and enter it into the incision, then raise your hand.
With the bistoury between the skin and the peritoneum as if you are splitting it, the amount you split should be like the width of a fingernail or similar. Then prick through the peritoneum until the bistoury reaches an empty place where the water is located. Then remove it and insert this instrument into the hole.
This is like a tube of fine brass made from silver or copper or smooth polished ebony, having at its base a small hole and on its sides three holes, two on one side and one on the other as you see.
And it can be placed thus, with its end open like the hollow of a reed pipe in this manner:
At its upper end there is a ring. When the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately descend upon the instrument and empty from it at an average pace, for if it empties too quickly, the patient may die due to the sudden loss of his vital spirits.
Otherwise, it may cause him to faint near death. However, if he empties according to his strength and the condition of the patient is good with a strong pulse and healthy color, then remove the instrument and seal the water immediately, for it will do so at once.
Due to the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum which you were told to cauterize in that manner, then replace the instrument after a day if you find the patient tolerating it.
And also, remove from the water a small amount each time while you are standing up and be careful not to leave too much water behind, for if you fear for the patient and leave too much water it can be treated by burying him in hot sand.
And abundant sweating in the bathhouse and sun exposure, anointing with dry drugs to quench his thirst until he recovers. Then cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water as described earlier,
Chapter Fifty-Five.
In treating children born with closed or narrowed urinary passages, or those with openings not in the proper place.
And some boys may be born from their mother's womb with the urinary passage closed; it is necessary to pierce it immediately after birth.
With a very fine lancet in this manner:
Then place a thin lead pin in the hole and tie it, leaving it for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove it and then replace it afterwards, lest the urine that flows over the area closes up.
And as for those whose opening is narrow, it is treated with lead as we have said repeatedly until it becomes wide. Among them are some where the hole is not in its proper place; there are those who are born with it at the end of the urethra, so they cannot urinate forward.
Until he lifts the penis with his hand upwards, and no child is born to him before the semen cannot reach the womb in a straight line, which is a very serious cause. The procedure for this is that the patient lies on their back.
Then, stretch your left hand's arm strongly and straighten the penis with a sharp knife or scalpel like a large pen point or as if carving something to have a middle that is protruding like a urethral opening. The hole should be made in the center as it ought.
And beware of bleeding during your work, for this often occurs. Oppose it with what stops blood flow and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
Regarding phimosis that occurs in the foreskin, urethra, and meatus: blackness, corruption, adhesion of the foreskin to the urethra.
Often this phimosis occurs in the glans penis which is swollen and hard, sometimes not harmful and sometimes harmful. The non-harmful one should be attached with a fine hook.
And cut it off entirely, then apply a cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment. After that, treat it with the yellow ointment until it heals. But if this phimosis is harmful and hard like stone, then cauterization should be used after cutting and scraping.
But if the phimosis is in an uncircumcised foreskin and some of it is inside and some outside, then remove the inner part first. Once that heals, then treat the outer part.
Because if you treat them both at once, you are not safe from puncturing the glans. Also, it may appear in females and foreskin with blackness and corruption, so cauterize all that has darkened or is about to corrupt.
Then plaster it with honey mixed with ground pomegranate skins and carob, then treat it with other remedies until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use the Cay with a lunar spoon in this manner:
If Cay is beneficial for both situations, i.e., bleeding and wound healing if it becomes corrupted. If the foreskin becomes inflamed and disappears completely at some time, do not insert a lead tube into the urethra for the patient to urinate through, as for adhesion of the glans to the foreskin.
This adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskin is correct and was not circumcised, it may also occur due to injury or tumor. It should be peeled off with a curved scalpel until the band is loosened and the foreskin is released from all sides.
If difficulty in distinguishing between them during examination, do not peel off any of the foreskin or glans, as the glans is thin and may easily tear due to its thinness. Then separate the glans and foreskin with a wet, thin linen cloth dipped in cold water so that it does not stick as well.
Then treat with an astringent drink until it heals,
Chapter Seventy-Five
On the purification of boys and treatment of their ailments.
Circumcision is nothing but separating adhesion like other surgeries, except that it is done by our own will and is especially practiced on boys. Therefore, we should describe the best way to perform it.
The easiest method leading to safety is what I say: the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not practiced among their laws, but we have acquired it.
Through experimentation, I found that the majority of practitioners and barbers perform circumcision using Moses' method with scissors and use ligatures and stitches with a thread or cut with a nail, having tried all these methods.
I found no better method than using scissors for circumcision and ligating with a thread because Moses' method often damages the skin as the glans has two layers of skin, so if the upper layer is cut, the lower layer remains.
It is necessary to cut the remainder, and continuous pain persists. Cleaning with a file does not ensure cutting off the tip of the urethra because it might enter its hole. As for cleaning with a needle, the skin may tear and ruin your work, or the child's skin may be naturally short.
Often, they are born like that and do not need cleaning. I have seen this. As for cutting with scissors and tying with thread, my experience has shown me its superiority because the blade above is equal to the blade below.
When you press both blades together, you cut with one measurement at once. The thread becomes like a wall for the skin of the urethra from all sides without any error occurring. Initially, it seems that the child will be harmed.
Especially if it is from one who understands little, that you only tie the thread in his urethra and leave it until another day, then you cut and scrape him as much as you can without harming him. Then hold him upright before you.
Make him sit down and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that he does not see them at all nor any of the tools. Then insert your hand into his urethra, inflate the skin and lift it up until the head of the penis appears.
Then clean it from the dirt gathered there. Then tie the known place with a double thread, then tie a little below it with another thread. Then hold the lower tying place firmly with your thumb and index finger and cut between the ties. Then quickly lift the skin upwards and bring out the head of the penis. Then let a little blood flow, which is better and causes less swelling. Then wipe it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it powder made from burnt dried dates, which is the best I have tried, or fine flour, which is also good.
Then quickly lift the skin upwards and bring out the head of the penis. Then let a little blood flow, which is better and causes less swelling. Then wipe it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it powder made from burnt dried dates, which is the best I have tried, or fine flour, which is also good. Then carry it on a bandage from above, with an egg boiled in rosewater crushed with fresh fragrant rose oil. Leave it like that overnight then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
This is an illustration of the scissors suitable for purification.
The blades of the scissors should be straight and not skewed. The length of both blades should be equal to that of the handles, equally. As for mistakes made during purification, it may happen that all or some of the inner skin is turned while cutting; therefore, make sure to stretch it with your fingers before the place becomes swollen.
And cut it horizontally. If you cannot hold it with your fingers, then grasp it with forceps and cut it. If three days have passed and the area below the glans penis remains swollen and warm, leave it until the swelling subsides, and then gently remove its skin.
Cut it as much as you like, but be careful not to cut the glans penis. If something is cut off from its tip, this will not harm, and treat it with the cicatrizing medications that are mentioned in the chapter on cicatrization.
If some skin is cut above the glans penis and retracts upwards, this will cause no great harm. Treat it with the remedies mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Eighty-Five.
In the treatment of retention of urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by stones, clotted blood, pus, or flesh that has grown there or similar causes. If you treat these with the remedies mentioned in this section
If the urine does not flow and you find that its retention is due to a stone stuck in the neck of the bladder, then make the patient kneel on his knees and lie prostrate. Then another person should mount upon his back, stretch his belly towards his back, and hold him as firmly as possible.
Upon this, the neck of the bladder will be compelled to push the stone backwards and urine will flow. If it does not flow with what has been mentioned and the patient's condition worsens, then you should use an instrument called a catheter, whose shape is as follows:
It is made of silver and should be thin, smooth, and flexible like a bird's feather quill, about one and a half spans long, with a gentle funnel at its tip. To use it for drawing out urine, take a doubled thread and tie a small sponge or cotton ball to its end securely.
Insert the thread's end into the bladder's bottom, pierce it with scissors if some membrane remains so that it may enter the tube to plug it like a cork. Then grease the bladder with oil or foam or egg white and have the patient sit on a chair.
And release the urethra, rinse it with warm water or oil and then insert the catheter gently into the urethra until it reaches the neck of the bladder. Then tie the urethra above towards the scrotum and push the catheter inside.
Until after tying the urethra, push the catheter inside until it approaches near the bladder. Then tilt the penis downward with the catheter inside and push further until you feel that it has reached an empty space which the patient can also sense.
And this is done because the path through which urine passes is bent. Then pull the thread with the catheter slightly and strongly so that the urine follows it. Then remove it and let the urine flow out, then reinsert the catheter.
Continue doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relieved.
Chapter Ninety-Five.
How to inject a catheter into the bladder.
And the instruments suitable for this purpose are made of silver or hollow ivory with a long, fine tube at its tip for dripping water and drugs. This is called the 'syringe' and it appears as follows:.
It is made of silver or hollowed ivory with a long, gently curved tube whose end is closed except for three holes: two on one side and one on the other as shown.
The hollow part into which the piston fits should be just large enough to fit snugly without any excess so that when you pull it some liquid is drawn in, and when you push it out the liquid moves away like a fire squirt used in naval warfare.
If you wish to introduce liquids into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the liquid and pull the piston up so that the liquid is drawn into the barrel of the syringe. Then insert its tip into the urethra as described earlier for the catheter, then push the liquid in with the piston.
If that moisture reaches the bladder, the patient feels it; this is also a gentle injection figure used to inject the bladder:
Make it of silver or bronze, its upper part resembles a small funnel and beneath it has a groove in which the band is placed, then take a camel's bladder and put into it the moisture you wish to inject into the bladder, then tie it tightly between the grooves with a doubled thread.
Warm that moisture a little on the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, and press your hand firmly on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a syringe, take a piece of cloth, make a circle from it, and pierce it on all sides, then insert a tight thread through those holes as it turns, then close the circle like closing a sieve after putting into it what you want of moistures and oils and waters.
Then tie it to the device and use it as you used the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder,
The Sixty-First Chapter.
On removing the stone.
We have mentioned in the treatise the kinds of stones and their treatment with drugs, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and their signs, and we have mentioned the stone that is operated on by hand and by incision.
And this is particularly about the stones formed in the bladder, especially those that occur in the urethra, which I will describe clearly and briefly.
I say that stones formed in the bladder are more common among boys, and one of its signs is that urine comes out of the bladder like water in its fluidity.
And sand appears in it, and it scratches the glans penis, and causes discomfort, and it often protrudes then retracts, and the anus also protrudes with it in many cases. It is easy for boys to pass stones until they reach fourteen years old, but difficult for the elderly; while those of intermediate age find it somewhat easier.
As for those with larger stones, their treatment is easier; while smaller ones are more difficult. Therefore, the first step in treatment is to inject the patient with a syringe that expels all the waste in his intestines, as it may obstruct the detection of the stone.
Then the patient is taken by his legs and shaken downwards so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or he may jump from a high place repeatedly, then sit before you upright with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder tilts downwards entirely, then examine him.
And examine him externally, and if you feel the stone in the space [between the anus and scrotum], then hurry at that moment to cut upon it; but if it does not fall out, it is better not to insert the left hand's index finger if the patient is a boy, or the middle finger.
If he is a full-grown boy, then insert it into his anus and search for the stone until you feel it under your finger; then gently move it little by little towards the neck of the bladder and press upon it with your finger and push it out towards the place where you intend to cut.
And order a servant to press the bladder with his hand, and order another servant to stretch the skin above the anus with his right hand while stretching the skin below it away from the place where the incision will be made, then take the sharp lancet which looks like this:
Make the incision between the anus and scrotum, not in the middle but towards the left side of the anus; the incision should be on the stone itself with your finger inside the anus pressing it outwards so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part is narrow enough for the stone to pass through.
Do not make it too large, as you may press the stone with your finger inside the anus during the cut and it will come out easily; know that some stones have angles and projections which may hinder their exit.
Among them are smooth ones like chestnuts and rounded ones which exit easily; but if a stone has angles or projections, then increase the size of the incision slightly. If it still does not come out this way, do not persist upon it, rather grasp it with forceps that have a sharp tip like an awl.
To secure the stone so that it does not escape, either insert a fine hooked instrument underneath it, or if you are unable to grasp it, widen the incision slightly. If some blood troubles you, cauterize it with a hot iron.
If there are more than one, first push the largest towards the bladder mouth then incise upon it, then do likewise with the smaller ones if there are more than two. But if they are very large, it is ignorance to make a large incision upon them because of exposing the vital parts to two dangers.
Either he dies, or it will cause perpetual leakage of urine because the wound does not heal. But try to push it until it exits or break it with forceps piece by piece until it is removed.
After completing the procedure, wash the wound with honey and vinegar, then apply a compress dipped in olive oil and wine or rose oil and cold water to cool the heat. Then have the patient lie on their back without loosening the bandage until the third day.
If the wound becomes inflamed, wash it thoroughly with water and oil. Then treat it with ichthyol ointment and belladonna ointment until it heals. If there is excessive heat and swelling in the wound, or other symptoms such as blood clots forming in the bladder preventing urine flow, this can be recognized by the presence of blood in the urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood. For if it remains, it will cause corruption and infection of the bladder. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and treat each type according to its appropriate remedy until it heals.
It is advisable during all stages of treatment to tie and bind the thighs together to secure the dressings placed on the wound. If the calculus is small and lodged in the urethra causing urine retention, treat it with the method I have described before it reaches the opening.
I have often used this treatment instead of incision and it has proven effective. It consists of taking an iron rod with this appearance:
A sharp-pointed triangular iron rod inserted into a reed, then take a thread and tie the penis underneath the calculus to prevent it from slipping back into the bladder. Then gently insert the iron rod into the urethra until the tip reaches the calculus itself.
Rotate the stone with your hand gently, bit by bit, until it breaks through to the other side. Then urine will flow immediately. Press your hand on what remains of the stone outside the penis; it will crumble and exit with the urine, and the patient will recover.
If this treatment is not feasible due to some obstruction, tie a thread under the stone and another above it. Then make an incision on the stone itself within the penis between the two threads, and remove it.
Then untie the thread and cleanse the congealed blood that has gathered in the wound. It was necessary to tie the first thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other above it so that when the thread is untied after removing the stone, the skin will return to its place covering the wound.
So, when you tie the upper thread, lift the skin upward so that it can return to its place and cover the wound as we have mentioned.
Chapter Fifty-One.
Regarding the Removal of Stones for Women.
It is rare for women to develop stones, but if one of them has a stone, its treatment becomes difficult and is often prevented by many reasons, one being that the woman might be a virgin, and another that no woman permits herself to be examined by a physician.
Moreover, if the woman is chaste or from among those who are prohibited to examine, and fourthly, there may not be a woman skilled in this procedure, especially when it comes to manual work. Additionally, the location of the incision on the stone in women is far from where the stone itself resides, necessitating a deeper cut.
Therefore, it is necessary to seek a female physician skilled in this field, though they are rarely found. If not available, one should choose an upright male physician or arrange for a skilled midwife knowledgeable in women's affairs, or someone with some indication of this procedure.
Have her brought and instruct her to perform all that you command, first examining the stone. If she finds it, press it gently with your finger.
Then command her to be opened, for if she is not a virgin and has been widowed, order the midwife to insert her finger into the young woman's vagina and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it well.
If she finds it, then she should draw it down from the mouth of the bladder towards its capacity until it reaches the root of the thigh, then make an incision opposite to half of the vulva at the root of the thigh from whichever side it may be felt.
And her finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing upon it. Let the incision be small at first, then insert the hook into that small incision; if she feels the stone, increase the size of the cut according to what you know is sufficient for its exit. Know that there are many kinds of stones.
Among them are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and those with branches. Know their kinds so that you may guide yourself thereby. If bleeding troubles you, sprinkle powdered frankinense in the place and hold it for a while until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and work with yourself to remember the instruments mentioned for removing stones in men that you may aid yourself with them in your work. If bleeding troubles you and you know that it is from a severed artery, place a ligature on the spot.
Tie it with forceps tightly and firmly, then leave it without returning to it or removing the stone, for the young woman may die. Then treat the wound. If the intensity of bleeding subsides after some days and the place becomes clean, then return to your work until the stone comes out.
Chapter Two and Sixty.
On the Incision for Urinary Stones
The urinary stones are nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white membrane underneath the skin surrounding the testicles, called the scrotum. This may occur in a special membrane prepared by nature on one side of the testicle.
So that it is thought to be another testicle, and it lies between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane mentioned above. This occurs rarely, due to weakness in the tunica vaginalis which causes this matter to adhere to it, sometimes due to a blow on the testicles.
This dampness has many colors, either yellowish or blood-red or blackish or white like water. These are the signs by which it is recognized.
Where water meets, if it is in the white peritoneum we mentioned earlier, the tumor will be rounded and somewhat elongated like an egg shape, and the testis will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own membrane, then the tumor will be rounded on one side like an egg.
And so, a person may imagine that it is another testicle. But if the moisture is between the skin of the testis and the white peritoneum, then it will be detected by touch. And to determine the color of the moisture, press the tumor with the square probe whose image you have seen, and judge it by what comes out.
When we resort to treatment with iron, it is advisable not to order the patient to bleed if he is able to do so himself, and after seeing that his body is full [of blood], let him lie on his back on a slightly elevated surface. Place many cloths underneath him, then you sit at his left side.
Order a servant to sit at his right side, extend the patient's penis towards one of the sides of the scrotum and towards the navel. Then take a wide-bladed knife and cut the skin of the scrotum from the middle lengthwise, almost reaching the pubic hair.
And make the cut straight and parallel to the line that divides the scrotum in two until you reach the white peritoneum, then carefully peel it off without damaging it. Take care not to cut too much, and your peeling should be more from the side that adheres to the testicle.
Then, spread the water-filled peritoneum widely and remove all the water. Then separate the edges of the incision with retractors and lift the peritoneum upwards without touching the tunic of the testis, and cut the peritoneum as much as possible, either in one piece or in pieces.
Especially concerning his delicate side, if you do not cut him completely, you will not be safe from the return of water. If an egg emerges outside its skin during your work, once you have finished cutting the peritoneum, restore it and then stitch up the edges of the foreskin.
Then treat him as you would any other surgical patient until he recovers. But if the egg has been damaged by another disease, tie off the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent bleeding before cutting the testis from the cord and removing the egg. Then treat him according to what has been mentioned.
If water is collected on both sides, know that they are both hydroceles. Cut the other side as you did the first one, making sure to perform the same operation. Then wipe away the blood.
And insert into the incisions wool dipped in oil or rose oil, and cover it with another piece of wool dipped in a mixture of honey and oil. Place this on the testes and abdomen, then put over it a folded cloth for support. Then tie it above with a bandage that has six ends in this manner:
Then take two cloths, stitch them together and stuff them with loose wool as shown. Make the ties that will hold it in place from cotton or wet wool, gather them with a belt around the waist, and one of the ties should be brought up to the back.
And the second one goes towards the pubic area, with two ties on each thigh from below and the remaining two ties on the scrotum. Gather all the ties together with a belt around the waist. This support can also be made using wool instead of cutting with an iron.
It is also possible to take a fine skene's lancet and carefully cut the foreskin with it as described until the white peritoneum protecting the water emerges. Then take another m
which resembles the Greek letter 'omega,' then use it to push out that peritoneum carefully until all moisture is removed. Then extend the peritoneum with forceps and scrape off the outer layer using the makoate, cutting away as much of it as possible without damaging the testis.
Know that this procedure is safer and more distant from bleeding, and better than performing an incision. If you encounter inflammation of the wound, swelling, heat, or bleeding, treat each according to what has been mentioned earlier.
If the patient is fearful and cannot endure this procedure due to its severity, then use the cautery as I have described it.
Moisten the sponge and sit the patient on a high chair. Then make an incision below the swelling with a broad scalpel, making the opening wide enough for all the water to flow out. Then place cotton on the site and bind it.
Leave him until the water stops flowing, then treat it until the wound heals. If water does not flow out during cauterization, it is because the white membrane blocks the mouth of the wound.
At this point, insert a goose feather or the instrument used to extract water from sweetmeats (as shown earlier) into the wound, or slightly increase the size of the opening.
And know that water may return after six months or so. If it does, cauterize again in the same manner, and the patient should fast during this time.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Treatment of Incision on Flesh and Its Wound.
Know that an incision on this flesh is often fatal, hence it should be left alone. I mention its treatment and types of swelling here.
I say that many swellings can occur in the body parts where women are constituted, and this is due to various causes such as excessive heat rising to the uterus or injury. The color of the swelling will be like the color of the body, without any water.
The swelling may be hard, perhaps it is a solid tumor with dark color and no sensation. It could also be due to the entanglement and dilation of blood vessels as mentioned earlier, or dilation of veins.
If it is a swollen vein, pressing it with the fingers is not beneficial. However, if it is due to an inflammation of the veins, nothing will be achieved by pressing them with the fingers; this condition may affect other flesh as well.
Then cut the skin of the scrotum, lift the testicle upwards and remove it from the white tunica, sever the cord from its vessels, tie the vessels, and cut the cord after ensuring that all sides of the testicle are freed, especially if it has adhered to surrounding flesh.
If necessary, remove and cut the testicle. However, if there is adhesion to any part of the tunica or between vessels, all adherent tissue should be freed and removed by circular incision.
If there is excess flesh at the site of adhesion behind it, all should be cut away and the testicle removed as previously described. Then wash the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, apply other appropriate dressings until healed.
The Forty-Sixth Chapter.
Regarding the treatment of hernias accompanied by a prolapse:
Prolapse is a mass with some twisting, resembling a bunch of grapes, associated with relaxation of the abdominal wall and difficulty in movement and exercise. Its treatment is similar to that mentioned earlier for strangulated hernias.
But it is necessary to mention the procedure as done by earlier practitioners. Thus, I say that the patient should sit on a high chair and the spermatic cord should be pushed downwards. Then grasp the skin of the scrotum along with the vessels near the penis using your fingers.
A helper should pull it strongly downwards while you grasp the skin and vessels. Then make a curved incision along the side of the vessels using a wide, sharp scalpel until the vessels are exposed. Then strip them from all sides as mentioned earlier for ligating blood vessels in abscesses, and insert a curved needle with double thread into them.
Tie it first at the points where prolapse occurs and also tie it at its distal end. Then make a standing cut along the length of the body and remove the accumulated, foul, purulent fluid from it.
Then treat the hemorrhoids as you would any other wound that requires prolonged healing to avoid damaging the vessels that nourish one of the testicles. It is not permissible to expose all the vessels to the air lest the testicle be deprived of its nutrient. Prior to cutting the vessels, they will rot and no benefit shall come thereof
Chapter Fifty-Five
In treating varicose veins
The occurrence of these varicosities is due to a fissure that appears in the extended peritoneum on the abdomen, near the sides of the navel, from which the vein extends to one of the testicles.
This hernia occurs either due to a rupture of the peritoneum or its extension, and both types have many causes such as trauma, jumping, shouting, lifting heavy objects, etc. If it is due to an extension of the peritoneum, it usually happens gradually over a long period of time.
If it is due to a rupture of the peritoneum, it happens suddenly and the tumor appears deep under the skin. However, if it is due to an extension of the peritoneum, it occurs gradually over time and there may be pain present from the beginning. The tumor will appear different externally near the skin.
This happens when the vein and its tributaries protrude from the peritoneum, exiting the body. This condition is called varicocele-thrombosis. The vein may also contain feces which can become trapped there, leading to the patient's demise.
This condition causes severe pain and cramping, especially during exertion. It is dangerous to use iron for its treatment, so caution should be exercised. The treatment consists of having the patient manually push the protruding vein back into the abdomen if possible.
Then, have the patient lie on their back in front of you and raise their legs. Pull the skin over the scrotum upwards and make a longitudinal incision through the entire length of the scrotal skin using scissors. Insert retractors into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open it.
The incision should be wide enough to remove the testicle. Then, carefully dissect the parietal tunics under the scrotal skin until the white, tough peritoneum is exposed on all sides. At this point, insert your index finger behind the testicle.
Between the white peritoneum which is under the skin of the testicle and the second one, which is used for adhesion behind the testicle, then fold it with your right hand into the scrotal skin while simultaneously pulling up the white peritoneum with your left hand and lifting the testicle together with the peritoneum towards the incision.
Then order the servant to pull up the testicle and let go of the adhesion behind it completely, then search with your finger to ensure there is nothing twisted from the intestine in the white, solid peritoneum; if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads, insert it into the end of the peritoneum under the scrotal skin near the incision, then cut off the excess thread ends so that there are four threads remaining. Then tie them together in a reef knot and bind the peritoneum we mentioned is under the scrotal skin tightly on both sides, then also wrap and tie the thread ends tightly so that nothing can reach the blood vessels supplying it. So that no inflammation occurs from it and also a second ligature is made outside the first one, about two fingers away from it, and after these two ligatures, leave about one finger's length of peritoneum under the scrotal skin.
So that no inflammation occurs from it and also a second ligature is made outside the first one, about two fingers away from it, and after these two ligatures, leave about one finger's length of peritoneum under the scrotal skin. And cut off the rest completely around and remove the testicle with it, then make an incision below the scrotal skin allowing blood and serum to flow out as described earlier, then use cotton soaked in oil and place it in the wound and use the stitch we described.
Also, cauterize the white peritoneum we mentioned after cutting it carefully to prevent bleeding, as this often occurs, and leave the stitch until it falls by itself; if its fall is delayed, facilitate it with hot water and bear upon it what is necessary until it falls.
And then treat the wound like other wounds until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
In cases of rib fractures, I have not seen anyone dare to treat them with iron. The ancients mentioned that they should be treated like those connected to the diaphragm, binding the vessels carefully after cutting them below.
Then cut in the middle and treat the swelling until the vessels fall out, and then treat the wound as mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Six
In the Hernia that occurs in the scrotum.
A hernia may appear in the scrotum as we have mentioned, but it does not descend towards the anus at all, or if it does, it is easy to reduce and always returns.
However, if left for a long time, the opening in the peritoneum increases until the intestines and hernias descend into the scrotum, appearing as an extension of the peritoneum that is in the scrotum. For it stretches out, then becomes relaxed and causes swelling, so treat it with cautery as described above.
It may also be treated with iron on this condition: the patient lies on their back before you, then make a horizontal incision over the swollen hernia, about three fingers wide. Then push the peritoneum underneath the skin aside.
Until the white peritoneum is exposed. Take a probe and place it on the protruding peritoneum, pushing it into the abdomen as far as possible. Then suture the two openings of the peritoneum onto the probe and sew them together.
Then cut off the end of the probe without cutting the peritoneum at all or touching the testicles or anything else, as I have taught you in treating intestinal hernias. Then treat it like other wounds.
If the sutures are removed and the wound heals, then the peritoneum will contract and the hernia will not recur.
Cautery is better in this case because it is closer to safety.
Chapter Eighty-Six
On relaxation of the foreskin
The foreskin often relaxes in some people without the tissues inside also relaxing, which is unsightly. So, if someone wants to treat it, they should make the patient lie on their back.
It cuts away all the loose skin on the thick skin, then brings together the lips. If you wish to stitch first, sew three or four stitches in the loose skin and ensure them, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it like other wounds until it heals and the sutures fall off,
Chapter Ninety-Six
In Castration.
Castration is forbidden in our religion.
Therefore, I do not intend to mention it in this book of mine. However, I have mentioned it for two purposes: firstly, so that the doctor may know about it if asked; and secondly, because we often need to castrate some animals for our own benefit.
Castration can be done in two ways: either by cautery or by cutting. The method using cautery is performed as follows: sit the animal in warm water until its genitals relax and soften.
Then cauterize it with your hand until it melts away and cannot be felt. As for castration by cutting and severing, it is preferable to hold the animal and squeeze its scrotum with your left hand, then tie the cords and make a single cut on each testicle.
So that when the testicles come out, cut them off after peeling them, leaving nothing of the membranes except for the thin membrane that is on the vessels. This method of castration is better than the one done by cautery.
Because cauterization may leave some testicle tissue, which causes the animal to desire copulation. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy
On treating hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two types: one where it appears externally as a vulva with hair, resembling a woman's vagina; the other is located inside the scrotum, where urine may also flow from it.
In women, there is one type: a small penis-like structure grows above the vulva on the pubic area, resembling a man's glans penis. Both types are treated as follows:
The two types of men and the one type of women should have those superfluous flesh cut until their scars disappear, then treat them like other surgeries until they heal. But for the second type of men who emits urine in a foreskin, there is no procedure nor any cure at all.
The Seventy-First Chapter
Regarding circumcision and cutting away excess flesh from women's genitals.
The foreskin may exceed its natural state, becoming thickened and repulsive in appearance, and in some women it may become so large that it resembles a man's penis and can be used for sexual intercourse.
It is necessary to hold the foreskin with your hand or forceps and cut it, without cutting too deeply at its root lest there be bleeding.
Then treat it like other surgeries until it heals, and as for the excess flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And it may prolapse externally, resembling a hernia. Therefore, some early physicians called it 'the disease of the prolapse,' and it should be cut like circumcision, regardless of its size, and treated until it heals.
The Seventy-Second Chapter
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are when a woman's vulva is not ruptured or has a small rupture, and this may be either natural at birth or acquired due to some cause, with the acquired type being either excess flesh that has grown.
Or thin or thick peritoneum, located either inside the womb, on its sides, above or below it, preventing sexual intercourse and pregnancy, as well as childbirth, and possibly preventing menstruation. The knowledgeable midwife can determine this.
If the obstruction is visible and close by, search for it with your fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is made of thin peritoneum and is near the labia, immediately cut it open by making an incision like the opening of the vulva, then place your thumbs from both hands inside.
The woman lies on her back with her legs spread, then she pulls the labia forcefully until the thin peritoneum is torn open and the obstruction opens. Then take some wool soaked in oil and place it on the spot, and have sexual intercourse every day to prevent the wound from healing again.
If the spleen is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide scalpel resembling a fig leaf. If the bridge is made of flesh, adhere it to the clamps and sever it; have remedies at hand to stop bleeding without cauterization, such as aloe, shilajit, and wax mixed with egg whites.
Then use a wide brass tube to prevent the wound from closing quickly, hold it in place for several days and apply a dry linen dressing. Then treat according to other methods of healing until it heals; sometimes there may be another flesh growth in the uterus which should not be cut as described.
If it is not a cancerous tumor, the cancerous tumor that occurs in the uterus should never be treated with iron.
Chapter Seventy-three.
In treating piles, warts and red blisters appearing on women's genitals.
As for piles, it is the dilation of blood vessels until they discharge much blood continuously. When piles become wartsy, I have mentioned its types and signs elsewhere.
I say that piles and warts, if they are in the depth of the uterus and have not appeared externally, there is no treatment with iron for them. But those that appear at the mouth of the uterus can be treated.
It is forbidden for a woman to enter a cold house, then stretch the warts with a nail or rough cloth and cut them at their roots. Then apply one of the blood-stopping drugs without cauterization.
Such as aloe, shilajit, wax and the like. Then raise her legs against the wall for a while then dip them in cold water. If bleeding persists, seat her in a tub of samag, pomegranate peel, carob pods and the like. Then take some barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar.
And anoint her back with it. If bleeding stops, wrap the lumbar spine and breasts tightly without restriction. Then take some cotton wool, dip it in a decoction of purslane or colostrum or cucumber juice mixed with carob syrup and apply it to the spot.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with an ointment until it heals. As for a red boil, it resembles the heads of thorns in appearance and should not be cut according to what was mentioned regarding warts. Treat it until it heals.
The Forty-seventh Chapter.
Regarding the tumor that appears in the uterus.
A variety of tumors may appear in the uterus, such as cancer, calcified growths, ulcers, warts, eating sores, polyps, varicose veins, fissures, and hot swellings. All these diseases and their types and symptoms have been mentioned in the classification.
If we discuss in this chapter the hot tumor that appears in the uterus, especially if it is one of those tumors that gather and become hard like iron, do not examine it. If the pain of the tumor at its onset is severe with inflammation and fever.
And if it appears red, do not hurry with its incision. Treat it with what promotes ripening until these symptoms subside. Then, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And she should gather her legs towards the lower abdomen, with her thighs wide apart. Her arms should be placed under her knees and tied together with a suitable band.
Then, the midwife should sit on the right side. She should use the instrument for opening the mouth of the uterus, whose image is shown later. When using this instrument, it is important to estimate the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed its depth.
If the instrument hurts her, then if it is too deep for the uterus, place pads on the lip of the cervix to prevent the whole instrument from entering the depth of the uterus. The loop that runs through the instrument should be at the top side.
And you hold the instrument while the assistant turns the loop until the cervix opens. If the tumor appears and is touched by hand, it should be cut at its head with a wide scissor if it is soft. Once all the contents have been expelled.
It is necessary that a soft wick, soaked in rose oil or green oil with some wax, be inserted into the wound and the wick should exit from the opening of the neck of the uterus. Then, pure wool soaked in boiling water mixed with bread dough should be applied externally on the uterus and the groin.
Then treat it two days later with the ointment suitable for this until it heals.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by injecting honey water, then water boiled with celery or long pepper seeds. Then return to using the ointment if the discharge is hidden and entering the uterus.
It is not permissible to treat it with cauterization by iron, but rather treat it as mentioned in this section.
Chapter Seventy-Five.
On teaching midwives how to treat live fetuses that emerge abnormally.
The midwife must first know the signs of natural labor. These include: if the woman begins to push downwards and feels an urge to breathe deeply, and she finds relief in her pains.
If the fetus emerges quickly, know that this is a normal birth with the head emerging first, followed by the umbilical cord or attached to it. If you see these signs, do not press on her belly to speed up its emergence.
But if it emerges head-first, the umbilical cord will also come out with it and should be cleaned thoroughly. Any other position is abnormal and reprehensible, as the fetus may emerge feet-first or hands-first before the head.
The midwife must be skilled and careful in all these matters to avoid errors and mistakes.
And I have described all these shapes and the remedies for each, so that you may refer to them when a fetus emerges head-first but the woman is struggling with labor pains and has weak contractions. Then make her sit on a chair and tell women to support her.
Wash the uterus with cooked fenugreek and wet cloths. Then, insert a small probe between her fingers and cut the umbilical cord until it bleeds, squeezing her belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, one should inject the woman with frankincense juice mixed with castor oil. Then she is to be ordered to sneeze and cough using henbane, while her mouth and nose are held closed. The child will then exit immediately. If a hand of the fetus comes out first, they should gently push it back slightly.
If entry is not attained, place the woman on a pulpit and elevate her legs above. Then shake the pulpit on the ground while the woman holds on to prevent falling. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and gently pull them out, as the fetus emerges feet first. Once the fetus emerges feet first, do not push its legs up but turn it slightly until it is positioned correctly, then take one of its legs and gently extend it.
If they come out up to the thighs, command her to sneeze and cough using henbane so that it comes out. If it does not come out as described, gently fold the fetus back until it returns to its natural position, at which point it will exit smoothly. If it still does not come out despite all these measures,
Take equal amounts of saliva from the dog's mouth, frankincense juice, and castor oil. Mix them with tragacanth gum powder in a mortar and pestle until smooth. Then apply it to the woman's vulva and lower abdomen before placing her in warm water up to the navel.
If you see that her lower part has softened, prepare a compress of myrrh for her to hold. If she holds it for some time, seat her on a chair and make her sneeze while holding her mouth and nose closed, gently pressing her lower abdomen. The fetus will then emerge immediately, coming out on its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this manner, gently insert its hands, then have the woman lie on her back with her hips elevated and legs hanging down while lying on a bed. She should bring her knees up to her chest, then gently press her abdomen. Then remove what is under her legs of the cushions until she is elevated at the bottom. If the child does not come out, then take both of her legs entirely and shake them vigorously, then press upon the uterus a little bit by little until the child ascends above. Then the midwife enters her hand and arranges the child a little bit by little.
The woman is commanded to squat so that the child comes out. The exit of the child is resisted and delivered with one hand, holding it in its hand if it cannot be returned. If she cannot return her hand, then make the woman stand up and walk. If she cannot walk, then lie down on.
Then lie her on her bed and shake her legs vigorously. Then use the suppository that I have described from the medications. If it takes effect, then seat her on a chair. Then treat in returning the hand and arranging the child in the natural way, and make the woman sneeze, commanding her to squat until it comes out.
The exit of the child is upon its back with hands spread out and its face towards its mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife takes hold of the hand of the child, then turns it a little bit by little and arranges it gently. When it stands still, then apply on it what we have described from ointments and suppositories before its birth.
Then make her move a little bit. When she does that, seat her on the chair and command her to lean towards the right side. Then make her squat and sneeze with henna, for it will come out standing upright on its hip.
If it descends to the mouth of the uterus in this manner along with the placenta, then cut the placenta with your finger until it is emptied of its moisture. If it sticks to the face and neck of the child, then cut it from its source so that it does not suffocate and die. Then push the child back inside until it assumes its proper position.
Command the woman to squat several times until it comes out easily. The exit of twins or multiple fetuses, know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four may live, but this is rare. As for five, it is against nature and they never live.
[The twins] are surrounded by a single placenta, and though they may be many, they separate through a partition between them, fastened at the navel of each. They emerge like a single fetus, easily and naturally, or in an abnormal manner as we have described.
If some [twins] are difficult to deliver at birth, and thus deviate from the normal shapes we have mentioned, treat them as we have described. Let the midwife be gentle and proceed with care and patience, adapting her technique to each situation in order to ensure safety.
It has been reported that embryos in the womb may fall out, sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even more than ten. I have personally witnessed a woman who aborted seven and another who aborted fifteen, all of them formed.
Praise be to Allah the All-Knowing. This is all knowledge that should be possessed by a midwife, for she may encounter such cases one day and thus deal with them appropriately.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
Regarding the delivery of a stillborn fetus.
If you have treated the stillborn fetus according to what was mentioned in the previous section, but it did not emerge and you were forced to intervene manually, then look: if the woman is strong and healthy with no signs of symptoms that cause fear of harm, she should lie down on her back on a bed.
And her head should be tilted downward and her legs raised. An assistant should hold or tie down her body on both sides so that her body does not move when the fetus is pulled out.
Then moisten the mouth of her womb with damp cotton wool soaked in honey, gum tragacanth, and ground linseed seeds. The midwife should also moisturize her hand with these substances before gently inserting it into the womb to locate suitable positions for inserting the forceps among the parts of the fetus.
Then look: if the fetus is presenting headfirst, insert the forceps into its eyes, throat, mouth, palate, cheeks, beard, or armpits, or near its ribs or hips.
If his descent is upon his legs, then it is in the groin and middle buttocks. It is necessary to hold the cannula with the right hand and its curve should be between the fingers of the left hand. Then gently insert the hand and pierce the cannula into some of those places mentioned.
Until you reach something empty, then pierce another cannula or a third one if necessary, so that the traction is even and does not lean towards any direction. Then extend it in a straight manner, but do not extend it only in a straight line; rather move it towards all directions.
It is not easy to extract it as done in the case of an abscess. Between this, it is necessary to relax the traction. If any part is obstructed, then grease some fingers with oil and insert them from that side to rotate what is obstructed. If some of the fetus comes out, then move the cannulas to other places.
Raise it a little and do this until the entire fetus comes out. If one hand comes out before the other and cannot be pushed back due to its tightening, then wrap a cloth around it and pull it until it all comes out, then cut it.
Either at the wrist joint or at the elbow, and you should do this with the other hand and the feet as well. If the head of the fetus is large and there is pressure on it during delivery or if there is water accumulated in its head, then insert a pointed scissors between the fingers.
And cut the head with it so that water comes out or use the instrument called 'Al-Mishdak' whose image is shown along with other instruments in the following chapter.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head, you should cut the skull or crush it with 'Al-Mishdak' as mentioned earlier. Then extract the bones using forceps. If the head comes out and is stuck at the neck, then make an incision until the chest cavity collapses.
If the chest adheres at that time, if the chest does not adhere and there is no way out, then cut as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is warm or there is heat in it, then bathe it until the moisture comes out.
If the fetus is on its back, its extraction is easy and pushing it towards the mouth of the womb is simple. But if it is compressed in the abdomen or chest, it must not be pulled out by a cloth wrapped around the hand until the abdomen or chest has been opened so that what is inside can flow out.
If the rest of the organs have been removed and the head has returned but is obstructed, let the midwife insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, she should enter her hand into the neck of the womb, seek out the head with it, grasp it with her fingers and pull it towards the mouth of the womb. Then she should insert a tube or two tubes and pull it out with them.
If the mouth of the womb has adhered to a hot tumor that is projecting, it should not be handled roughly. Rather, at this point, moist compresses should be used and poultices applied, sitting in warm water that relaxes and softens.
And if the fetus is on its side, if possible it should be laid flat using what has been mentioned for live fetuses. But if this is not possible, then it should be cut and removed. Nothing of the afterbirth should be left inside at all. After you have finished treating it, use what has been mentioned for the treatment of hot tumors that appear in the wombs.
If bleeding appears, let her bathe in constricting waters and use other treatments. I have seen a woman who became pregnant, but the fetus died inside her, then she conceived again afterwards.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time she developed a tumor in her womb which swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus. I was called to treat her and treated her for a long time without the wound healing. Therefore, I applied some strong drawing ointments.
So a bone came out from the place, then after some days another bone came out. I was amazed by this because the belly is not a place where there are bones. I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus. So I searched the wound and found many bones of the head of the fetus.
I continued this until I extracted many bones from it, and the woman was in the best of health. She remained so for a considerable time, with only a slight discharge issuing from the place. This is the remarkable case I have reached.
This contains knowledge and assistance for what the practicing physician attempts by hand in treatment.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
It includes images of the tools needed for delivering a fetus.
Image of a screw used to dilate the mouth of the womb:
This dilator, with which books are leveled, has screws at both ends; however, this screw should be gentler than the dilator and made either of ivory or ebony. Each wooden part should have a thickness of two fingers.
Each has a length of one and a half cubits, with two projections in the middle, made of the same wood, each about half a cubit long or slightly more, with a width of two fingers or slightly more. These are the projections.
These are the ones that enter into the mouth of the womb to dilate it when using the screws. Here is another tool for this purpose, gentler and lighter:
It is made of ivory or ebony in the shape of tongs, except that it has two projections at its tip, each about one cubit long and two fingers wide. When you wish to dilate the womb with it,
Seat the woman on a bed with her legs dangling, knees apart. Insert these projections into the mouth of the womb, with your hand holding the tool lower down between her thighs, then open it like tongs according to how much you wish to dilate the womb. Until the midwife achieves what she desires. Here is another screw mentioned by earlier authors:
Image of the cannon used to expel the fetus:
Image of the hook used to grasp and pull out the head of the fetus:
It resembles a pair of scissors with teeth at its tip, as shown. It can also be made like tongs with saw-like teeth to cut and tear.
An illustration of a cannon also:
An illustration of a net:
This net has some thickness to prevent it from breaking when pulling out the fetus, an illustration of a double-mouthed net:
An illustration of two wide scissors for cutting the fetus:
This tool, the more types it has and the better equipped the craftsman is with them, the quicker his work becomes and the greater his reputation among people. Therefore, do not disdain any tool that you may need.
Chapter Eighty-Seven:
In expelling the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, order the midwife to grasp herself, then plug her with a tampon and pull your hand on its mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, otherwise take as much as you can.
And pierce the lid of the pot with a hole, place in it opened herbs like fennel and rue and hyssop and basil and silique and celery and celandine each or some of these drugs and immerse them in water and put them on fire then place one end of a silver tube on the hole of the pot's lid and the other end in the mouth of the uterus.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then plug as we have said. If the placenta remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in oil of rose or spittle.
Then she inserts her hand into the vagina and searches for the placenta. If it is found, grasp it and gently pull it out. If it is attached deeply in the uterus, insert the hand as described until you find the placenta, then gently pull it out with care.
So that the uterus does not fall out due to excessive pulling, but rather move it gently to the sides right and left, then increase the amount of pulling gradually until it comes out and detaches. If the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have described the treatment with plugging and pot treatment and herbs.
If despite all that has been described it does not come out, beware of violence in pulling again, but rather tie what has come out from it to the mouth of the uterus to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with the four ointment plaster. It will rot it after a few days.
And it dissolves and comes out until it has rotted, for then a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, which harms the patient. Therefore, it should not be used.
And some predecessors have tried using incense of herbs and dried figs, an image of the apparatus used for vaporizing it in cases of menstrual obstruction and retained placenta, etc.
It is made of brass or copper, shaped like a funnel. The narrow end is placed over the vulva and the wide end over fire containing incense on embers. Hold it until the incense finishes, then replace with fresh incense.
Chapter Ninety-Seven
In treating an unperforated anal fistula.
Many boys are born with an unperforated anus, which is plugged by a thin membrane. It is not permissible for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, but rather she should use a sharp probe to avoid harming the muscle.
Then place on it a sponge soaked in syrup and oil, then treat with ointment until healed. If you fear that it may close again, insert a brass tube into the hole and remove it when the child wishes to defecate.
And if the anus becomes obstructed due to healing of a wound or tumor, do not cut into that scar tissue. Rather, treat it with the aforementioned treatment and ointment.
Chapter Eighty
Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur below are complex and hardened, near the anus externally or in the space on one side. They may be singular or plural.
If that complexity opens, a clear watery discharge or thin pus may flow from it. Some of these fistulas may extend to the bladder and rectum, while others do not. The connected ones can be identified by the passage of feces and wind during defecation.
And sometimes worms may come out of it. If they are in the space, they may extend to the bladder and urethra, or to the hip joint and scrotum. Also, those connected to the anus can be identified without being connected.
Insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the bladder. If there is no obstruction in the bladder, then insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair probe if there is.
If you do not feel the probe or hair with your finger and there is no release of feces, gas, or discharge as mentioned earlier, then know that it is obstructed. Proceed to treatment.
If the bladder is open into the bladder or the urethra, then its discharge will be through urine. If it's open to the hip joint or the prostate gland, then the probe will reach there.
If it is not obstructed by bone, and there is pain on one side with continuous discharge of pus that does not improve with treatment and does not adhere with ointment, then these open bladders are incurable.
And the treatment for these open bladders is futile, as those who attempt it are ignorant doctors. However, those that are not open and not chronic can be cured by iron, as I will describe and have proven.
Place the patient on their back with legs raised and knees bent. Insert a copper or lead probe into the urethra until it reaches the bladder, so you know where to stop. If the patient feels the probe near the anus, do not insert your finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe has entered by itself, exposed and without feeling any resistance between your finger and it, then know for certain that it is open. Do not waste effort on it, as there is no cure for it, as we have said.
It has been said that some people are cured by heating a thin ironing stone according to the size of the bladder and inserting it into the urethra until it reaches near the anus, then repeating this two or three times.
Until you know that all the excess, thick flesh resembling a bird's quill has burnt off. Then treat with hot oil to remove the burnt flesh and apply adherent ointments. If it heals.
Otherwise, he will not recover without it forever. If you inserted the trocar but it did not reach your finger inside the abscess because there was a thick barrier of flesh or peritoneum between them and you saw the pulsation beneath the skin then tear the skin from its beginning. Then, as you pass through the incision with the trocar being in the pulsation until you reach where the tip of the trocar ended and it gets released and falls off. Then cleanse those rotten flesh resembling a feather pipe leaving nothing of it.
Then treat it with caustic ointments until it heals. If blood overpowers you and hinders your work in cutting that flesh, then the best thing to do quickly is cauterize or use a sharp medicine because cauterizing by fire has two advantages: burning the excess flesh.
Then stop the bleeding and dry the moisture, then treat it with a linen bandage dipped in butter or powdered sulfur mixed with oil until it becomes inflamed. Then remove those burnt flesh through pus. Then dress the wound with caustic ointments that soften hard flesh.
And these are the medicines that cause coagulation and drying. If it heals, then it is healed, and there will be no recurrence. But if the pulsation has extended to the depth of the abscess and is far from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the abscess and search with it.
If you feel the trocar and there is a barrier of peritoneum or flesh between it, and it was close to penetrating, then its treatment is only by patience and hope. And in this case, one of three methods should be used: cauterization as mentioned earlier.
Or you can cut it until you reach its bottom so that you can insert the linen bandage and treat from nearby without cutting too much to avoid damaging the muscle surrounding the abscess, causing uncontrollable passage of feces. Then treat it as mentioned before, perhaps it will heal.
Or pierce that barrier after cutting it near the abscess as mentioned earlier, either with the trocar or another sharp-pointed instrument. Then cleanse all the rotten flesh in the incision as much as you can.
Then, sew up the entire wound along with the split and upper mouth until it closes, leaving the anus open inside the rectum. This will be easier for the patient, although the anus may remain sutured in this manner.
If the speculum is inserted into the anus and leans towards the side of the rectum towards the body's surface with the skin, then use a pierced speculum like the carpenter's awl in this fashion:
Insert a thread made of five or similar strands into the speculum, then insert the speculum with the thread into the anus until it reaches its depth. If it protrudes at the edge of the rectum from inside near.
Then pull out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the rectum and pulling out the end of the thread. Gather all its ends and tie them, leaving it for a day or two. Whenever the thread cuts through the flesh, tighten it well until those tissues between the ends of the threads fall off and drop, then treat the wound until it heals.
If the mouth of the anus is not protruding, then protrude it as much as possible without going too deep lest you cut the muscle. Then treat it as mentioned until it heals.
The pointed end of the spinal lancet should be very sharp to incise the anus, while the other end should not be sharp lest it cut unnecessarily, as you can see:
Chapter One Hundred and Eighty.
On the incision of haemorrhoids that bleed profusely, their excision, and the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the rectum resembling red grapes, or they resemble raisins and vary in size, with blood flowing from them constantly.
And they may be single or numerous, and may be external to the rectum, with their tips protruding except for those that are outside the rectum which are usually less moist, secreting yellow water or little blood, appearing always pale in color like the skin.
The treatment for those inside the rectum is to order the patient to evacuate and cleanse until the hemorrhoids appear. Then quickly grab them with forceps or pinch them with your fingers, and cut them at their base. If the forceps do not adhere due to moisture and relaxation.
Remove it with a coarse cloth or a piece of softened leather or pull it out with your fingers, then cut it. Afterwards, sprinkle some sharp salts on it to serve as cautery or proceed as mentioned earlier under the chapter on cautery.
Then treat it with other treatments until it heals. If the womb does not come out, inject the patient with a mixture containing a little honey to wash out what is inside the womb and help it come out quickly when the patient empties. Then, tie off the prolapsed uterus.
Either take it with your fingers or suspend it with forceps and cut it, then treat it as mentioned earlier until it heals. If you dislike cutting with iron, use a curved needle instead.
Then pull the mole upwards and pierce its base on the other side with a needle, wrap the ends of the thread under the needle while it is inserted, tighten the thread pulling the mole tightly, tie the knot and remove the needle. Do this for all moles but leave one unpunctured.
To discharge some blood from it, then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cypress oil on the womb and leave the patient still until it falls. If the prolapsed uterus falls off, treat it with ointments and other treatments until it heals.
As for treating piles, it often appears due to inflammation and constipation. If it persists without improvement despite medication, scrape off the hard skin with a razor or your fingers until it becomes soft and moist, and remove the upper layers that prevent adhesion.
Then treat it until it heals as usual. If it does not heal, scrape it harder than before until it bleeds well and peels off, then treat it again; it will heal.
Chapter Two Eighty.
On the treatment of ingrown and non-ingrown nails, hard moles, and warts.
A screw is nothing but a round knot resembling the head of a nail, found in all parts of the body, especially at the soles of the feet and toes. Pain is felt from it during walking.
It is necessary to incise around the screw, grasp it with tweezers or forceps and remove it from its root, then treat it as mentioned earlier in this chapter. As for dry warts, each one of them is a small rough, diffuse, round elevation on the surface of the body.
Warts often appear on the hands of children. Their treatment involves squeezing them and cutting them off, or removing them by tying a silk thread or hair around them until they fall off. Alternatively, you may cauterize them with fire or apply a caustic drug as mentioned earlier.
The inverted and non-inverted warts may be removed using the instrument mentioned earlier in the treatment of the ant. The ant is a small, diffuse, thick node on the surface of the body that goes deep into it. When it gets cold, one feels something similar to the bite of an ant.
In the body as a whole, and more commonly in the hands, there is an anthrax. Its treatment involves taking a quill from an ostrich or eagle feather and making it into a tube around the anthrax until its circumference fits snugly. Then rotate your hand with the tube to incise around the anthrax.
And it goes deep into the flesh and removes the anthrax from its root. Alternatively, you may use a copper or iron tube in this manner:
The upper part of the tube is closed and flattened to facilitate gripping and twisting it with the fingers. Alternatively, you may cauterize the anthrax as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter Eighty-Three.
Chapter Eighty-Three: On the various instruments used for injecting remedies into cases of hemorrhoids, diarrhea, and dropsy.
The syringe may be made of silver, bronze, or polished or chased copper. They are made in various sizes according to the users' needs. Syrup used for treating young children, especially those with narrow or obstructed anuses, is quite gentle. It resembles a large syringe.
The upper part that holds the catheter is wide with a stop at its entrance for the catheter as you see. Its lower end, which enters the rectum, is smooth and rounded on one side there are two small holes, while on the other side there is one.
The diameter of the hole should be equal to or slightly thicker than the thickness of the reed. The catheter into which medicine is inserted, made from an animal's bladder or young goat's bladder, should resemble a small funnel with a width of about one shitra (a unit of measurement).
And it should be pierced with many holes, like a sieve, with one hole every fingertip thickness apart. Then, insert into these holes a closely woven thread of ten or twelve yarns folded over and gather the catheter like a funnel. After putting medicine inside, hold the top of the syringe tightly between the two stones with a tight grip. Then, squeeze it to inject. This is an illustration of the catheter and the hole.
And the method of administration is to fill the rectum or bladder with the medication while it is warm, taking care not to make it too hot or too cold. Then, the patient lies on their back and lifts their legs upwards.
And place a cloth or pad underneath him. Then, grease the tip of the catheter with oil, egg white, or barley mucilage, and insert it gently into the rectum. Then, a servant takes hold of the catheter with both hands and squeezes it firmly until all its contents are emptied into the intestines.
Then, remove the catheter and have the patient bring their legs to the wall. If the medication causes the need for evacuation, they should hold it back as much as possible. If the medication remains with them throughout the night, it will be more effective in treating piles (hemorrhoids). If used for treating diarrhea and causing urgency of bowel movements, repeat the enema until recovery.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the rectum, use a very gentle and smooth syringe similar to those used for children. This is an illustration of a gentle syringe with its skin drawn tight:
Chapter Eighty-Four
In the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the section on treating injuries like burns, and I am here mentioning their treatment by hand and drugs to perfection; so I say that wounds differ according to the thing by which the wound is caused and according to the place where it occurs.
The things by which wounds are caused are many, such as a blow from a stone or a cut from a sword or knife or a thrust from a spear or stake, or an arrow and the like among many other things.
And as for wounds according to their location on the body, there is the wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and the like of the organs.
And I will describe the treatment of some wounds as a guide and rule for other wounds, and I will begin with simple head wounds particularly because composite ones will be mentioned in the first chapter of this book.
So I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture of the bone, then if it is from a blow of a stone or the like and has only torn the skin but the wound is large and you fear hot inflammation for the patient, hurry and shave around the wound immediately. Do not delay that, and let out as much blood from him as possible if it does not hinder cauterization particularly if the blood coming out of the wound is slow, and let the cauterization be done on the opposite side of the wound.
And warn the patient against overeating and drinking, especially against rough foods. If cauterization is hindered by some obstacle, then let him reduce his food intake and avoid meat and drinks. And if hot inflammation occurs on the wound, apply a cloth soaked in olive oil alone or with the decoction of rue to it.
And if you have prevented the hot inflammation, then apply to the wound if it is fresh with its own blood and do not expose it to dry air which I will describe to you later. But if it has been exposed to dry air, apply some ointments to it.
Until pus comes out, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and is from a sword cut or the like and its lips do not meet with the forceps, then sew it up according to what I will describe in sewing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has been exposed to bone and adhered but its attachment is only slight, cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines that induce strong scar tissue to replace the skin. Order the patient to consume nourishing foods such as brains and game for strength.
If foulness occurs in the skin without adhering to the bone, cut off all the affected portion and throw it away. Then treat the wound. If there is an artery or vein bleeding in these wounds and the blood does not cease with medication, search for the artery.
If it does not heal, cauterize it with the scalpel and bind it. If necessary, when the previous methods are ineffective, evacuate until bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and numerous, simply smearing this ointment on them will suffice.
Before exposure to air, the ointment is made by taking one part of frankincense, two parts of gallnuts, and three parts of slaked lime or unslaked lime. Grind all ingredients together, sift, and apply to the wound, pressing firmly until it adheres well.
The wound is tied with thread, then a bandage is applied from above and left untouched until it heals. The lime can be used alone if frankincense and gallnuts are not available.
This action can also be performed on its veins in many large wounds, if correctly applied and tightened, provided the wounds are fresh with blood. However, if they have already been exposed to air, especially in summer.
There is no point in applying this ointment if you then apply other prepared ointments or a gruel of barley flour made with water and honey to encourage pus formation, as it will still need to be treated with other remedies until healed.
If a fracture of the bone occurs with the wound and it is minor, treat it with traction using weights. I have mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in the chapter on head surgery; there is no difference between treating wounds of the neck and simple wounds of the head.
If he has cut a nerve from the neck or an artery, if it is a nerve then there is no treatment for it other than to abstain from its care with something that causes severe constriction such as ginger and pitch and similar substances because they harm the nerve and cause it to spasm.
No cold substance should be placed on the wound, for the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain which is the noblest organ, therefore the remedies used for its treatment should be unctuous such as washed date honey diluted with sweet water or rose oil or turtledove grease.
If the wound is washed also with sweet water and other mineral stones in this manner, and if the wound is large then use suturing or press its lips with compresses until it heals.
If the wound has a depth and there is a cavity beneath it where pus has collected, then drain it at its lowest point. If an artery has been severed in the wound and blood is flowing profusely, cauterize it or tie it off or cauterize it if necessary.
If the wound has cut some or all of the tonsils and the uvula is severed, then gather the skin edges with sutures on the tonsillar pillar without touching the tonsils but instead preserve their natural shape, then tie it gently and leave it for a period.
Then treat it with remedies that cause constriction and drying until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, search for it. If there are bone fragments in it, remove them all or as many as possible. If you cannot, leave it until the wound softens and heals and makes its removal easy.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the dusting powder we have described. If bone appears in the wound and it becomes hard and turns into a scab, treat it according to what is mentioned in this book under the chapter of chest surgery and that between the shoulders.
If a wound is from a spear or a knife and you see that it has depth, observe. If air comes out when the patient breathes, know that it is a fatal wound. If there is no depth and it is fresh with blood, do not apply dusting powder at first nor compress it lest blood becomes trapped in its depth.
It extends to the heart, killing the patient. But make in it an attractive plaster and dissolve it during the day twice. If no ointment is available, put in the mouth of the wound an old cloth to absorb its secretions. And let the patient sleep on the wound.
If no discharge occurs within it, even if three days or more have passed without causing the patient convulsion, palpitations, or shortness of breath and other conditions appear good, then know that the wound is sound. Treat it with ligature, along with other treatments until it heals.
If it cannot be seen and the discharge continues, know that it has become a fistula. Treat it from its opening; let the patient lie on his wound to drain it. If the wound is in the chest or back, treat it as mentioned earlier with suturing.
If it is large or deep, if small, search the wound. If it has affected the bone and pieces have broken off, hasten to remove those fragments if they are pure. Otherwise, leave them alone until...
If the wound is infected, it facilitates removing the fragments. As for other wounds in various organs, their treatment follows what has been mentioned.
Chapter Eighty-Five.
In abdominal wounds and prolapse of intestines and its suturing.
A wound exposing the abdomen may be large or small, with varying degrees of difficulty; a large one may have intestines or several loops protruding, making their reinsertion and suturing difficult.
Even a small wound can pose another challenge, requiring more difficult reduction. If intestines do not protrude immediately upon injury and become edematous and thickened later, it becomes difficult to reduce them back into the abdomen. Therefore, the optimal wound is moderate in size as it does not pose this challenge like the two extremes.
Know that abdominal suturing has four aspects. The two common ones are suitable for abdominal and other bodily wounds, while the other two specialized ones are mainly used for abdominal closure but can also be applied to other wounds.
And I shall describe them for you one by one with explanation and clarification, so I say that if the wound is small and something from the intestines emerges and it is difficult to push back, this has two causes: either because of the smallness of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines were exposed to inflation due to the expulsion of air.
If it is like this, then it is necessary to warm it by dipping a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone or cooked with onion, celery, and fennel until the inflation dissolves.
And he may do this with a drink that has an astringent effect, which is better than water alone in dissolving the inflation. When you see that the inflation has dissolved, moisten the intestines with water cooked with rue or wild carrot, for it will facilitate its re-entry with ease.
If its return is still difficult after this treatment, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for cutting ligatures. The first treatment, if successful, is better than the incision, and one should resort to incision only after necessity and failure of other remedies. This is an illustration of the instrument:
The one end of the instrument is bent and limited, while the other end is not limited. The thin tip should not be too sharp like a lancet, but rather somewhat blunt, resembling a small awl as you see here. If the wound becomes wider and the intestines enter, then its return should not be in its natural form.
And its specific place, if you can manage it, is the best. But if the wound is wide and located in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head. If it is located in the upper abdomen, then he should keep his head and chest raised above his feet.
And similarly, if the wound is on one of the sides of the abdomen, then your aim and intention should always be to keep the side with the surgery higher than the other side. This is also how great surgeries and medium surgeries should be performed.
And as for small surgeries, place him according to what you can manage. Then prepare beside you an assistant who will hold the wound with both hands and gather its edges together, revealing a little at a time for the suturer.
Here is the method of common suturing: Take one or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave a thickness of skin like that of a finger nail at the edge of the cloth and insert a single needle without threading it with thread into the edge of the skin. And when sewing the peritoneum that is under the skin from inside until it appears from that side, having gathered both edges of the skin and the peritoneum together in four layers, then pull tight with a double thread around the needle on all sides so that the lips of the wound meet neatly.
Then leave a thickness like that of the finger again and insert another needle, then intertwine it with the thread as was done with the first needle, continuing thus until the entire wound is closed, using needles of moderate thickness.
For fine needles quickly cut the flesh and thick ones are difficult to penetrate the skin, so they should be of moderate thickness in both respects. Do not insert the needle too close to the edge of the skin.
Lest the flesh be quickly cut and the wound opens before healing, nor too far apart from stitching lest the wound refuses to heal. Then cut the ends of the needles so they do not hurt the patient during sleep, and make padding of linen cloth on each side to hold the needle ends.
And leave it until you know that the wound has healed. This method of stitching with needles is most effective in small wounds as they can be closed with one or two needles at most.
Or the method of second common stitching is to gather all four edges, namely the skin edge and the peritoneum edge, in one stitch using a needle with a medium thick thread, then when this needle has passed through all four edges, bring it back from the same side where you started.
So that the thread is interwoven from above the wound, making the stitching like the stitch used in sewing a purse, leaving a thickness of little finger between each stitch. This stitch is known to everyone.
With this stitching, the surgery was performed on a man in his abdomen who had been stabbed with a dagger. The cut of the surgery exceeded a span and approximately two spans of the middle intestine had prolapsed from his anus. The laceration was in the center of the abdomen.
He was discharged after his intestines remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in approximately fifteen days, and he was treated until he recovered fully. He lived many years afterward, active in all his affairs, despite physicians believing that he would never recover.
It is remarkable that I did not treat him with an ointment, as I was in a place where there were no available medications. Instead, I applied wet cotton twice daily to the wound and had it washed with honey water until it healed.
Of the two types of suturing, I recall one specifically as described by Galen: begin stitching from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. Proceed straight through the skin and muscle along the entire length of the abdomen.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on one side intact, inserted the needle into its other edge from inside to outside, and then passed it back through the same edge again from outside to inside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum on this side intact, inserting the needle into its other edge from inside to outside, and passing through it along with the peritoneum until you have pierced all of its edges.
Then begin again from this side, stitching with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side. Exit the needle at the nearby skin and then reinsert it into that same skin, stitching together the other edge of the peritoneum along with this edge of the omentum.
And exit the needle from the skin on this side, repeating this process until the entire wound is closed in this manner. The characteristic of this suturing is that it resembles the stitching of furriers sewing fur.
To stitch the peritoneum once on one side along with the skin edge and leave it unattached on the other side until empty, as Galen also described this second specific method of suturing.
He says that you should suture it in the manner that some healers do, by joining each part to its counterpart. The difficulty lies in bringing together the edges of the spleen and the edges of the liver.
You should insert the needle into the nearby edge of the liver from outside, and pass it through to the inside alone. Leave the edges of the spleen, then bring back the needle and pass it from outside to inside in both edges of the spleen.
And pass it from inside to outside in the other edge of the liver that is on the opposite side. This method of suturing is better than simple, common suturing, as this is what Galen has stated. Some have said that the abdomen can be sutured with two needles. This is so that you can pass a single thread through them both, starting by inserting the needle from your side and passing it to the other side. Then insert the other needle from the opposite side of it and pass it out on your side, just like sewing a bag.
Know that if the wound is in the center of the abdomen, its suturing will be more difficult than other parts of the belly. But as for treating the wound, its ruling is like that of other wounds, so if you catch it while it's still fresh with its blood before the air has altered it, return the intestines, suture and close it, then apply a meat poultice.
But if the wound has already been altered by the air, apply one of the ointments that you have prepared until it becomes inflamed and the sutures fall out and the spleen and liver adhere. Then treat it like any other wound until it heals.
If you do not have any remedies prepared, apply boiled cotton wool soaked in hot water to it from the beginning of inflammation twice a day as I have instructed you until it heals. For usually there is no other treatment needed for simple wounds except that you fear that the wound may affect the main organs.
It is recommended that you soak clean wool in moderately warm oil or rose fat and place it around the area between the armpit and thigh. If he feels pain or swelling in his abdomen, this often happens, so treat him with a laxative black drink.
If the gangrene has reached the intestine and caused a penetrating wound into its interior, know that the thick parts are easier to heal while the thin ones are more difficult.
And as for the intestine known as the 'fasting bowel,' it does not undergo healing through surgical intervention due to its abundance of vessels, bones, and thin tissue, and its close proximity to the nature of nerves. But if a prolapse occurs and is found still fresh and pliable, then it should be replaced according to how you would replace the intestine itself.
If it has passed some time and turned green or black, then do not tie it with a thread above the place where it has turned black lest it lead to bleeding. For there are vessels and arteries within the prolapse. Then cut off what is below that tie.
Leave the ends of the thread attached from below the wound, hanging outside so that it is easy for you to pull and remove them when the prolapse falls and the wound becomes inflamed. Concerning the wound that occurs in the intestine, if it is small...
...it can sometimes be tied in some people, as I have seen a man who was pierced with a lance in his abdomen, the wound being to the right of the stomach. The intestine became prolapsed and was protruding, emitting feces and wind. So I treated him without expecting recovery. I continued to treat him until he recovered and the site healed. When I saw that the site had healed, I feared some misfortune might happen inside him. However, nothing untowards occurred, and he remained in good health. It is said that this method is correct, as the patient can eat, drink, copulate, enter the bathroom, and serve himself. Some practitioners have mentioned that if a small wound appears in the intestine, it should not be sutured in this manner.
This method involves taking large-headed ants, then bringing the edges of the wound together and placing an ant with its mouth open on one edge. When it bites down and its head is cut off, it sticks and does not come apart. Then another ant is placed nearby.
She still does it by applying several ants according to the size of the wound, then she returns them and sutures the wound. Those heads remain stuck in the intestines until the intestines are healed and recover without causing any harm to the patient. It is also possible to suture the intestines with a fine thread.
After taking a thread from the sinew, one should remove it using tweezers. Then, tie a thin and twisted cotton thread to its end before inserting that thread into the needle. And thus, the sinew thread is used to suture the intestines and then returned into the abdomen. This method of suturing with ants and sinew is only done out of desperation and hope.
But if the tear is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thinner intestines, there is no remedy or cure for it.
Chapter Eighty-Six.
In treating catarrh and sneezing.
Know that any wound or tumor, if it persists and deepens until it becomes an ulcer and does not heal, constantly oozing pus, is generally called 'catarrh' in any organ. We also call it 'nasal catarrh.'
It is indeed a thick, turbid, solid, white fluid without pain, having a cavity like that of bird feathers.
Therefore, some have named it 'feather' due to its similarity in appearance. At times, it may be moist and constantly ooze pus, while at other times, the moisture might cease. This moisture can sometimes be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And as mentioned in the section on wounds, every ulcer that does not heal or become flesh-grown has one of nine causes: either insufficient blood in the body, or its thickness, or there being solid flesh inside it and at its edges preventing proper flesh growth. Or because the ulcer is foul and dirty, or because the ulcer itself is corrupt and its substance is of poor quality, or because the treatment used is inappropriate, or because there has been an outbreak of a contagious disease in the area, or due to some local peculiarity.
Or because the ulcer is foul and dirty, or because the ulcer itself is corrupt and its substance is of poor quality, or because the treatment used is inappropriate, or because there has been an outbreak of a contagious disease in the area, or due to some local peculiarity. In the city of Zaragoza, where diseases take time to mature and the healing of tumors is delayed naturally, either due to the presence of a single bone or multiple bones, I have demonstrated all these causes, their signs, and their treatments with medications in the division [of this work].
I should now inform you about the treatment of nasal polyps and catarrh, which occurs through manual operation. Know that polyps can occur in all parts of the body, some ending in large veins and arteries, others in nerves.
Or to the peritoneum, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to a rib from the ribs, or to a vertebra from the vertebrae of the back, or to a joint from the compound joints such as the hand and foot, and there are those that approach a principal organ...
If any of these polyps are of this nature, they are among the difficult diseases to heal that do not accept treatment and effort due to their difficulty and ignorance. However, if there are polyps that have not reached these places mentioned above, one can hope for and strive to treat them.
To determine this, take a probe made of copper or iron. If the polyp is straight, search for it with this. However, if there is a bend in the polyp, use a thin lead probe, as lead softens its body.
If upon entering it turns towards the bend, and if the polyp has many openings that cannot be discerned by the probe, then inject one of its mouths with liquid. The moisture will follow towards the other mouths and flow.
Then, thoroughly examine in whichever way you can to determine if there is bone or nerve nearby, or if the base of the polyp is far or near, or if it is a single polyp with many openings. Then, according to your ability to investigate and explore its presence, press on the spot with your finger.
And similar signs and causes that indicate the presence of a tumor. Once you have confirmed all this, then proceed with confidence to the treatment, which is to look (examine) if it happens.
The surgeon appears nearby or in a healthy remote location from the joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places mentioned earlier. He incises according to the aforementioned description and removes what is inside: the accumulation of pus, rotten flesh, and excess flesh.
And whatever grows in his mouth, such as flesh or warts and the like, treat it until it heals. If the wound is deep and straight, it is preferable to cut into its depth as much as possible before removing all the rotting flesh.
Then use the wick dressing with caustic drugs and insert it into the depth of the wound that you grasp with an iron instrument, doing so repeatedly until the medication consumes all the remaining corruption in the bottom of the wound.
Then apply the ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it heals. If it does not heal, repeat the procedure mentioned earlier. If the cause of the wound is bone and you confirm this, search for it and cut according to what I have instructed you, unless something prevents you from doing so.
If you expose bone and find some corruption or darkness, scrape it until its corruption disappears. Then treat it with what adheres to it until it heals. If it does not heal and the pus continues as before,
Know that you have not completely removed all the corruption, so uncover it again and scrape and clean it thoroughly. Then treat it again. If it heals, well and good. Otherwise, know that the corruption is deep and far-reaching, so uncover everything once more.
And thoroughly scrape and clean it with your utmost effort. If the bone was small and rotten, remove it using the gentle forceps suitable for that purpose.
If there are many bones, remove them all without leaving any behind with your utmost effort. If something prevents you from removing them due to ligaments, cut those ligaments and flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
If you are unable to remove the bones at that time, pack the wound with something that will protect it and leave it for a while until what is around the bones in terms of flesh and ligaments rots. Keep the wound clean so that the incision does not heal during your work.
Should you fear this, place upon it a cloth soaked in sulfur powder mixed with oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. For if these ligaments rot and the bones become softened, their removal and extraction will be easy.
If it is a single large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone, and only its tip has decayed, scrape it clean until the blackness and decay disappear, then cauterize the wound. But if a large portion of it has decayed and the decay has reached the marrow, it must be excised.
Cut off all of it until the decay ends, for then healing will occur until it unites. I shall tell you about a case of gangrene that appeared on a man's leg as an example and aid in your treatment; this man was elderly.
About thirty years old, he felt pain in his leg due to an internal cause until the matter reached the leg and it swelled and became inflamed, but there was no external cause. Then as time passed with the negligence of physicians, the abscess opened.
And much matter came out from it, and his treatment was neglected until the leg gangrened and many openings appeared from which pus flowed. Physicians treated him for about two years, but there was no one skilled in manual surgery among them.
Until he came to me, and I saw his leg with much pus flowing from those openings. The man had wasted away and his color was yellow. So I inserted a probe into one of the openings until it reached the bone, then I explored all the openings.
I found that they communicated with each other from all sides of the leg. So I incised over one of those openings until I exposed some bone, which was decayed and had eaten away and blackened and softened until the hole reached the marrow. Then I excised what was exposed to me.
And I removed the decayed bone, believing that there was no other decay in the bone besides what I had cut and excised. Then I applied cautery to the wound for a longer duration than usual, but it did not heal. So I returned and reopened the wound above the first incision.
I found decay connected to the bone, so I exposed what was visible of it and tried to force it out but it did not budge nor adhere. Then I uncovered it further but continued breaking off pieces of bone bit by bit until I cut about a span from the bone.
And I extracted it with forceps, then dressed the wound with medication which adhered quickly and healed completely. However, this repetition in the procedure was necessary due to the patient's weakness, inability to tolerate treatment, and fear of death because he suffered from excessive vomiting at all times.
And in the place of the bone, solid flesh grew and his condition improved in his body. His strength returned and he functioned well without any harm affecting him during walking. If a protruding bone was broken in some part of the body.
It is necessary to expose it in this manner: take a bandage, tie one end of it around the protruding bone and command someone to pull it upwards while preparing another bandage made of thick wool.
Then tie it around the flesh beneath the bone and pull its end downwards to draw the flesh down. Expose the flesh from the place where you intend to expose, so that the saw does not harm the flesh. Then place a plank or board underneath the bone from below.
For if you do this, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the decayed bone. It is necessary to expose only slightly above the place of decay so that there is no decay in the cavity of the bone appearing on its surface which would necessitate exposing it again.
If the bone is decayed but not protruding, rather connected to itself with decay in its midst or some parts of it, then expose the flesh from all its sides and place the board underneath. Then expose it from the first side where there is decay.
After finishing exposing one side, expose the other side keeping it slightly away from the decay as mentioned before. If the decay is in a joint, cut the decayed joint itself and expose the bone on the other side where it connects.
If the defect is in the joint of two bones, there is no remedy but scraping it off. But if the defect is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, its treatment is very difficult; nevertheless, one should scrape away and cleanse whatever defect appears.
And whenever a vein or nerve does not interfere, you should use any suitable saws and chisels to cut these bones according to their shape, position, thickness, fineness, size, smallness, hardness, and hollowness. Therefore, it is necessary to have for each type of work an appropriate tool for that work.
And know that the operations themselves may indicate the type of tool needed if you have extensive practice and knowledge of the arts of this craft, for expertise in surgery lies in having seen many cases of diseases. He may also devise for himself suitable tools for each disease, and I have depicted for you at the end of this chapter several such tools.
Make them as examples to follow and measure by them others, if Allah wills. Picture of a saw:
Picture of another saw:
Picture of a small saw:
Picture of a large saw:
This chisel has a head shaped like the head of a nail, with incisions like those on an Esculapian probe. It is used to scrape off the heads of joints if they become defective or for removing a large broad bone." Picture of another small chisel:
Picture of a wide chisel:
It is made with its upper bow and blade from iron, and its handle from a thick, tapering stick. Picture of a chisel with a hollow:
Picture of another fine chisel:
Picture of another chisel with a hooked tip:
Picture of a small chisel resembling a pestle:
Picture of another small cutter:
And its tip is like a awl that can be used in many places for scraping off bones, picture of a chisel suitable for scraping where bones are pierced.
A sharp triangular chisel is made from Indian iron, likewise all that has been mentioned regarding the saws and cutters should be made.
The Seventy-Eighth Chapter.
In cutting off limbs and separating bones.
If the extremities become putrefied, either due to an external cause or an internal one, and you have treated this corruption with medicinal treatment without success, and you find that the corruption is advancing in the member without ceasing.
It is necessary that you cut off that member where the corruption has reached, so that the patient may be saved thereby from death or great harm which is greater than the loss of the member. And a sign of this is when the member turns black as if it had been burnt by fire.
Or if it becomes putrid after turning black, so that this corruption advances towards the other member and begins to affect the body, then hasten to cut it off. Likewise, if the cause of corruption is due to the bite of some poisonous creatures such as scorpions or snakes or spiders, etc.
If the corruption or bite is in the tip of a finger, cut off the finger without delay lest the corruption spread to the hand. Similarly, if it affects the hand, cut it off at its root without delay lest the corruption spread and affect the arm.
And likewise, if it affects the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow in the joint itself. But if the corruption has reached towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all, for that would mean certain death for the patient. In such a case, resort to other treatments according to one's ability.
And do likewise with the leg if corruption affects the toe, cut off the toe at one of its joints. If it affects the sole of the foot, cut off the entire foot. If it reaches the knee, cut off the thigh at the knee joint.
If the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy except to leave it alone and submit the patient to death. To cut off or separate a member, tie a bandage below the place where you intend to cut, and another bandage above the place.
Have one assistant hold the lower bandage downwards and another assistant hold the upper bandage upwards. Then you strip away the flesh between the two bandages with a wide lancet until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or separate it. It is necessary to place cotton pads on all sides.
To prevent the saw from slipping off the intended spot and causing unnecessary pain and inflammation, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly cauterize or apply pressure with some absorbent cloth until it stops.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals. I will describe to you an example of this case, which occurred in the leg of a man who suffered blackness and burning like fire.
The corruption first appeared in his toe, then spread to the whole finger. When the man saw that the decay was progressing despite the intense pain and burning, he severed it at the joint, and it healed.
So, after a long period of time, the same corruption appeared in his middle finger. He came to me and I applied medicine to it after cleansing its body, but the decay did not abate and spread to the other finger.
Until the decay reached his hand, he asked me to amputate it, but I refused, hoping to cure it. I also feared that he might die from cutting off his hand because his strength was failing. He then gave up hope and returned home.
I heard that he eventually cut off his entire hand and recovered. I tell this story so that it may serve as an aid in similar cases, and as a guide for reference.
Chapter Eighty-Eight.
On treating sinuses and their injection with medications.
If a tumor appears in some fleshy member and persists for a long time until it bursts or bursts out and all its contents come out, leaving the place empty like a vessel.
And the skin over it is like a rag, having become thin and not much affected such that it does not affect bone, nerve or ligament. Therefore, it deserves to be called a 'sinus' and not a 'ulcer' unless its duration becomes prolonged enough to affect one of these parts.
At this point, it is called a 'ulcer' or 'scab'. Its treatment involves cutting away all that skin around it, especially if it has become thin like a rag and is not adherent to the part due to its corruption.
If you desire the skin to adhere but it has not reached that level of corruption, and there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, treat it with an injection. If the abscess is large and emits foul-smelling pus, cauterize it with the Egyptian drug.
Take equal parts of celery, oil, honey, and ginger. Mix them together in a container and cook over fire until the medicine thickens like honey. Then take what you need, dilute it with water and honey, and inject it into the abscess. Tie its mouth closed and leave the drug inside for two hours.
Then squeeze it out using a press. Do this repeatedly until the abscess is cleaned and the bad odor has gone. If you do not have this drug, you can use ash water instead, which is made by taking the ashes of grapewood or oak wood and mixing them with water.
Then purify it and inject it until you are certain that the abscess has been washed clean. If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian drug or ash water, use a mixture of water and honey with some ground ginger added.
Or inject a mixture of honey and wine, as honey cleanses and washes while wine makes the wound adhere, especially if it is strong and dry. Once you have done this several times and are certain that the abscess has gone, then inject something to stimulate flesh growth.
For example, take the lion's grease ointment and mix it with rose oil and astringent wine. Or inject some of the other drugs or ointments whose properties we have described in our chapter on ointments. If the mouth of the abscess is too narrow for the injection tube to fit.
Widen it slightly with an iron or insert a wick soaked in the Egyptian ointment or the squirrel ointment until it is wide enough. If its mouth is also too wide, sew its lips together and leave just enough opening for the injection tube to enter without any extra space.
And if the mouth from which pus is flowing is located high up, cut it lower down so that the pus will flow downward. For if pus accumulates in the depths of the abscess, it prevents flesh from growing there.
If you cannot make the incision towards its base as desired, then place the organ in such a way that pus drains from it easily according to your preference. Ensure that no pus remains trapped within at any time.
To apply the medicinal poultice externally on the abscess, take one of the medicated poultices suitable for your purpose and spread it onto a linen cloth. Ensure that the cloth is large enough to cover the entire abscess. Then, using scissors, cut a hole slightly wider than the mouth of the abscess opposite its opening. Spread one of the soft medicated poultices on another linen cloth to match the size of the hole and place it there, keeping it away from the mouth of the abscess to facilitate pus drainage. Do not remove the large cloth until afterwards.
For several days, remove the poultice at the mouth of the abscess frequently to allow the accumulated pus to exit and observe whether the discharge is profuse or scant, thick or thin.
Additionally, examine the site of the abscess itself to determine whether it is painful or not painful and whether there is swelling or no swelling. If your treatment has progressed thus and you find that the material exiting the mouth of the abscess is minimal
then know that the abscess has adhered or is nearly adherent. In this case, open it the next day or on the third day. When you have opened the wound, replace the cloths with fresh ones and renew the poultice. If thin pus continues to discharge after a long period, do not despair of its healing.
The recovery is near because some people's flesh grows slowly in wounds, while others have the opposite tendency. If thick pus continues to discharge from the abscess after many days, know that the abscess has not healed. If the healing of the abscess is delayed
If the case drags on, increase the drying property of the medication and use remedies that are moist in consistency but dry in potency, such as the medicated wax if you have already increased its amount of calamine. The most effective remedy to use is the medicated wax itself.
He mixes rose oil and sprinkles it evenly over the wound. Then he kneads it in and uses it, or if rose oil is not available, he can do the same with honey ointment after heating it until it liquefies. Alternatively, he may take equal amounts of gum arabic, wax, and storax, grind them together, and mix them into heated honey. He then soaks a cloth in it and applies it to the cavity, or he uses heated honey until it thickens, sprinkles drugs on it, places a cloth over it, and applies it.
He may also use long saffron, blue iris root, senna leaves, carthamus flower powder, and red poppy seed alone or mixed together. Grind them, sift, and mix with the honey previously mentioned. If the cavity persists without healing, know that there is some underlying corruption.
He also treats fractures of bones or other solid nerves and ligaments with the treatment for dislocations mentioned above.
Chapter Ninety-Nine.
On the treatment of hammer toes, claw toes, supernumerary toes, and separation of joined toes.
Hammer toe is a thick flesh that grows under the toenail of the thumb or any other toe, causing swelling and heat if left untreated.
Or if it becomes putrid and gangrenous to the point that it consumes the nail root, or even reaches the bone causing a foul odor. The tip of the toe may become bare and turn black.
Then you should cut away all the excess growth with an iron knife, and cauterize afterwards. Cauterization in this case is very beneficial.
If the nail angle has pushed in and embedded the flesh, you should place a thin wedge under the nail angle to lift it up and cut away the embedded flesh carefully.
Then apply burning ointments until all the flesh is destroyed. Treat it with ointments to heal. But if the bone has been affected, you must cut away and remove the rotted bone entirely.
If you see corruption and decay spreading in the finger, cut it off at one of its joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals. If the nail receives a blow or becomes sore and experiences severe pain, it is not advisable to bleed the patient initially.
Then cut the nail with a sharp scalpel, making an oblique incision from top to bottom, taking care not to reach the flesh underneath the nail. If you do so, it will cause the patient severe pain and lead to excessive flesh growth in that area. Then treat the area with something that alleviates pain.
As for the extra finger that occurs in some people's hands, sometimes it is entirely flesh, sometimes it contains bones, and sometimes it has a nail. Its growth may be at the root of one of the fingers.
Or its growth may be on one of the finger joints. Those that grow on a finger joint do not move, while those that grow at the finger's base may sometimes move. If it is purely flesh, it can be cut off easily with a wide scalpel at its root.
But those that grow at the root of a joint are difficult to treat and should not be cut off. Those that grow on a finger at one of its joints should first have their flesh cut away in a circular motion towards the bone, then the bone should be scraped away using one of the appropriate scrapers.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the adhesion that occurs between fingers, this often happens, especially as a result of birth defects or from wounds caused by burns and similar injuries. It is not advisable to cut through this adhesion.
So that the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place a piece of linen or cloth soaked in rose oil between them to prevent them from adhering quickly and to keep them separated until the area heals as it should.
If adhesion occurs between some of the fingers at the hand's palm, cut through that adhesion according to what is appropriate and beneficial for the shape of the affected member.
Chapter Ninety.
In the section on the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are twisted, hardened veins filled with blood and black bile that occur in most parts of the body, but they occur more frequently in the legs, especially in sailors and porters. It is recommended first to cleanse the body from black bile by powerful purging.
Then bleed the patient with cupping glasses, and as for its treatment by iron [surgery], it is of two types: one is to cut and remove the black blood, and the other is to cauterize the vein and remove it entirely. But cutting should first be done after warming the leg with hot water.
Until the thick, congealed blood is liquefied, then tie the leg of the healthy person above his buttock to below his knee with a bandage, and cut the vein in one place or two places or three places with wide incisions.
Then remove the black blood from below the leg to above and from above to below until you see enough blood come out or as much as the patient can tolerate, then bind it and instruct him to avoid foods that produce black bile. Then repeat purging and bleeding.
When the veins are filled and cause harm to the patient, then for its treatment, shave the leg of the patient if it has much hair, then enter him into the bathhouse and warm his leg with hot water until it turns red and sweat comes out or he engages in vigorous exercise.
If a bathhouse is not available to warm the limb, then cut the skin against the vein lengthwise either at its upper end near the knee or at its lower end near the heel. Then open the skin with forceps and scrape off the vein from both sides until it becomes visible.
When it appears, you will see it red and bloody. When freed from the skin, you will also see that it resembles a tendon. Then insert a probe underneath it until when it rises and comes out of the skin, tie it with a smooth, blind forceps. Then cut another incision beside that one about three fingers' breadth.
Then strip the skin from around the vein until it becomes visible, then raise it with tweezers as done before and attach it to another forceps as was done initially, then make another incision or several incisions if necessary.
Then pull it out and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel, then pull it out and strip it until it exits from the second incision, then pull it up to the incision above it and do this until you pull it out from the third incision above all incisions, then cut it off once it is all out.
If pulling and stripping does not work, then insert a needle with a double-threaded strong thread and tie it, then pull it out and place tweezers underneath and wind it around your hand in all directions until it comes out, but be careful not to break it, for if it breaks, it will become very difficult to strip.
The patient may experience pain from it. Once you have stripped all of it, place wool soaked in a mixture of honey and rose oil or olive oil on the site of the incision and treat it until it heals. If the vein is inflamed with twists and turns, relieve its tension by pulling it gently towards its direction.
And if it is not straight as we have mentioned, do not cut into it at every turn and twist, but rather attach tweezers to it on both sides until you strip it completely. Be careful when cutting into it not to cut or injure the vein, for this will make stripping difficult.
Image of the incision used to strip the vein:
Image of the blind forceps:
The forceps should not have teeth like other forceps, nor be sharp at the tips so as not to injure the vein. It should be thick and smooth, for if it is thin it will cut the vein with its fineness. Instead, it should have a thicker edge as mentioned.
Chapter One Hundred Ninety-Nine.
On stripping the temporal vein.
This vein originates in the legs, particularly in hot countries such as Hijaz and other sparsely populated regions with abundant heat. It may also originate from other parts of the body besides the legs due to foulness that occurs underneath the skin.
In living bodies, it is known that worms and insects occur internally, including scabies mites and those born between the skin and flesh. The first sign of this affliction appearing in the leg is intense heat followed by sweating at the affected site, after which the eruption begins to emerge from the location of that sweating.
It seems like the source is a plant or an animal. When its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing between one to two dirhams and tied, then left hanging from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it externally, wrap it in lead and tie it. If it becomes too long, cut off some of it and wrap the remainder without cutting it from its origin before it has all emerged, for if you cut it, it will shrink back into the flesh causing swelling, inflammation, and an ugly wound at that site.
Therefore, it should be treated and drawn out little by little until it emerges entirely from the body without any remnant remaining inside. Sometimes, this eruption can reach a length of five or ten spans.
I have heard that for one man, it emerged up to twenty spans. If it breaks during your treatment of it, insert a probe into its hole and push it back deeply within the body until all its contents are emptied out, then attempt to heal the site with medications over some time.
Then treat it with a treatment for tumors, as this eruption may have many branches, especially if it appears at the knee joint or on the leg itself. In such cases, it will have many mouths from which multiple shoots emerge. Treat each branch as mentioned earlier in this section.
Chapter Two Hundred and Ninety
Regarding the treatment of scabies mites that occur beneath the hide, which is known as cattle disease.
This disease is called "Biqr's affliction" in some of our lands because it often affects cattle. It is a small, single mite that breeds between the skin and flesh and crawls throughout the entire body, ascending and descending.
One can sense its movement from one organ to another until it breaks through the skin, creating a hole where it emerges. Its composition is formed from some corrupt humors, like that of other worms and insects found in the belly.
And it is expected that harm from it will happen if it spreads in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, perhaps it may open it and come out thus abolishing the eye. This occurs frequently. If you desire treatment for it and its removal, this can only occur when it has spread and become perceptible.
It is necessary to bind what is above and below it with a tight band, then cut upon it and remove it. If it has penetrated into the flesh and cannot be found, cauterize the place with fire until it burns out. The greatest harm expected from it is corruption of the eye, as mentioned.
If you see it has reached the head near the eye, bind tightly beneath it on the forehead, then cut upon it and remove it. It is necessary for the patient to treat himself by purging his body with drugs that ease corrupt humors and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
Chapter Three-Ninety.
Regarding the incision for the disease known as 'Nafar'.
This disease, which we call 'Nafar' in our land, is a pain that appears in some organs and then spreads from one organ to another. I have seen it as I have described to you.
I was called to a woman patient in some villages. She uncovered her arm and showed me a slight swelling in the vein of the forearm. After an hour, I saw that swelling spreading upwards towards the shoulder like a worm or quicksilver.
If it flows from one place to another, the pain leaves that spot and settles in the shoulder. After sitting for an hour, it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm. She then told me that her entire body was rotating as I witnessed.
I was amazed at the speed with which it moved from one organ to another, having never seen this disease manifest in such a way before, except that I had heard of others experiencing pain moving from one organ to another, but not witnessed it personally as I did in this woman.
I concluded that this was due to the woman being from a desert region with a dry body and prominent veins, making it easier for the pain to spread visibly. It would not appear in this manner among those of comfortable living with moist bodies and concealed veins.
If you wish to treat him and his companion feels pain, when it appears before you as we mentioned, then apply pressure above and below it swiftly and cut upon him until that retained wind escapes, and the space is cleared.
If you do not see it with your own eye, treat him by shaking the body and using winds dispelling remedies such as ground peppermint seed or ground purslane seed and similar drugs.
Chapter Four Ninety.
In extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their types and the locations on the body where they strike, and as for their variation in type, some are large and others small, some have hollow glass tips and others solid ones, while still others have three or four corners.
Some have blades, others have splinters. As for those that strike vital organs, they fall into two categories: either the organ is hollow like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, etc., or it is not hollow. When an arrow strikes one of these organs and the signs of impending death become apparent, as I will describe later, it is imperative that you do not attempt to remove the arrow, for death usually ensues. However, if these signs of ill omen do not appear and the arrow has not disappeared deep within the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. A sign that an arrow has struck the brain is severe headache, epistaxis, and dizziness, especially if the arrow has pierced the skull bone and injured the meninges covering the brain.
However, if these signs of ill omen do not appear and the arrow has not disappeared deep within the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. A sign that an arrow has struck the brain is severe headache, epistaxis, and dizziness, especially if the arrow has pierced the skull bone and injured the meninges covering the brain. Symptoms include redness in the eyes, reddening of the tongue, convulsions, mental confusion, fainting, epistaxis or otorrhoea, loss of speech and voice, and the discharge of a white, milky fluid resembling gruel from the wound.
If these signs become apparent, do not attempt to treat the patient or remove the arrow if it has not yet emerged. Signs that an arrow has struck the heart include severe pain near the left breast, as if it had struck a solid object rather than an empty space.
Additionally, the arrow may pulsate like a heartbeat. If black blood issues from the wound, followed by cold extremities, sweating, and loss of consciousness, then death is imminent. A sign that the lung has been injured is the emission of frothy blood from the wound.
The vessels following the neck become swollen, and the patient's skin color changes. He breathes heavily and desires to inhale cold air. If an arrow has struck near the heart, it is usually close to the ribs. In such cases, breathing becomes very difficult with severe pain.
He sighs deeply and moves all his lower limbs. If the liver is struck by an arrow, severe pain follows and blood similar to liver in color emerges from the wound. If the stomach is hit, undigested food may emerge from the wound.
If the abdomen is struck and the bowel is perforated, or if there is a rupture of the intestines, there is no hope for his recovery nor any means to remove the arrow. But if the bladder is pierced, urine may emerge.
If something protrudes from the wound and pain increases, know that he is doomed. Otherwise, most other parts of the body such as the face, eye, neck, shoulder, upper arm, back, thigh, leg, etc., can generally recover.
When an arrow does not hit an artery or vein and is not poisoned, I will tell you about some cases I have witnessed that may guide your treatment. Once, an arrow struck a man in the root of his nose.
I extracted it from the other side under his ear, and he recovered without any harm to his eye. In another case, I removed an arrow that had pierced a Jew's lower eyelid, leaving only its small tip sticking out.
The arrow was large, one of the composite bow arrows with a square iron head, smooth without ears. The Jew recovered without any harm to his eye. I also removed an Arab arrow from the throat of a Christian.
Another arrow, which had ears, was stuck between his shoulder blades in the back of a man. We were able to pull it out carefully until it was removed. The man survived and recovered.
About thirty days later, without any change in his condition, we opened the arrow and removed it. He recovered without any harm. I also saw a man who was struck by an arrow in the back. The wound adhered to the arrow.
After seven years, the arrow emerged at the root of his thigh. I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her belly; the wound adhered and the arrow remained unchanged. Her condition did not alter in any way nor did she find it harmful in any of her natural actions.
I saw another man struck by an arrow in his face; the wound adhered and he found it only moderately painful. Many such cases exist. I also extracted an arrow from a soldier of the Sultan's guard, which had pierced him in the middle of his nose, inclining slightly towards the right side.
The entire arrowhead had vanished, and I was summoned to treat him three days after the arrow struck. Upon examination, I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; I probed it with a thin probe but did not feel the arrowhead. He felt pain and soreness beneath his right ear from the wound's opening.
I suspected that the pain was due to the tip of the arrow, so I applied a dressing with a drawing agent and allowed it to remain for several days in hope that the place would swell and the mark of the arrowhead would become apparent. But no such indication occurred.
I continued the dressing for many days, but nothing happened. The wound healed over during this time, and the patient became resigned to leaving the arrow where it was until one day he felt it inside his nose and informed me of this. I then applied a powerful corrosive medication to the wound for several days.
Until the wound opened up and I probed it, feeling the fine point of the arrowhead adhering to the bone. Then I increased the application of the powerful corrosive medication until the tip of the arrowhead became visible. I followed this course for about four months.
Then when the wound had widened enough for me to insert forceps, I grasped and moved the arrowhead but it did not budge. So I continued treating him with various devices until one day I succeeded in firmly grasping it with forceps as shown at the end of this book.
The physicians had judged that his nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I managed to restore it. The wound healed and the patient recovered completely, never feeling any discomfort afterwards. I tell you this method of extracting some arrows so that you may use it as a guide for other cases which I have not mentioned.
It is impossible to grasp the intricacies of this art through description alone or encompass it entirely in a book. Only the skilled practitioner can measure the small by the large, the present by the absent, and deduce new works and new tools for unusual occurrences.
If an arrow is removed from this art, I say that it exits from the organ in which it lodged in one of two ways: either by pulling it from the place where it entered or by pushing it out from the opposite side.
Either the arrow is sticking out at a flesh wound, in which case pull it and remove it. But if it does not come out within its original time, leave it until the surrounding flesh rots, making it easier to grasp and remove. Similarly, if it has lodged in bone.
Leave it also if it does not come out, and return to pull and move it daily. If it still does not come out after several days, you should then perforate around the arrow in the same bone on both sides with a fine awl until its path is widened, and then grasp and remove it.
If the arrow has lodged in the bone of the head and penetrated into one of the ventricles of the brain, showing some of the symptoms mentioned earlier, do not attempt to pull out the arrow. Leave it alone until its course is cleared after several days.
...attempt to pull out the arrow and remove it. If it is too deeply lodged and cannot be pulled out, then use the awl around the arrow as described earlier, and treat the wound until it heals. But if the arrow has disappeared within a part of the body... ...and search for it with a probe. If you feel it, then grasp and remove it using some of the instruments suitable for its extraction. However, if you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound and the arrow's depth within the cavity, and there is no bone, nerve or vein in the way...
It troubled him until the wound widened and the arrow came out with ease. If it has ears attached, hold them firmly; free the surrounding flesh from all sides as much as possible, using all your skill. Should you fail to detach the flesh in breaking the ears and twisting them off, strive to release it nonetheless.
If you attempt to remove the arrow from any location, use tweezers on all sides until it is dislodged. Take utmost care lest the arrow break and become difficult to grasp and extract. If you are unable after some time.
Leave it for some days until the surrounding flesh putrefies, then attempt again; this will be easier. If bleeding intervenes, use the treatment mentioned earlier. Take care not to cut any vein, nerve or tendon, and exercise caution.
Do your utmost to remove the arrow gently and steadily, as described. When pulling out the arrow, ensure the patient is in the same position they were when it entered; this is preferable.
If you are unable to do so, use whatever position is possible. As for the arrow exiting from the opposite side, it may have already protruded slightly or you may detect its tip near the skin's surface by touch.
Make an incision over the arrow, as wide as your tweezers will allow, then pull it out gently. If it is stuck in bone, twist your hand around the arrow's tip until it affects the bone and creates space for itself, then pull it out.
If it does not come out, leave it alone until it can be removed. If the shaft of the arrow is still attached, use it to push it out. If the shaft has fallen off and you wish to use a pushing tool, insert the hollow probe into the wound until its cavity fits around the butt of the arrow, then push it with this.
If the arrow is hollow, push it out using a tool that fits inside its cavity; this will facilitate its removal. If the arrowhead is poisoned, excise all the affected flesh if possible, then treat it accordingly.
If the arrow is embedded in the chest, belly, bladder or flank and is close enough to be felt with the probe and you can make an incision upon it, then do so. Be careful not to cut any vessels or nerves as you extract it.
Then suture the wound if necessary and treat it until healed. Image of the tongs used to draw out arrows:
Their ends resemble the beak of a bird and are made in such a way that when they grasp an arrow or any other object, they do not release it. Tongs can be made in large, small, or medium sizes according to the thickness and length of the arrow and the width and depth of the wound.
Image of the hollowannon:
Image of the cannonsmith's forge:
This is a smith's forge with a narrow end like a funnel, making it easy to insert into a hollow arrow and push it through.
Chapter Fifty-Nine.
In letting blood from the veins.
The veins commonly bled in the body are thirty, of which eighteen are in the head: the two temporal arteries behind the ears known as 'hassisin', and the two superficial temporal arteries. The two veins in the eye sockets known as 'naazir.'
And the vein that stands out in the middle of the forehead, the vein at the tip of the nose, the two jugular veins in the neck, the two veins in the upper lip of the mouth and lower lip, these are known as 'jaharak', and the two sublingual veins.
And as for the veins bled in the arm and hand, there are five: one is the cephalic vein on the lateral side, commonly known as the 'head vein'; another is the median cubital vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic vein, commonly known as the 'body vein'.
And the basilica vein on the medial side is also known as the 'armpit'. The vein commonly called the 'abdominal vein' and the 'arm vein' is located on the forearm and appears clearly above the thumb. This is known as the cephalic vein.
This is the vein that lies between the index and middle fingers, with two branches; in the leg and foot there are three veins: one beneath the knee joint on the outer side, the second behind the ankle on the inner side, and the vein of the buttock located on the outer side at the heel.
In the other leg, there are three veins like them. As for the two veins behind the ears, their benefit lies in treating frequent colds, migraines, and head wounds that do not heal.
Shave the head of the patient and rub his buttock with a coarse linen cloth at the location of the veins, rubbing vigorously. Then tie a handkerchief around the patient's neck until the two veins appear behind the ears in their lower locations on the head. Feel for their pulse with your finger, and where you feel it, mark the spot with ink.
Then take a sharp lancet, known as the 'Nashli', and insert it under the vein in the skin until it reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein along with the skin in a piece about two fingerbreadths long.
Or similarly, allowing as much blood to flow out as desired, then tie them with sutures and leave them until they heal. As for the two arteries in the temples, their benefit lies in treating chronic migraines, severe headaches, and persistent eye inflammation with profuse discharge.
To treat them as described: tie a handkerchief around the patient's neck until the two arteries become clearly visible to the touch and their pulse can be felt under your finger. Then mark the spot with ink, and then raise the skin above the artery with your index finger.
Insert the lancet 'Nashli' from below, raise the artery upwards and cut it as done with the other veins. Allow blood to flow according to your need, then release the patient's neck and press your finger on the artery for a while.
Then place a bandage and dressing on it, tie it tightly from above, and leave it until it heals. The mention of their (artery and vein) piercing, cutting, and tying is found at the beginning of the book. As for cupping to draw out the vein of the forehead, its benefit is in treating chronic facial conditions such as epilepsy, ulcers, and stubborn acne.
To perform cupping on the forehead in the manner I have described for you, suffocate the patient's neck with a scarf until sweat appears. Then take the instrument called the 'axe', which is shaped like this:
Place the protruding spike at the head of the axe on the same vein and strike from above with a comb or similar object in this manner, allowing the blood to flow into the desired vessel. Then release the patient's neck and leave it until it heals.
And it may be opened with a wide-bladed lancet, but it should not be as sharp-pointed as other lancets. Rather, its point should be somewhat blunted to prevent injury to the nearby bone, for if it were too thin, the lancet might break upon it.
As for the veins at the angles of the eyes, their cupping is beneficial for treating eye diseases such as itching, inflammation, and optic nerve issues, as well as facial diseases. To perform this cupping, have the patient lie on their back with their head facing you, then place the cups on the temples at a slight angle towards the lengthwise direction using a small, blunt-tipped lancet.
If there is no flesh at the site, then if the lancet point is too thin it may break. Then send forth some blood according to your need and place a bandage on both wounds, tying them tightly for one night before removing them. As for cupping the veins of the nose, it is beneficial for treating acute fever.
And for severe headaches and facial diseases such as red hives appearing on the nose, especially if they are chronic, cupping should be performed by having the patient lie on their back while you hold their nose with your left hand and take a long, thin lancet.
Pierce it in the middle of the nostril itself between the nasal septum, for the vein does not appear there by touch. Send forth some blood according to your need, then tie it tightly with a bandage overnight as it heals quickly.
And as for the poultices, their benefit is that they relieve shortness of breath and treat the onset of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the skin's surface such as black patches, boils, and bad sores. Their method of application is to have the patient lie down on their back with a bandage tied around their neck, while the practitioner stands at the patient's head.
The patient sits on a chair, then the bloodletting is done vertically down to the elbow in a wide vein. Then, an appropriate amount of blood is drawn or according to what is seen as necessary, and this is done again with the other vein. Finally, the bandage is untied.
And tie the veins moderately to prevent the patient from fainting, then leave him until the next day as this will heal the wound. And as for the veins of the arms, their benefit is that when they are bled after bleeding the head vein, they alleviate pains in the mouth and cure bad gums, canker sores, cracked lips, and bad sores.
That are in the nose and around it, and their method of bleeding is that the patient sits facing you with a scarf tied around their neck. Then pull on their cheeks to expose the veins on either side of the lip, from which you draw blood according to their darkness.
And around them are small, dark veins which you cut off completely. If you are unsure about these, then look for the largest and most visible ones, and do the same with the veins on the lower lip.
And as for the two veins beneath the tongue, their benefit is that when they are bled after bleeding the head vein, they alleviate quinsy in the throat from diseases of the tonsils and mouth. And their method of bleeding is to have the patient sit facing you with the sun at their back, raise their tongue, and look underneath it on one side for a vein and on the other side for another vein, both of which should be dark in color.
So bleed them, but be cautious not to cut too deeply as there are arteries beneath them that may cause bleeding if cut. And the three veins that are bled at the elbow are those which it is customary to bleed in most people, and their bleeding should be done on both sides.
Either cauterize with a broad, elongated or olive-shaped probe, or cut with a slender, needle-like probe, which is called the 'Nashal'. The shape of the broad, elongated probe is as follows:
The probe should be broad, as shown, to repair the opening of tortuous veins filled with dense blood that are prominent and thick-skinned. The shape of the olive-shaped probe is as follows:
This probe is narrower with a sharper point, suitable for letting blood from veins in the neck containing thin, yellowish blood. The shape of the needle-like probe ('Nashal') is as follows:
This 'Nashal' suitable for cutting comes in various widths and lengths according to the size of the veins, also narrow. It is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the 'Basilic' vein, which is one of these three veins, its benefit lies in drawing blood from swellings under the neck and chest leading down to the abdomen. The cutter should take care not to insert the probe too deeply, for there is an artery beneath it; otherwise, he may cut that artery.
If bleeding occurs, it is not appropriate to cut him with a cautery probe but rather to slit him with the needle-like probe ('Nashal'). If the 'Basilic' vein does not appear clearly, it should be avoided and another vein should be used or some of its branches sought.
Or, you may let blood from the arm vein instead. It is obvious and should be slit with the needle-like probe ('Nashal') as mentioned before. If you wish to perform this procedure specifically, it is necessary before tying the arm to examine the site until you recognize the pulse, then mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and cut the vein with a clean incision using the needle-like probe ('Nashal') as mentioned earlier, taking care to strike away from the artery. When you see swelling at the spot marked with ink upon tightening the bandage, that is the swelling of the artery; avoid it.
If, upon letting blood, you see it pulsating like urine from a boy and the blood is thin and red, know that it is arterial blood. Quickly place your finger on it for some time, then remove your finger. If the bleeding stops - which happens frequently - bind the arm.
Leave it alone and warn the patient not to neglect it, let it remain on his neck until he recovers. If blood does not stop flowing and you are overpowered and no medication helps at that moment, then ligate the artery if it appears to you; its ends will contract and blood flow will cease.
Or take a piece of linen and cut it in half, tie one half around the wound tightly with knots and bandages. If bleeding stops by the next day, well and good; otherwise treat it as mentioned earlier by using ligatures to stop the bleeding, for cutting the blood vessel is not difficult in most cases.
If the wound is small and you manage to tie a ligature around the arm, inform him; but as for the dark vein, it is beneficial to tie it off because it attracts blood from the head downwards because it consists of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have mentioned.
It is preferable for the tie to be on the neck from its origin, for beneath it there is a nerve. If the ligature is too tight and the needle punctures the nerve, numbness will occur which may not recover, and sometimes it does not heal at all; this nerve is often palpable.
If the vein is hidden in some people and too thin to be felt, then make your incision with a scalpel avoiding the nerve at all costs; if the vein is between two nerves, cut it lengthwise. The cephalic vein is beneficial to tie off as it attracts blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases, particularly if you wish to ligate this vein. Use the olive-pointed needle or the wide reed needle; all veins are suitable for this because there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
However, when ligating, avoid the head of the muscle with the needle and search for the soft spot. If the vein is not tied off on the first attempt, it may be repeated; however, some people may swell if not tied off on the first try.
However, this swelling does no harm. As for the method of ligation and its effects, as well as what should be done to repair it, first know that ligation is either used solely for health preservation purposes
If the procedure is used for diseases and that which is used for preserving health and maintaining it, and preventing the occurrence of diseases, then bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins at the elbow called the cubital vein, cephalic vein, or basilica vein. Bloodletting should be performed during the first week of spring if signs of plethora appear.
Bloodletting should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday after noon, three hours have passed. However, bloodletting used for diseases has no specific time limit; it is performed whenever necessary, day or night.
And at every hour and at all times, except for children until they reach fourteen years of age or the elderly who have exceeded seventy years. Anyone intending to undergo bloodletting should do so regardless of the reason.
It is necessary to cleanse the bowels before bloodletting with a gentle enema if there is abundant retained feces, lest putrid matter from the intestines be drawn into the veins during bloodletting and harm the vital organs. One should not undergo bloodletting while intoxicated or drunk until that state has passed.
Also, one should avoid bloodletting after an attack of fever, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual intercourse, fatigue, exercise, sleeplessness, fasting, and any other physical or mental exertion that weakens the body. Then examine the thinness of the humors before proceeding if the blood is thick.
If possible, prepare the body with suitable foods, drinks, and medications. Then enter a bathhouse if there is no impediment or engage in some exercise to make the blood thin. Bloodletting should be performed during midday as mentioned earlier, aiming to empty the chest of all negative emotional states that day.
Just as one should empty the chest of negative emotions such as sadness, anger, fear, and excessive physical exertion like fatigue, strain, sexual intercourse, etc., prepare for the procedure by arranging for oneself objects commonly used by people according to one's ability, such as incense, perfumes, lamps, etc.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a cushion higher than that of the patient. The patient should extend their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub it twice or three times with his hand before tying the tourniquet using the bandage and twisting it twice or thrice. The tension should be moderate.
For tension, when it is not moderate, either by excess of tension prevents the flow of blood, or by relaxation also prevents the flow of blood. Afterwards, upon releasing tension, one should gently rub the joint with both hands.
Until the vessels swell and become visible to touch, then gently rub the joint with old oil particularly. Then place the left hand's index finger on the same vein beneath the point intended for ligation, slightly pressing so as not to allow the vein to escape the strike. For some veins are like a string which retreats upon cutting and others are filled with air so that when the lancet is placed on them, they sink beneath it deceiving the ligator and the lancet does not open the vein or if it does, its opening will be narrow.
Therefore, the ligator should be steadfast and deliberate in all these matters. Then let him lower the lancet; if the vein opens from that stroke, otherwise let him repeat it once more beneath or above that point with haste if the point does not become swollen.
If the patient becomes swollen or anxious, leave him for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage as it might bring on heat. Do not let him enter the bath. Then resume ligation if he wishes. If the lancet is inserted and the opening was small but blood flowed freely.
I feared that not enough blood will flow, so prepare the lancet in the same hole gently and straight, increase the opening a little, do this hastily before the point becomes swollen for many people the point swells at a small opening.
If you find that it has swollen, do not repeat upon it for it will be of no avail. Place upon it some strained oil which facilitates the flow of blood; it is better in this place than oil itself and other ointments.
So use strained oil in all your ligations for veins when the flow of blood is difficult. Also, the remedies Farrq and Shukzunya can be used if one applies either of them to the point, for it causes thick blood to become thin.
If a large swelling occurs at the cupping site, especially for those who have not undergone cupping before or whose vein opening was small, quickly apply a warm sponge soaked in saltwater to the swelling and hold it in place until it subsides.
One should do this after the blood has completely exited from the vein itself or another one. If there remains some darkness or greenness at the site afterwards, that is not harmful.
Or use the juice of fennel or something similar. Often, a swelling and lump appear when cupping is done on the buttocks; place your hand on it, and if it feels soft when pressed, this is a bad sign, so be careful not to apply any of the aforementioned remedies.
If blood from an artery flows, compress it with a cloth to stop the bleeding, then treat it with other remedies until it heals. Each person should have blood drawn from them according to their strength and the predominant color of their blood.
If the blood is dark, let it flow until it becomes red. If it is thick, allow it to thin out. If it is sharp, remove its sharpness. This applies especially to those who are full-bodied and strong and require a large amount of blood to be drawn at once.
For those with strong bodies, widen the cupping site and use a broad lancet. For the weak, do the opposite. Draw blood in stages and make the incision narrow. The best tool for cupping is a sharp, pointed, slit-tipped lancet without a guard.
This method of cupping is safe from bleeding and nerve cutting, and it is easier and more secure than longitudinal or transverse cupping. Before cupping those with hairy skin, feed them some bread soaked in pomegranate juice or fenugreek water.
If the lancet is sharp and blood is drawn in three or four stages, those with cold temperaments should eat bread soaked in syrup of figs, honey mixed with rose petals, or good-quality rosewater before cupping.
If syncope occurs during phlebotomy and its cause is excessive blood loss, one should give the patient water boiled with meat and diluted rose syrup to drink. Apply frankincense powder topically and apply it to the chest. Use all other methods mentioned in the section on syncope.
Regarding those with purging, if someone wants to relieve their arm and evacuate blood again, it is necessary for one whose phlebotomy was performed for excessive purging but has weak strength that the blood be gradually evacuated a little at a time over successive days according to their strength.
And for one whose body is strong and desires to relieve their arm and evacuate blood again, they should do so on the seventh or ninth hour after the first phlebotomy. However, if someone wants to draw blood from their body towards the opposite side where it has flowed, they should not do this until the second or third day.
But if there is much blood in the body that has become heated and harsh, causing fever, then blood should not be removed all at once, nor should too much be taken out. The opening should be widened until syncope occurs after agreement on all conditions for phlebotomy. And place your hand on his pulse while blood is flowing to prevent death occurring instead of syncope, as this often happens due to the ignorance of the phlebotomist and negligence. This should not be done if one intends to relax the arm again.
If the mouth of the vein closes and blood flow becomes difficult, do not press or twist it too harshly. This is very harmful. Either leave it alone until another phlebotomy can be performed, or use the edge of the lancet to scrape away any clotted blood in the mouth of the vein.
Or, dissolve some salt in water and apply it to the vein or use some Farrq Tiryq or Shukhzannah and gently press until blood flows. If the vein has become swollen, leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the swelling has subsided. If there is a necessity to evacuate blood again and it cannot be avoided, then perform phlebotomy either above that spot or on the other arm or vein.
As for bloodletting from the upper arm vein, it is performed instead of cupping and leeching when they are not available or if they are concealed because it consists of both. The procedure is as follows: the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the skin turns red and sweat appears visibly. Then, a ligature is tied above it with moderate tension.
Then, bloodletting is performed with slight inclination neither towards the front nor lengthwise; let the opening be wide. The incision should be made slightly above the wrist joint. If blood does not flow out, place the hand in a vessel containing hot water and allow the blood to run into it.
Continue until you achieve your goal. If it is summertime, you may dispense with immersing the hand in hot water, but more so during wintertime. Bloodletting from this vein is safest of all veins. For there is no prominent vein or nerve beneath it. As for bloodletting from the elbow of the right arm, it is beneficial for liver ailments. Its procedure involves tying the wrist with a ligature or by hand after immersing it in hot water until the veins swell.
For there is no prominent vein or nerve beneath it. As for bloodletting from the elbow of the right arm, it is beneficial for liver ailments. Its procedure involves tying the wrist with a ligature or by hand after immersing it in hot water until the veins swell. It is clearly discernible by touch. Then perform the bloodletting slightly inclined, and even if you cut all of it, it will not harm him. Be cautious not to pierce too deep with the lancet as there lies beneath it a nerve of the fingers and a bare flesh.
Allow the blood to flow until it reaches its desired amount. If you do not immerse the hand back into hot water, the blood will congeal at the mouth of the vein and prevent further bleeding. Once you have extracted enough blood, apply fat and salt to the vein to prevent rapid clotting.
And similarly, you should proceed with any narrow vein. As for bloodletting from the left arm, it is beneficial for spleen ailments, and its procedure is the same as that of the second one (right arm). Bloodletting from the thigh is beneficial for diseases of the lower abdomen such as uterus disorders.
The procedure involves immersing the leg in hot water and rubbing it with a cloth until the veins become visible. Then, tie a ligature above the ankle joint near the heel where the vein is prominent like the thumb.
It branches into many veins on the male's face; therefore, lance it in its widest branch or at the heel when they join together, which is better and safer. If you lance it on the male's face, be cautious of the nerves underneath.
And make your incision curved, as if you intend to amputate, and use a sharp lancet. If the blood does not flow out, immerse his leg in warm water and let him remain thus until it runs out completely. If the vein is missed on the first attempt at lancing.
Move the incision upward slightly if it is safe, for there is no harm in that place provided you are careful of the nerve, as mentioned earlier. The same applies to the saphenous vein on the other leg. As for the great saphenous vein, its location is as mentioned at the back of the outer side of the ankle.
The benefit of lancing it for hip pain when caused by hot blood. The method of lancing is that the patient should enter a warm bath and hurry up, pulling his thigh from behind the buttock upwards towards the heel with four fingers using a thin, long cloth. This is how it will appear.
When it appears, lance it in any state you find him in, either curved which is preferable, or straight with a cut. Its location is usually greatly recessed. If you cannot find it.
And if it does not appear at all, lance one of its branches that appears on the back of the foot near the little toe and the ring finger. Be cautious of the nerves and let only as much blood flow out as you desire.
Then release the tension, apply a bandage to the site of the lancing, and press it. It will heal quickly.
Chapter Sixty-Nine.
On Cupping and its Method of Use.
There are cupping glasses made from horns, wood, copper, and glass. There are two types of cupping: one with cautery and bloodletting, the other without cautery.
This cupping without cautery has two aspects:
The temples are on both sides of the neck, and the chin is below the lower jaw of the mouth, and the shoulders, and the buttocks on the back of the hip, and the armpits which are in the middle of the arms, and the thighs, and the calves.
And bloodletting is indeed the drawing out of blood from the veins in the back of the neck that are scattered throughout the flesh, and because of this it does not cause weakness like cupping nor should it be used with fire or without it for any disease caused by fullness until the entire body has been emptied.
If bloodletting is necessary due to illness or custom, it should be performed at the beginning, middle, or end of the month and at any other time as well.
And among people, some find heaviness in their heads and dizziness when blood increases excessively and needs to be removed by bloodletting. Some experience fullness and redness in their faces, heads, and necks, while others suffer from itching in their faces and behind their ears, as well as darkness and dimness in their eyes. Still others scratch the site of their cupping.
And some laugh excessively, while others taste blood in their mouths and gums, spit out blood, or experience vomiting of blood. Some sleep too much, while others see visions of blood, redness, wounds, and surgeries during their dreams, so whenever we observe any of these symptoms
Especially if it is in the middle of the month, we would then order bloodletting after two or three hours have passed since dawn. The benefit of cupping with a needle is that it helps alleviate heaviness in the head and prevents water from flowing into the eyes.
However, this should be done after the entire body has been emptied. This cupping can serve as an alternative to cupping of the skull, but it is not recommended for those with a cold temperament or a fever, as it can cause great harm.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly, nor by those whose heads have cold diseases, nor by those who are addicted to it as it can cause forgetfulness.
Therefore, it is necessary to instruct the cupping practitioner to lower his hand slightly with the cup, fearful of causing profuse bleeding. As for cupping of the nape, it is a substitute for phlebotomy of the temples and phlebotomy of the side.
Thus, cupping benefits those suffering from shortness of breath, asthma, headaches due to difficulty breathing, coughing, and congestion. It is recommended that the cupping of the nape be lifted slightly so it does not descend too much, as this could cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for cupping of the temples, it benefits those suffering from sudden headaches, eye inflammation, migraines, nasal congestion, and toothache. It is a substitute for phlebotomy of the side, and it is necessary to instruct the practitioner not to insert the needle too deeply to avoid cutting an artery and causing bleeding.
And cupping below the navel benefits those suffering from mouth sores, tooth decay, and other oral diseases. It can serve as a substitute for phlebotomy of the cheeks. And cupping of the shoulders benefits those suffering from palpitations caused by congestion and heat.
And cupping of the lower abdomen benefits whatever phlebotomy of the three veins (basilic, temporal, and cephalic) benefits, as it attracts blood from all those superficial veins in the flesh and draws blood from deeper veins until it reaches the three deep veins.
It is necessary to instruct the practitioner not to insert the needle too deeply, as the area lacks flesh and has nerves and arteries underneath. And a single cup placed on the buttocks benefits hemorrhoids and anal sores.
It is necessary to instruct the practitioner that the cup should be large and made of copper, as the area requires strong suction. A glass cup may break and necessitate many punctures. And cupping of the legs reduces congestion noticeably.
Because it draws blood from the entire body, benefits chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, regulates menstruation, treats boils and skin diseases, and can serve as a substitute for phlebotomy of the forearms and calves. However, it tires the body greatly and causes dizziness in most people. Cupping of the calves has similar benefits to cupping of the legs.
To apply the cupping glass: first place it empty and draw out moderately without lingering too long. Instead, apply it quickly and remove it swiftly to encourage an even reception of humors into the site until you observe the area reddening and opening.
Upon observing the redness of blood, one should then gradually withdraw the suction, looking at the condition of the skin. If the person has loose flesh and open pores, cauterize only once to avoid causing a raw wound.
The cupping practitioner should widen and deepen the cauterization slightly, adjusting the suction gently with delicate movements. If there is thick blood present, he should cauterize twice: first to open a path for the thin blood and its fluidity, then again to thoroughly remove the thick blood.
If the blood is extremely thick, cauterize a third time to achieve the desired result. In general, one cauterization is sufficient for removing a small amount of blood, but multiple cauterizations are required for a large quantity, especially if the blood is thick.
It is not permissible to cauterize too deeply; the moderate depth should only reach the skin. The cupping practitioner should avoid using hot coals, water, or anything else that might cause harm, especially when dealing with individuals who have thick, hard, rough skin and narrow pores.
One should anoint the sites of cupping with melted, refined, and dissolved fat. However, during summer, one may use olive oil, rose oil, or sweet almond oil instead.
In winter, however, one may use narcissus oil, saffron oil, or other fragrant oils like musk or civet. If the fat used is coarse and cold, prefer oils such as myrrh, nard, balsam, or storax.
If the cupping practitioner has large pores and loose flesh, he should avoid using fat. Such individuals should wash their cupping glasses after the procedure with rose water, cold water, or waters of fox grape, watermelon, or pomegranate, especially if they have moist blood.
He washes his cupping glasses with vinegar or water from the well and pomegranate, etc., but for those whose blood is thick, he washes them with old wine, or water of marjoram, or decoction of colocynth or papaw, etc. It is advisable to avoid cupping in baths and after baths.
It is preferable to use cupping after leaving the bath by an hour or two, and it is not advisable for anyone to sleep afterwards. The patient and the cupper should not prepare food before or after cupping.
First, look if the patient or cupper is yellowish, as blood is usually hot and inflamed. Therefore, they should take coolants such as pomegranate, radishes, chicory, parsley, celery, etc., in vinegar. They should also eat lean meat, sheep liver, and similar foods.
For those with a cold temperament, they should drink honey syrup or mint syrup decoction, and have moderate wine. They should eat sparingly and their food should be liver, quails, pigeons, and young poultry. On the day of cupping and venesection, drink more than usual.
It may be advisable to give some people theriac, musk remedy, or coloquintida before cupping or venesection, and after it, to strengthen the main organs and relieve the blood. Avoid giving it to those with weak stomachs.
As for cupping without restrictions, it is done on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, heart, kidney area, and buttocks, as these organs cannot withstand restricted cupping. Its aim is to draw blood from one organ to another.
When cupping is placed on the breasts for weaning, or used to remove cold wind from an organ, it should be done on the abdomen and chest. This loosens the organ, warms it, and alleviates pain by expelling the wind.
Placing pressure on the kidneys when a stone or calculus is present may, with forceful pulling, open the passage or dislodge the stone from its position. This can also be done for the liver and spleen when affected by wind (flatulence). These cupping glasses are used empty.
It can also be used with fire, and can be employed filled with lukewarm water for treating chilblains. This is done by filling the cupping glass and making it large, using either hot water alone or water that has been boiled with some herbs suitable for this purpose.
Then it is placed on the location and held while suction occurs, repeated several times according to necessity. This is the image of the cupping glass used with fire:
The width of its mouth is two fingers open, as shown, and its depth is half a cubit. On one side, halfway down, there is a small hole the size of a needle, used for inserting the fire. It is made of Chinese or yellow copper with thick rims.
Smooth and flat, polished so as not to harm the organ when placed upon it. In its center there is a cross-shaped copper or iron tube where the fire candle is placed. These cupping glasses can be made large or small according to the condition being treated.
And its use is that the cupping glasses for children and thin individuals are not the same as those used for men or strong-bodied patients. As for how to place this cupping glass with fire on the organ, it is done by lighting a piece of tight linen or a small candle made of wax and placing it on the center of the raised tube in the middle of the cup.
Thus, the fire rises up towards the bottom of the cup to avoid burning the patient's body. Then the cup is placed on the organ with a finger covering the hole mentioned earlier until, when holding the cup, one can remove the finger.
As a result, steam escapes through that hole and the cup adheres to its location. Then extinguish the flame using water according to need. As for the cupping glass used for treating chilblains with water, it does not have a raised tube or hole.
And it is used by filling it with water and placing it on the member; this is its form:
This collyrium, the larger it is to hold more water, the better.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
Regarding the treatment of dislocations.
The splint is used in most cases on members that cannot have bandages applied to them due to their small size, such as the lip and gum, etc., or because the member is bare of flesh like the finger and nose, etc.
And its method of use is to choose a splint that has been in fresh, pure water from springs for a day and night until it hungers and nothing remains inside it. Then the body is first evacuated by cupping or bloodletting, then the injured member is wiped clean.
Until it reddens, then place the splint upon it. If it becomes full, remove it. If possible, suck on the spot with a cupping glass; this is more beneficial. Otherwise, wash the spot with vinegar first, then with plenty of water and rub and squeeze. If bleeding persists after removing the splint, apply a cotton cloth dipped in cold water as a compress.
And place it on top until the bleeding stops. If blood is abundant, sprinkle powdered pitch or gum tragacanth or similar substance to stop the bleeding, or apply crushed barley grains ground with water.
And leave it until the barley grains stick to the spot, then remove the splint if needed. If the same splint is reused, wash the spot with fresh blood before reapplying.
Or insert a needle into the spot until some blood comes out, then place the splint. If it feels any blood at all, it will stick to the site. If you wish to remove it, pour some resin or salt or ashes upon it.
Chapter Three.
On Dislocations.
This chapter is also about the remedies needed in the art of medicine, which is the reduction of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Know ye, O my children, that many physicians and laymen claim proficiency in this chapter (of surgery), yet they have not consulted the ancient writings nor read a single word from them.
And because of this, this art has become extinct among our people; I have never found anyone skilled in it. Indeed, I have only benefited from this art through my extensive reading of the ancient books and my diligent study of them until I extracted its knowledge, then I remained devoted to practice and experience throughout my life.
And in this chapter (of surgery), I have drawn for you all that I know about it. After long practice, I have made it accessible to you, freed it from superfluous detail, condensed it as much as possible, and clarified its language; I have also illustrated for you many figures of the instruments used therein.
This is in addition to the explanation given in the two preceding chapters, and there is no power except with Allah, the Most High.
Chapter One.
And in the first chapter, there are many concise accounts about fractures of bones. And it is proper to begin by discussing them before we proceed to mention the individual members that have been broken or dislocated one by one; therefore, let us commence this chapter with general statements and sections. First of all, you must understand and grasp its true meaning, you and whoever else is eager to learn this noble art.
So I say that whenever a fracture or dislocation occurs due to falling, striking, or twisting, one must not rush immediately to reduce (realign) it or manipulate it, nor both at once. Unless there is a hindrance to doing so, such as weakness of the patient's strength, or if he is a child, an old man, or if it is extremely hot or cold.
Then his diet should be restricted to cold pulses, poultry, and eggs; he should avoid intoxicants, tough meat, foods that cause fullness in the vessels, and any food that causes blood congestion until the swelling has been relieved and no further oozing of fluid is anticipated at the site.
When the bone fragments are set in traction, the patient should then return to his usual diet, avoiding foods that are too thick or sticky, such as dates, rice, millet, wheat, barley gruel, and beef brains. The whites, fresh fish, thick drinks and the like; through this arrangement, healing of fractures becomes quicker and better. Know that broken bones in robust men and elders cannot join and unite as they originally were.
The ends of broken bones and their flexibility; what was once hard bone becomes like the soft bones of children. However, nature generates a glue-like substance on all sides of the broken bone, which is thick and sticks, holding them together until they unite.
And it binds together until it becomes as strong and firm as it originally was, so that nothing hinders his actions.
Therefore, the patient's diet should consist of foods that are tough and thick, as mentioned earlier. Know that fractures differ in type according to the difference in organs, for a fracture of the leg bone is not like a fracture of the skull bone, nor is a fracture of the rib bone like one of the spinal vertebrae.
And likewise, all other organs are different from each other. We will come to a detailed description of each type of fracture in its respective chapter, and even the type of bone fracture may differ.
For a fracture may be cracked without any splinters, or it may occur lengthwise with splinters and fragments that are sharp and blunt. It may also happen with wounds and tears in the skin, or it may be a slight fracture.
And each type has a specific method for its treatment, as will be mentioned in detail later. One way to recognize a bone fracture is by its deformity, swelling, and prominence to the touch, and by its crunching sound when pressed with the hand.
Therefore, if there is no apparent deformity, no crunching sound, and no disturbance felt when pressing the bone, nor does the patient complain of much pain, then it is not a fracture but rather a sprain or slight fracture or minor fracture. In such cases, one should not manipulate or press the limb excessively.
But apply to it the medications that will be mentioned later, according to its location, then gently immobilize it. Know that if a bone is completely fractured into two pieces without any splinters, each piece is entirely separated from its fellow.
Act promptly to straighten and align it before inflammation occurs. If inflammation has already occurred, leave it alone for a while until the inflammation subsides, then straighten it using whatever gentle means you can.
Know that straightening and aligning it is easier than a bone with fragments. Then, as will be mentioned later, if there are fragments in the bone, it is necessary to extend the broken limb on both sides whether it is an arm or a leg.
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with two cords, or with both cord and hand, ensure that you position the limb on a flat surface in its natural shape until the broken bone extends. Then gently press back those fragments into their places using whatever means of skill and gentleness you can.
Strive to not cause any pain or inflammation to the patient through your actions. Strive to join one bone with its partner in the best manner possible, touching and feeling them with your hand. If you find anything deviating from normal, correct it and straighten it as much as you can.
Beware of excessive stretching and strong pulling as many ignorant ones do. Often they cause inflammation or dislocation in the limb, as I have seen happen many times.
After straightening, perfecting, and securing the limb, keep it at rest and prevent it from moving during wakefulness or sleep, turning or straining, or during urination. Advise the patient to ensure that the splint is positioned in a way that prevents pain.
Whenever the patient feels pain during splinting, he should move it to another position where there is no pain. He should ensure that his splint remains straight and even.
Otherwise, the limb may become deformed when it heals. Know that broken limbs differ in size and shape, so those that are small like the arm, finger, and wrist...
It is necessary that the bandages be long enough to encircle the limbs and not too thin, nor should they be rigid like a thigh or back or chest. The wide bandage must be evenly tensioned around the large member without any gap.
Then, after finishing wrapping, you should apply the appropriate plaster. First, apply a soft pad at the fracture site. Then begin wrapping with the bandage over the fracture itself in three or four layers depending on what the limb deserves. Tighten your hand slightly on the bandage and then bring it up to the upper side of the fracture.
Wrap more gently than at the fracture site, then space out the wrapping slightly away from the fracture and loosen the tension gradually until you reach the appropriate area. Then take another bandage and wrap it around the fracture.
Wrap again, this time going to the lower side of the fracture. Tension and loosening should be done as mentioned earlier for the first wrapping. Then place a soft pad or cloth between the wrappings to straighten the fracture.
If there is no deformity, do not place anything between the wrappings. Then wrap with another bandage and secure it properly if there is no swelling or heat around the limb.
If there is swelling or heat, apply something to reduce the inflammation and subsidence. Leave it for some time, then secure with bandages. The splints should be made of half-rounded reeds prepared skillfully or made from ebony wood.
Which are made from pinewood, palm fronds, calamite, or broomstick and similar materials readily available. The size of each splint should be in this shape and form specifically.
Except for the splint placed directly on the fracture, which should be thicker and wider than the others. The length of the splint should be made according to the size of the broken limb. Splint shape:
Then you tighten it with another bandage according to your first tightening, then tie it from above with fine sutures according to what was mentioned about the tightening, such that the tightening is stronger at the fracture site. And as for the parts distant from the fracture, they are tightened less.
It is preferable that the sutures be moderate in thickness and strength, preferably made from moistened cotton thread, for if they are thick like some ignorant people do by using coarse cotton strips, it is a grave error.
For tight sutures will cause excessive tension, and fine ones are unsuitable as they do not achieve the desired tension. It is preferable that there be no less than a finger's width between bandages.
If the patient is bothered by the edges of the bandages after proper tightening, place padded gauze or loosely woven wool underneath them so that they do not cause discomfort. As for fractures with wounds and tears in the skin, we will discuss that separately later on.
Know that not every fractured limb should be immobilized with bandages from the first day. If the limb is large, it is preferable to wait five to seven days or more until swelling has subsided before applying bandages.
This is the description of the splints used by earlier practitioners for fractures, dislocations, and luxations. It is a concise general description suitable for most constitutions, especially children and women, as it does not aggravate heat or cold.
Take the dust from the millstone, which is the flour that adheres to its walls during grinding. Mix it as is without adding eggs, making sure it is not too thick or too thin. Then apply it.
Another recipe for setting fractures, dislocations, and luxations: Take ten dirhams each of millet (mash), lentils (ladan), onions (aqaliya), raisins (rassan), fenugreek (maghatha), cumin seeds (sukk), five dirhams each of pepper (mar`), ginger (sabur), and twenty dirhams of frankincense (uhl). Mix them with Armenian or Roman clay (tin armani/rumi). Everyone should be beaten and mixed with water of the mastic tree or white of eggs if the patient's temperament is dry, then this bandage should be applied as it is well composed, it quickly sets broken bones and suits most people for balance.
A second bandage that is also beneficial for fractures and dislocations: Take opium, mastic, and white wax from each one ten dirhams, myrrh and saffron from each five dirhams, acacia six dirhams, Armenian earth twenty dirhams. Grind them all finely, sieve, mix with water or egg white, apply.
A bandage for joints and loose bones from their places, to alleviate sudden pain and headache caused by bone dislocation or fracture: Take pure wool, dip in vinegar and cooked oil, apply on the affected area. This bandage has no setting power.
However, it is beneficial in reducing hot swelling and relieving pain particularly. Another bandage that sets broken bones: Take leaves of figs and poplar bark, grind them together, apply wet. Another concise bandage used for forced fractures.
And if you wish to analyze the remainder of the swelling, take equal parts of opium poppy, myrrh, and powdered bdellium, grind them together and mix with plaster if the member is not inflamed, or with water if it is inflamed. Apply it.
Another bandage, stronger in analysis than the first one, used when solid swelling occurs due to forced bone fracture: Take equal parts of opium, saffron, tragacanth, senna, frankincense, bdellium, and poppy.
Grind all ingredients together and mix with sour grape juice, water, or plaster according to the heat of the member and its calmness. Hippocrates did not mention in his book that it should be applied to the broken limb when setting it.
But Qirritius advocated a plaster made only from wax and oil, moderate between thickness and softness. Galen recommended applying things that are dry with some heat, like myrrh, saffron, and honey, etc., to the broken limb during setting, as mentioned before.
A plaster that is beneficial for pain and stiffness. It consists of: ground fenugreek, crushed chickpeas, burnt human hair or bird feathers, saltpeter, salt, and equal parts of each ingredient are mixed together. The amount of plaster to be applied depends on the size of the bandage.
Then, if it is removed [the plaster], one should observe: if there is no pain, itching or movement of the broken bone from its position, then do not remove it too soon. But if there is severe itching, distressing pain or swelling at the site, then remove it.
So act quickly and remove it [the plaster] at the right time, without delay. Then take a soft cloth or sponge soaked in warm water, wring it out and wash the area until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then allow the limb to rest for a while.
Then, apply clean, soaked wool in vinegar and oil or rose oil ointment, wrap it around the area overnight to prevent hot swelling and reduce inflammation. Then resume gentle traction and light plastering without applying as much tension as before.
And treat it until it heals. If you find that the swelling, redness, pain, inflammation and all symptoms have disappeared completely and there is no longer a need for plastering and traction, then repeat the original procedure if necessary, otherwise leave it alone.
Remove the plaster after three, four, five or seven days, or even up to twenty days depending on how the limb appears as mentioned earlier, until the fracture has healed and the flesh has adhered.
So increase the tension at this point beyond the initial traction, and also increase the thickness of the diet for the patient as mentioned earlier. If you find that the fracture site has become dry and wasted more than it should, then know that the nutrition is not reaching it.
Wash it with warm water every time you remove the plaster, doing so every three days and slightly reducing the tension. By this action, nutrition is brought to the limb and it heals quickly. However, do not follow those who foolishly break the limb again.
If he does not first attempt what is necessary, and attempts instead something twisted, it is an error on his part and a great fault. Had it been correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books, and I would have acted upon it; yet I have not seen any trace of it among them at all. It is correct to not act upon it,
Chapter Two.
On Fractures in the Head.
The types of fractures that occur in the head are numerous and varied, with different causes. Some fractures result from a sword blow, causing either all the bone to break off up to the diaphragm underneath the bone. As happens with wood.
And this type of fracture is called 'qadumi', and sometimes the sword cuts only part of the bone, breaking its surface without penetrating completely; this kind is called an 'absolute excision'. The wound in both types may be large or small.
Among fractures are those that are crushed or depressed, caused by a blow with a stone or falling onto one; these may either approach the membrane beneath the bone or remain on its surface.
Both types of fractures may result in a large or small wound. Another type is a hidden fracture within the bone, which causes only slight concussion.
This type is called 'shari'i' fracture. Another type occurs from a fall or stone blow, causing the bone's surface to sink inward like dented copper.
More often than not, this occurs in the soft bones of children's heads. All these types of fractures may have sharp and blunt fragments, which will be discussed later along with their treatment. First, we shall identify all these types of fractures by examining them.
The hairy type can be identified by uncovering the bone and wiping it with ink; if a fracture is present, it will appear black. As for treating fractures, first consider the patient's symptoms.
If the patient displays obvious symptoms indicative of fear, such as vomiting blood, seizures, loss of consciousness, fainting, high fever, and intense eye redness or similar signs, do not approach him or attempt treatment. Death is likely in most cases with these symptoms.
Should you encounter symptoms that do not alarm you and hope for safety, then treat him at the onset of his injury. This is especially so if it occurred during the winter days.
It is not advisable to attempt removing the bone before the fourteenth day, even if it were in summer. It is preferable to hasten its removal before the seventh day lest the tissue beneath the bone becomes corrupted and exhibits the symptoms previously described.
If a bone fracture has reached the dura mater surrounding the brain, and is accompanied by bruising and inflammation, then cut away the affected portion as I have described. First, shave the head of the injured patient.
Upon exposing the bone, proceed according to what is feasible and based on the shape of the wound and the patient's condition. If you find bleeding or a hot swelling around the bone during examination, respond accordingly.
And you should fill the site with a linen cloth soaked in a decoction of rose and honey, then press it to reduce swelling and secure against bleeding. Afterwards, begin to extract the bone fragment by one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a fine, narrow-bladed knife; its shape is as follows:
And then use another cutting edge that is slightly broader than the first one; its shape is as follows:
And use another cutting edge that is even broader than the second one. It is essential to have various cutting edges of different widths and lengths, all being very sharp at their tips, made from Indian steel or good quality iron.
And strike gently on the cutting edge so as not to dislodge the head and cause injury. If the bone is hard and sturdy, do not drill around it with those drills called 'non-immersed drills' before using your cutting edges.
For these drills do not exceed the thickness of the skull bone due to their round tip below the sharp point, resembling a small ring or circle that prevents them from penetrating too deeply into the bone.
It is necessary for you to prepare many of these drills in various sizes, each suitable for the thickness of a bone, so that you may have for every skull a drill whose tip's length and width match the thickness of that skull. Here are three types. Of the drills, one is large, another medium, and the third small:
And the manner of drilling around a broken bone is that you place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated, then move the drill to another location, leaving about the thickness of a reed between each drill.
Then cut with the cutting tools between each pair of drills, doing so with as much gentleness as possible, until you can remove the bone either by hand or using some other tool prepared for that purpose.
Such as the forceps and gentle tongs, and it is necessary to be very careful that the drill or cutting tool does not touch anything of the peritoneum. When you have completed the drilling and freed the bone from the adhering peritoneum, if any, do not strip it.
And smooth the roughness of what remains of the bone with another tool resembling the cutting tool, but it should be finer and gentler than the rest. If there remain any small bones or fragments, remove them gently using whatever tools you have.
Then treat the wound afterwards with dressings and ointments as mentioned. The other aspect of this procedure is a simple one, far from error, as Galen has mentioned and greatly praised, and these are his words: It is necessary for you first to expose a portion of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and prominent, so that when you have exposed that portion, you may insert under it the tip of this adze-shaped cutting tool, which looks like this:
So that the adze-shaped part is smooth and does not cut anything, while its sharp edge is on the sides extending lengthwise as you see here, so that the adze-shaped part rests on the peritoneum and the cutting edge faces the bone, then strike the tool from one side only.
With a small hammer such that it can gently break all the bone, as if rotating while being secure from the membrane; no frightening incident will occur, even if the practitioner is the most ignorant and clumsy of people. Indeed, even if he were asleep.
If there remains any portion of the membrane attached to the bone in certain places, scrape it off gently using the edge of the same cutting instrument; this will detach it without harm or fear.
But if the bone fracture did not reach the membrane and what was broken off from the bone is its tip with roughness and small splinters remaining, then it is necessary to remove that roughness and extract those splinters gently using a variety of soft forceps of different sizes suitable for each situation according to the requirement of the task.
And regarding the broken bone end and its shape, it is preferable to first use the widest forceps for removing the bone, then proceed with narrower ones, continuing in this manner until the finest and thinnest are used.
As for minor cracks and gentle fractures, each one should be treated according to what promotes its healing, which is evident to anyone with even the slightest practice in this field; refer to what has been written and explained regarding large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed after removing the bone, take a piece of cotton cloth corresponding to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil; then place it on the mouth of the wound, followed by taking another folded or triangular piece of cloth. Soak the second cloth in rose water and oil, then place it on top of the first one; do this as gently as possible to avoid weighing down the abdominal cavity. Then use a broad bandage from above without pulling too tightly, only enough to hold the wound closed.
Leave it under this dressing for a day or two until the heat of the inflammation is secured, then remove it and afterwards use powders made from beneficial ingredients such as onion bulb, crushed cinnamon, almond flour, and caraway seeds among others.
Press on the wound as it is dry and generally use a medicine that cleanses without causing inflammation. Make every effort in treating the wound to keep it clean, without fat or dirt, and do not allow pus to accumulate.
If pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and inflames it, causing great harm to the patient. It may also appear in the peritoneum of the head when the bone is exposed, especially if left untreated.
If blackness appears on its surface, know that if the patient exhibits the symptoms mentioned, it is certain that he will die. However, if this blackness occurs due to a medicine applied to it, then the power of that medicine caused this blackness.
It is necessary to take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them well, and apply it to a cloth, then place it on the peritoneum. Then treat him with appropriate remedies until he recovers.
Chapter Three.
How to set a broken nose.
Know that the upper part of the nose alone breaks, as it is made of bone. The lower part consists of cartilage and does not break; rather, it experiences swelling, dislocation, and fracture.
If one of its sides is broken, you should insert your little finger into the nostril and use your index finger from inside and your thumb from outside to realign the fracture gently, without causing pain to the patient.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, use a thick round-tipped instrument to realign it. If both sides are broken, do likewise. Perform this reduction on the first day after the fracture.
If you cannot reduce the fracture on the first day, wait until the seventh or tenth day after the swelling has subsided. Then insert a wick of cotton gauze into the nostril, using one wick for a unilateral fracture and two wicks for bilateral fractures.
Let the wick be thick enough to fill the nostril, and some earlier cauterizers have mentioned that the wick should be smeared with fat and changed daily. However, I do not recommend this; rather, it should be dipped in beaten egg white mixed with flour.
Then leave the wick until the bone hardens and the cartilage stiffens. You may also insert pipes of goose feathers into the nostril where the wick was placed, after wrapping them in soft cloth to strengthen the packing and prevent breathing difficulties.
If you wish, you may perform this procedure or not. If the nostril becomes inflamed during your work and a hot swelling occurs, apply cotton soaked in cypress oil or hydrated lime water, rose oil, or Diacelon ointment to the nostril.
If no heat inflammation occurs, it is preferable to apply a poultice made of semolina flour and almond dough mixed with beaten egg white from outside the nostril without any binding. If the nasal bones are broken slightly, this will not cause any harm.
Or if it is crumbled, you should incise upon it and remove it with the appropriate instrument. Then suture the incision and treat it with a suitable adhesive ointment that promotes healing. If an injury occurs inside the nostril, treat it with the wick and use lead pipes. Until healed.
The Fourth Chapter.
If the lower lip is fractured...
If the lower lip is broken without laceration, its recognition is easy.
It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you insert your left hand's index finger into the patient's mouth and likewise for the left side with the right hand to gently elevate the fractured prominence from inside out.
And with your other hand from outside the bone, you guide it to align the fracture. If the jawbone is fractured in two places, then use a splint on both sides straight until alignment is achieved. If the fracture occurs at the teeth level.
And you should separate it by pulling what has been hoped to remain with a golden or silver thread, or a brass one. Then place it on the broken beard's tip, followed by a folded cloth placed over it, then cover this with a tight bandage or a piece of leather shoe sole equal in length to the beard. Then secure it from above however you prefer, binding it and compressing it tightly so that it does not dislodge. Command the patient to rest quietly and make his food soft and nourishing. If on the third day you find that any part of the shape has changed in any way, hasten to release it.
Then secure it from above however you prefer, binding it and compressing it tightly so that it does not dislodge. Command the patient to rest quietly and make his food soft and nourishing. If on the third day you find that any part of the shape has changed in any way, hasten to release it. Then repair what you have bound with flour and egg white, or fine barley meal after removing the catgut. Apply this gently to the bandage, so long as it adheres without changing the bone's condition, leave it.
Do not remove it until the wound heals and the fracture solidifies. Often this happens in three weeks. If inflammation appears during that time, use what has been mentioned repeatedly to alleviate it until the swelling subsides.
Now, if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, observe whether any bone splinters or fragments have become separated from it. If so, carefully remove those splinters using whatever tool you prefer to use for their extraction. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, dilate it with scissors according to your need.
Then, after removing those splinters and leaving nothing of them behind, if the mouth of the wound is wide, stitch it up; otherwise, apply one of the salves suitable for that purpose. And allow the wound to heal.
Chapter Five.
On Setting a Collapsed Rib.
The rib most commonly fractures at its anterior end near the shoulder joint, and this fracture usually occurs in one of three ways: either it breaks into two pieces without any fragments being detached.
Or it may occur with fragments detached, which is more difficult to reduce; or it may be accompanied by a wound. If the fracture is without a wound, have two assistants ready: one to hold down the arm adjacent to the fractured rib, and another to extend the neck towards the opposite side.
Then, align the fracture with your fingers until its shape is as it should be without any offset or distortion. If you need more extension, place a ball of rags or wool under the patient's armpit.
And its bone should be of the required length, extending and raising the clavicle while pressing the ball with your hand until the fracture aligns as it should. If you are unable to pull the end of the clavicle outwards because it has sunk too deeply, then the patient should lie on their back.
Then place a moderate cushion under the shoulder blade and press down on it with your hand until the depressed clavicle rises upwards. Then adjust the fracture and align it with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the clavicle has broken off and is moving around, then carefully incise upon it and remove that fragment gently. But if the fragment is embedded in the bone, then change your approach to cutting it out with one of the prepared saws. Afterward, place underneath the clavicle an instrument that holds the diaphragm in place, made of wood or iron, and shaped as follows:
Similar to a spoon without distortion, its width should correspond to the size of the bone needed, and its length according to what is practical for working with. It should have two ends, one wider and the other narrower as shown.
If the wound made for removing the bone fragment is wide and there is no fear of bleeding, then close the wound edges with stitches. But if the wound is small or you are worried about bleeding, then pack the wound with rags and dressings according to its size.
If there is active bleeding, then pack the wound with a mixture of rose oil and honey or vinegar and hold it in place. For reducing a fracture without an incision, apply a bandage made from flour mixed with egg whites onto the bone. Then place the linen splint on it, and if necessary, place a ball under the armpit. Take a long bandage with a width of about an inch or more, then fold it over the splint and bandage. Finally, take a thin wooden board for a sling. It should be three fingers wide and likewise in length, then wrap it in a bandage, then insert this bandage with the dressing into the position on the turban that corresponds to the fracture site, then tie the turban over the fracture as usual. And here it is on his neck and under his armpit, both his own and the patient's. You have seen how tightening sets the fracture correctly, which should be clear to you.
And all of this indicates that the dressing should not be removed from the broken bone. Therefore, you should visit the patient every day. Whenever the bandage slackens and you see that the dressing has shifted, adjust it and tighten the bandage again. Then have the patient sleep on his back with a small pillow under his armpit at night.
Lift his arm with a pillow so that the collarbone fracture is raised as high as the shoulder, or tie his arm to his neck. Do not untie the bandage until twelve days have passed, unless there is an incident of itching or swelling at the site.
Then renew the dressing if necessary. Tighten it and leave him like that until the fracture becomes firm and solid, which should happen within twenty-eight days. And for some people, it may take less than that.
Chapter Six.
Chapter Six: Setting a Shoulder Fracture. The shoulder blade rarely breaks in its broad part; rather, it is the points that break. When a point or the center breaks, it can be identified by touch. Set the fracture according to its shape and form.
Set it back into its natural shape as much as possible, then apply a plaster made of flour, egg whites, and linseed oil over the site. Then place a wide dressing made of linen on top.
Make it as wide as the shoulder blade or slightly wider. If there is any unevenness under the dressing, smooth it out with linseed oil until the dressing lies flat, then tie it securely with a long turban from above.
Press the dressing firmly and ensure the bandage remains in place. Check the knot every day, tightening it whenever it loosens. If the dressing slips from its position, reposition it. Have the patient lie on their right side with their shoulder elevated.
After one to twenty-five days, when this period is complete and you are secure that the bone will not break or become dislocated, untie the bandage. If a splinter of bone protrudes and pierces beneath the skin, make an incision over it and remove it. And perform what has been mentioned regarding relieving inflammation in collarbone fractures if such a situation arises.
Chapter Seven.
On the treatment of rib fractures.
When the ribs are broken in the middle, it rarely occurs. However, their ends often break and shatter. Symptoms include severe pain when leaning forward, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
And perhaps blood will spurt out, and the cracking of the broken bone is evident to the touch. For treatment, have the patient lie on their back with a pillow between their shoulder blades. Then press down on their elbows, bring together the ribs at both sides using your hands, and smooth them as much as possible.
And arrange it until the bone returns to its proper shape. Then apply a bandage and padding, placing on top of it a splint made from a thin strip of willow or elder bark, wrapped in cloth. Then carefully tie the bandage around the broken bone so that it does not slip off. Pass the knot around to the back repeatedly, tightening it firmly each time. Then check the knot at all times and tighten it whenever it loosens.
However, if necessity demands removing the bandage due to pain or swelling at the site, promptly do so. Remove the padding and treat the matter as needed, then replace the padding if appropriate. And press it firmly until healed.
Chapter Eight.
If a rib is fractured, know that the fracture occurs only in the hard places near the back and its extremities facing forward. This is because they are cartilaginous, and this can be detected by touch during examination with fingers.
And reduce it by aligning the fracture with your fingers on the convex surface until the shape is as it should be, then bandage and apply traction to the fractured bone if necessary. If the rib fracture is inclined inward, it causes severe pain in the chest.
And like a cough, which those who have it suffer from because the fractured bone irritates the pleura and causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and spitting up blood. This is difficult to treat, and many methods were used by the ancients for its treatment.
Some said it is appropriate to make the diet of the patient produce wind and gas so that the abdomen swells, expands, and pushes the fracture outward. We disagree with this because it may cause inflammation if there was none, or increase it if it had already occurred.
Some recommended placing a cup on the site and applying suction with force, but we fear that it may draw the skin towards the site due to its weakness. Others suggested covering the site with wool soaked in hot oil.
And pack the space between the ribs until it is filled so that the bandage becomes even when wound around. Then treat the patient for cough with diet and medication. If the patient's condition is severe, they will not be able to endure it. And the fractured bone was irritating the pleura with a harmful cough. We feared for the patient and therefore it is necessary to incise at the site and expose the fractured rib, then place underneath it the apparatus that protects the peritoneum (which has been described earlier) and cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then bring together the edges of the wound if it is large by suturing and dress it with ointment until it heals. If inflammation occurs during this time, quickly apply poultices of rose oil on the site and treat the patient internally with remedies that calm inflammation.
He lies on the side that is difficult for him to sleep until he recovers.
Chapter Nine.
Force beads onto the back and neck.
If bones of the neck are broken, little harm comes to it. Most often this happens due to dropsy (edema), and also with the vertebrae of the spine. If this happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not: If you see that his hands have become paralyzed, numb, and lifeless, unable to move them or open or close them, and if you prick him with a needle or press on them hard, he does not feel it nor does he complain of pain, then know that in most cases he will not recover; he is doomed.
But if he moves them and feels the pinching and pressing, know that the marrow of the bone is intact, and the patient will recover with treatment. If a similar condition affects the spine and you want to know whether it will recover or not:
If you see that his legs have also become paralyzed, and what happened to the hands has happened to them too, then if he lies on his back, wind and feces come out without his will, and if he lies on his belly, urine comes out without his will. But if he lies on his back and cannot control urination, then know that he is doomed; do not bother with treating him. But if none of this happens, the case is easier to treat. The treatment for what has happened is to apply a plaster to relieve the hot swelling.
That is, you apply pure rose oil alone or with fried garlic cloves to the affected vertebrae three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then apply one of the strong, moistened bandages and bind it tightly with a linen cloth, commanding him to remain still and quiet.
He should not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain until he recovers. But if a fragment of bone has come off due to dropsy or something similar that has healed, do not cut into his skin and remove that bone. Then bring the edges of the wound together if it is large with stitches, and treat it with healing salves until it heals. But if the last vertebra of the spine, which is the tailbone, is broken, do not insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus.
The broken bone is reduced with the other hand according to its capability and then secured with a splint and bandage if necessary.
If you feel a fractured splinter therein, cut upon it and remove it, treating the wound as mentioned previously until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
To treat a hip fracture.
When the thigh bones do not break easily, if they do break, it is usually in such a way that the ends shatter and split lengthwise, tilting inward, exposing the marrow, causing pain in the area, numbness, and weakness in the limb.
And treat it by running your hand along it until you reach the fracture, and if the fracture is only at its ends, reduce that fracture according to what is feasible for you until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is lengthwise or has tilted inward, place the patient on their stomach to facilitate reduction of that fracture. Once reduced, apply a splint, then place a bandage made of wood or leather over it and secure it.
Do not fear displacement of the fracture or loosening of the splint, and pack the hollows between the toes with material that fills them until tension is evenly distributed. Order the patient to sleep on their back or unaffected side, if swelling becomes inflamed.
Stop massaging it and treat it until the inflammation subsides, then apply what is necessary to relieve it as mentioned previously. Then return to its reduction and secure it as appropriate. If there are splinters or fractures at its ends, do not remove them.
And do not touch it but reduce it from outside, as we have mentioned, and leave the splint until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On treating fractures of the arm.
The elbow is between the wrist and the shoulder. If it fractures, treat it in one of two ways. Take a smooth, hardened rod of medium thickness.
Tie two bands at its ends, hang it from a high place, and have the patient sit on a chair. Then place their fractured arm on the rod so that their armpit adheres to its middle curve. Then hang something heavy above it.
And a servant extends him to the bottom, then the physician sets the bone with both hands until it returns to its proper position. Alternatively, the patient lies on their back and their arm is suspended from their neck by a bandage.
Then, two servants are ordered: one to hold above the fracture with their hands and another below it. Each pulls in his direction. If you wish for greater traction, tie a bandage beneath the fracture and another above it, and each servant pulls towards his side.
If the fracture is near the elbow, then the bandage should be placed midway between the armpit and the elbow. Similarly, if it is near the wrist, the bandage should be placed on that spot and also on the wrist itself.
Then, the fracture is gently aligned without force until it stands correctly and fits well. If there is no signs of inflammation, then it should be tied. But if there are signs of heat, leave tying for seven days, then apply a bandage soaked in vinegar and smeared with rose oil.
Until the inflammation subsides, then it may be tied. The method of tying is: place a bandage on the fracture, then wrap a fresh cloth around the bandage, bring the arm close to the chest and place the hand open on the shoulder.
And hold the cloth and tie it to the elbow and arm, so that the arm acts as a splint if there is no obstacle preventing this. If you fear any change in the broken bone, then use splints.
And place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than others, leaving one finger's width between each splint. Let the length of the splints be according to the fracture plus three fingers' width on both sides.
Then tie them with the bandage mentioned at the beginning of this book.
And that the tying be tighter at the site of the fracture.
And as the distance from the fracture increases, the tension should decrease. If you see that the splinting and tying have been done correctly at this moment, then proceed.
If you fear inflammation from the hot tumor, leave the bandage and splints for seven days as we have said. Then examine the ligature every three days to prevent irritation, swelling, or obstruction of nutrition to the member due to excessive tightening; all this should be managed as mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of that sort will happen, do not remove the ligature until many days have passed. The patient should lie on their back with their hand on their abdomen and a moderately warm woolen pad placed under their armpit.
And examine at all times, day or night, to ensure that the shape of the broken member does not alter or the ligature relax. Restore all this with effort; maintain the patient's diet on the level previously mentioned, starting with soft food until the bone begins to harden.
It is not permissible to make the patient's diet harsh, for it is usual for the arm and leg to harden in forty days. At that point, the ligature should be removed and the patient should use the bath and treatments appropriate for such fractures.
Do not remove the ligature until fifty days or two months have passed.
Chapter Twelve.
On setting a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the radius and ulna. One, the smaller radius, lies next to the thumb; the other, the larger ulna, is situated beneath the radius at its lower end. Either bone may fracture alone or both may fracture together.
If the upper end of the radius fractures, its reduction is easy and its approximation is quicker. If the lower end fractures, its reduction is difficult and its approximation is slow. The most difficult case is when both bones are fractured together.
The doctor should make the reduction gently and carefully until it is complete. If only the ulna is fractured, the reduction should be made more forcefully; if both bones are fractured together, the reduction should be made very strongly indeed.
The hand's shape should be placed with its palm downwards on a cushion, the fingers stretched out, and the thumb raised above all other fingers. The little finger should be lower than the others, while the wrist is bent beneath itself.
And let the cushion be at his level so that the patient does not exert effort.
Then an assistant extends the arm from below, either by hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extends it from above. The doctor then aligns the bone until it returns to its best possible position; if there are fragments of bone, they should be removed.
Return each fragment to its place as best you can. If there is a protruding fragment that pierces the skin and cannot be reduced, incise over it and remove it according to the method mentioned earlier. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, proceed accordingly.
If inflammation and heat appear at the beginning of reduction, take a cloth moistened with rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin, and apply it gently until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the cotton and apply the prepared bandage, dusted with flour and egg white. Carry out the splinting, ensuring that the splint placed directly on the fracture is wider and stronger. Know that in most cases, there are six splints for the arm.
If the fracture is in one elbow or both, make the bandage around the fracture site tighter and stronger. Whenever you turn the bandage upwards or downwards, loosen it slightly as mentioned earlier.
And let the bandages wrapped around the fracture be soft and moist, not too hard. Let the thread used to tie them be made of medium-weight cotton, as described earlier. Examine the limb and the bandage after a few days.
If something needs to be fixed, such as itching appearing on the limb, warm water should be used to wash the limb until the itching subsides. Leave the limb unbound overnight so that it can rest, then resume bandaging.
If the tension has relaxed and the bone has been removed, or something similar, then restore that entirely with your utmost effort. Also examine whether food can reach the member due to excessive tension; if not, then slightly relax it and leave it for some days until food reaches it, then tighten it again.
If nothing as mentioned appears on the patient, then it is not permissible to remove the bandage until after twenty days or thereabouts. Then tie the patient's hand to his neck with the arm held evenly and the patient should exert himself in avoiding sudden movements, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days, or sometimes forty-three days, perhaps even twenty-eight days, all according to the states of temperaments and strengths.
Chapter Thirteen.
On Setting Fractures of the Hand Palm and Fingers.
Fractures of the hand palm and splints of the fingers rarely occur, but injuries do happen often. So when a fracture or injury occurs in the hand...
The patient should sit with his legs crossed before him on an even chair.
Then he should place his hand on it extended, then the bonesetter extends the broken bone and the doctor aligns it until it bonds well. Then, if there is no hot swelling, a splint bandage is applied, followed by a plaster cast according to the location.
And if the fracture is towards the palm of the hand, then make a ball-like shape from cloth and tell the patient to grasp it with his fractured hand. Then tie it with a long cloth.
And let the plaster cast be made of soft leather that adapts to the skin and allows for bending of the whole hand. If the fracture is on the outside, then make another plaster cast from above and another from below the hand to keep it open and upright.
Then apply tension as the hand rotates and tie between the fingers. If the fracture is in one of the finger splints, especially the thumb, then align it properly and bind it with the hand. You may also wish to make a small upright plaster cast for it.
Let it not be moved, if the fracture is in other fingers like the middle or index or thumb or ring finger, then align and bind it with the next healthy one, or bind them all together. This is better. Alternatively, place a small upright splint on it.
As we said concerning the thumb, observe carefully during the setting and afterwards keep it away from heat. If anything happens as described repeatedly, deal with it accordingly.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
On setting fractures of the thighbone.
The femur often breaks and is recognized by its forward or backward displacement. Its reduction involves pulling a band above the fracture and another below it, while the patient lies on their face.
Then each assistant extends their band gently towards its side, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. But if it is near the hip's origin, a soft band like wool should be used.
At the hip's origin towards the pubic area, so that the first band passes upwards and the other below the fracture. Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, the band should be placed near it so that its end is downwards. Then the physician uses both hands to realign the bone until it returns to its natural shape.
The bone should be immobilized well. If there is no inflammation of the limb, then start applying bandages and traction. But if inflammation occurs, wait until it subsides before resuming treatment.
And for traction, use a broad, firm band twice or thrice around the fracture without tightening it too much. Then fold the leg so that the heel is near the buttock, and insert a long thread between the thigh and leg near the knee from below. The ends of the thread should be above on both sides.
Then wind the remaining bandage around both the thigh and leg. Place splints on the thigh at the fracture site, making one splint for the leg bone. Then fill the space between thigh and leg with soft cotton to balance traction.
Then begin by applying strong traction from the center over the fracture site for three or four turns, and each time you bind further away from the fracture site, let your traction be gentler and milder and relaxed.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and leg, tie with it what is next from above of the ligatures, then pass one end of the thread down until it reaches the ankle, and tie with it also the other ends of the ligatures on the opposite side.
So that the bandage does not slip from its place, then leave the traction on it until the limb does not complain of pain or swelling or inflammation or suchlike. For if any such thing occurs, hasten to untie it and rectify all that has happened according to what we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a splinter of bone that has pierced, do not try to reduce it if you are able; otherwise, cut over it and remove it, and treat the wound as mentioned previously until it heals. For this fracture may be reduced in the thigh without adding ligatures to the leg.
As we mentioned regarding the arm and forearm, except that if it is reduced alone without including the leg, its owner will certainly remain lame forever.
Know that the thigh becomes strong in fifty days or a little more or less, all according to the varying constitutions and other circumstances.
Chapter Fifteen
On fractures of the knee-cap.
The knee-cap rarely fractures, but dislocation occurs frequently. If it does fracture, it is either aulsion or fragmentation of its parts, with or without wounding.
Examine all of this by touch, and reduce it by pressing together what has been displaced of its parts with your fingers until it meets and fits together according to your ability in reduction, gentleness, and care. Then apply a bandage and use a padded splint if necessary.
Apply traction above according to that, then follow all the conditions mentioned in other fractures such as heat and inflammation etc., until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen
On the reduction of fractures of the leg.
The leg has two bones: one thick called the tibia, and another thin called the fibula; they are subject to various types of fractures similar to those of the arm. Therefore, its reduction is like that of the arm, whether one or both bones are fractured. If both are broken, the leg will be displaced in all directions; if only the thin bone is broken, it will be displaced forward; and if only the thick bone is broken near the bottom, this should not escape your notice.
Apply traction and reduction, and bind the splints according to the fracture's condition. However, if it is a severe fracture with many fragments, use gentler traction and be careful when reducing it.
In addition to what is done for the arm, when you have finished applying the splints and completing your work on the leg, take two small pieces of pinewood used for flattening the spaces between the cracks in boards or made from date palm ribs.
Select two pieces that are slightly thick but not too thin, and their length should match the distance from the knee to the ankle. Then wrap each piece with cloth twice its length, placing one on either side of the leg.
Secure the splints at three points on both ends and in the middle to prevent the leg from moving sideways. You may also use a wooden splint along the length of the leg for additional support.
Insert it to keep the fracture from moving, especially if there is an associated wound. Then examine the leg daily and pay close attention to any swelling, inflammation, or other signs. If any of these issues arise, treat them appropriately until they heal. The tibia usually heals in about thirty days or thereabouts.
Chapter Seventeen
On fractures of the foot and toes.
The heel rarely fractures, but bones in the foot may fracture, as can the toes, although dislocation is more common.
If a fracture of the leg bones is exposed and you see that some of them have approached each other, then the patient should place his foot on the ground upright as if walking. Then you come and place your foot on what has risen among those bones and press and smooth it.
Until they return to their places, then bring the splint and the bandage from above and place a small board with two flat ends under the foot. Then tie the foot firmly after wrapping it with cloth and other necessary materials.
If three or four days have passed, then release the bandage. If you find that the bones are aligned and were previously broken or dislocated, proceed accordingly. But if only some of the fingers were broken, straighten them and align them as I have described for the reduction of fingers.
Then make a splint for the broken finger along its length, slightly wider. Then place the board I have described under the foot and tie it firmly if two or three or more bones were broken.
Make a splint for each finger according to its size, tapered at both ends and wrapped in soft cloth. Tie the board under the foot and ensure that each end of the board rests outside the sole of the foot for proper adjustment.
And you must not forget to treat all fractures according to the signs that have been mentioned and apply the appropriate treatment for each condition.
Chapter Eighteen.
Chapter 18: Fracture of the woman's hipbone and pubic bone in men.
When the woman's pubic bone is fractured, make her sit upright. Then tilt her slightly backwards and hold her from behind. The midwife should then pack cotton into her vagina until it is full and forms a ball-like shape.
Then shake the woman gently and raise her pelvis slightly. The cotton will come out until it is at the entrance of the vagina like a ball, allowing the bone to realign. Then place a support on her back. Whenever she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can do so.
Return it as it was initially placed, then go back to its original position. Do this for seven days or thereabouts; it will then be healed. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a reed tube onto its mouth and insert the entire bladder into her vagina.
Then blow air forcefully into the tube until the bladder inflates inside the vagina, causing the fracture to heal. Then fill it with cotton and maintain it as described until healed. If a bone in the pubic region of a man or woman is fractured, this treatment should be used.
And it is to be done as we have described for the hip bone. And you should not be in doubt about these strange fractures, which occur infrequently, especially if you have some experience and understand this book well, since the fracture itself usually indicates how to treat it.
Understand the correct method of its reduction and immobilization. As for a man whose thighbone has been fractured, insert the bone of a goose's leg into him, then apply a bandage made of cloth and leave it on for three days or thereabouts until healed.
Chapter Nineteen
In the reduction of fractures when accompanied by wounds.
It is necessary, especially if a large bone such as the thighbone or forearm is fractured accompanied by a wound, that you act swiftly and perform phlebotomy immediately, provided you meet the conditions for bloodletting as previously mentioned.
If the wound is bleeding profusely, you should immediately apply powdered soda to it. If nothing else is available, then proceed with reducing the fracture on that same day without delay.
If there is no inflammation, then proceed with reduction. But if there is inflammation, leave it until the ninth day to allow the inflammation to subside. Do not approach the fracture on the third and fourth days, as it will have adverse symptoms.
If the fractured bone is exposed and protruding through the skin, you should gently reduce and align it with your hands. If this is not possible, use this instrument made of iron, approximately seven or eight fingers long. Display it according to the extent of the wound.
Therefore, the physician should take from it three or four pieces according to what is needed for treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be thick enough so that they do not bend when pressed upon during work.
And it should have a sharp edge with a bend at its tip, being thicker above and much thinner below; this is its shape:
It is called in Greek "perma," meaning a small lever, and its sharp bent tip should be placed against the protruding end of the bone and pushed gently until the bone returns to place and the edges of the fracture are even.
If its broken tip is thin and the tool has not grasped it well, then cut off that tip of the bone so that the tool can grip it. If you are still unable to reduce the bone as described, use one of the cuts mentioned earlier that resembles it.
Or else, spread it with one of the saws as much as possible, then remove any roughness or splinters from the remaining bone. If after reducing the bone there is severe, painful swelling, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you can return it to its natural position, do so, for you will greatly benefit the patient. After completing the reduction of the bone, dip a cloth in black adhesive syrup, especially if it is summer, and do not apply any ointment containing oil to the wound.
So that no gangrene or corruption occurs, then use dressings during the setting of the bone and leave the wound open by cutting a hole in the bandages corresponding to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to pull on the wound while reducing the fracture, as many ignorant physicians have done this in the past and caused either death or shortening of limbs for their patients. Your pulling should be gentle and yielding, unlike the pulling used for other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear some of the bad symptoms described, and there is persistent pain in the area, do not apply dressings. Instead, make a bandage from thick cloth and use it to wrap the wound tightly.
If after a day or two you find that pus has begun to form in the wound, remove the bandage placed on it with wine, then apply the wrappings and ointments which we usually use for wounds, such as the 'Rabbee' ointment and similar ones. It is also necessary for you to loosen the bandage.
And examine the wound every day, morning and evening, until it heals and is cured. And you should elevate the limb so that pus flows downwards easily. But if many days have passed and the wound has not healed nor has the pus ceased, know that there are small bone fragments still present.
It is not necessary to search for the wound with forceps; those fragments that are not exposed should be removed and extracted. And those that are not exposed but are causing pain and penetrating the flesh, remove them by cutting around them as much as you can.
However, if there is inflammation, swelling, or any other type of corruption and foulness in the wound, you should treat each manifestation with its appropriate remedy, as described in this book.
And what you should not do is attempt to remove or extract a large broken bone such as the femur or humerus. For often death occurs from attempting this, so it is better left alone until it decays and falls off by itself after twenty or thirty days.
So treat the wound if you see a place where treatment can be applied; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty.
In treating the complication that occurs after some fractures.
This complication often occurs after healing of a fracture, especially near joints, causing the limb to become deformed or even disabling it from performing its natural function.
If the complication is fresh, apply medicines that constrict such as aloes, storax, myrrh, frankincense, and coloquintida amongst others. Take some or all of these and mix them with an astringent liquid or egg white or vinegar.
Place it on a complicated pulley system, secure it well with a good knot, and leave the tension for many days without releasing it, then release it and bind another until the complication is gone, if Allah wills. Or you may fasten upon it a tight plate of lead.
If lead has the property of removing all that has collected in the organs, then if the complication has hardened and become severe and necessity has compelled its removal, cut through it from above and sever or strip off the protruding part with some scissors until it is gone, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In treating fractures, if the member remains thin afterwards, unlike its original condition.
If a fracture of the bones has occurred and the limb remained afterwards thin and weak, then that may be for many reasons. One of those reasons may be either excessive cutting and improper tying of the ligaments, or over-tightening of the ligaments causing food to cease reaching the limb, or excessive rubbing, or excessive movements out of their proper time, or insufficient blood supply in the body of the patient and its weakness.
And its treatment is to nourish the patient and enrich his body until blood increases therein, and the use of baths, causing him pleasure and joy, and similar things. Then apply ointment on the limb so that it may draw much food onto it, or continue rubbing with warm water. Until nourishment is restored therein and it returns to its natural shape.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In treating broken bones that have healed crookedly and have prevented proper functioning:
If a limb has healed after breaking with distortion, or shortening of the broken bone, or complication, causing deformity of the member, but if the limb has not been prevented from performing its natural function, then it is not permissible to accept the claim of those who assert that the bone should be broken from the head, as many ignorants among physicians and bone-setters do in our land.
And this action is greatly reprehensible, leading to severe harm and incurable injury. But if the distortion and complication are fresh, it is permissible to rub with warm water in which soothing herbs have been boiled, such as papyrus leaves, their roots, and celery, etc.
Wid'i madh al-'iqdimat al-murakhiat ka-l-diyakhalun al-muhkam as-sin'ah aw yutakhaddam 'ala abu al-khidmah wa-yudammad bih.
And the distortion is dissolved by gentle, continuous friction using the hands. Movement of the joint in all directions at all times is employed; however, if the deformity has progressed and hardened and its treatment requires iron.
It is necessary to cut above it, release the connection of the bone, and sever any remaining deformity or bone with fine cutting tools, using care and gentleness. Then treat the wound as mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three
The jawbone is a dislocated joint that has moved from its proper place, causing immobility and deformity of the member. It also causes severe pain and aching in the patient. Therefore, when dislocation of one of the jaws occurs, it should be immediately reduced.
Never delay it; for if delayed, the place swells and it becomes difficult to reduce the jawbone. Therefore, during swelling, it should not be moved or extended lest the patient suffer from convulsions and severe pain.
However, if it does occur, bleeding the patient first should be done, then left until the swelling subsides somewhat. Then the member is softened with warm water and oil, and gently reduced. Each member should be treated according to what is mentioned in its respective place.
And the chapters on the jaw have also been arranged as mentioned earlier regarding fractures, from top to bottom of the body.
Chapter Twenty-Four
On treating the lower jawbone.
The mandible rarely dislocates except in rare cases. Its dislocation occurs in one of two ways: either it partially slips out from its position and slightly relaxes, or it completely dislocates and fully relaxes. To the extent of the chest until saliva flows from the patient and he is unable to hold it back, nor can he bear to close his jaw or control his tongue for speech. But if he recovers quickly, he often returns to himself easily.
And if the dislocation is complete, do not rush to restore it quickly nor delay it unduly. A servant should hold the patient's head steady and the doctor should insert his thumb into the origin of the jaw inside the mouth on one side.
Or he may insert both thumbs if the jaw is dislocated on both sides, using his other fingers from outside to align it. He should then instruct the patient to relax their jaw and move it in all directions, while the doctor guides the jaw back into its proper place.
If returning the jaw is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, use compresses with hot water and oil to facilitate their reduction without delay. After they have returned and aligned, and the patient's mouth has closed but not relaxed, place dressings of linen soaked in a mixture of wax, oil, and rose.
Then bind it gently with a soft bandage, and have the patient lie on their back with their head propped up between two pillows to prevent movement from side to side. They should not chew anything but take only soft foods.
Until the pain has gone and the jaw has healed, he should eat gently without forcing his mouth open when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw is fully recovered.
If the jaws cannot be reduced and do not return to their proper places, this often results in inflammation, persistent headache, abdominal pain, vomiting, or other ailments. If you observe these symptoms, know that the patient is severely afflicted.
He may die from this condition within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On the Reduction of the Shoulder Blade and Upper Arm.
As for the shoulder blade, it does not dislocate inwardly due to its attachment to the chest. If it dislocates outwardly, this can be felt. To reduce it, the patient should lie on their back and extend their arms.
Then press the site with your hand, pressing firmly; it will retreat. Then apply a bandage and bindings, tying them tightly; but as for its end which lies beyond the shoulder joint and is attached to it, it does not dislocate except rarely. If it dislocates once, do not return it nor set it right according to what was mentioned earlier.
Then apply the bandage and bindings, tying them tightly; and order the patient to observe calmness and rest until it heals. With this treatment alone, the shoulder joint will be restored if it has also dislocated.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On dislocation of the shoulder blade.
Know that the shoulder blade dislocates in three ways: one, towards the armpit and downwards; two, towards the chest; and rarely, upwards beyond the shoulder blade.
It does not dislocate backwards from the shoulder blade's location, nor forwards from its nerve; rather, it most commonly dislocates and exits downwards towards the armpit, especially in individuals with less fat, as it goes out quickly and enters quickly.
As for those with much flesh, it is different; it goes out slowly and enters slowly. Sometimes a person may receive a blow or fall, causing the shoulder blade to swell and become hot, leading him to believe that it has dislocated. Therefore, one must not test this until its condition is confirmed.
When that happens, proceed with its treatment. If the shoulder blade has dislocated downwards towards the armpit, you will find a clear difference between the dislocated and healthy ones when you bring them together. You will also feel that the head of the shoulder blade is rough and, upon touching it under the armpit, it feels like an egg.
The patient will not be able to raise his hand to his ear nor move it in all its motions. Similarly, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards, this will also be evident upon examination and cannot be hidden.
This dislocation can be easily reduced if the joint is soft or the patient is young. To reduce it, have an assistant raise his hand upwards, then place your thumbs under his armpit and press the joint firmly upwards into its socket while the assistant raises his arm overhead and extends it.
Then it is placed underneath him, for he returns quickly; if he does not return as mentioned and the fever has been present for many days, then the patient should bathe in hot water and use a relaxant ointment that softens and loosens, such as one made from linseed, chicory, and rue boiled in water.
Then the patient lies on their back, and a wool ball that is moderately soft but not too much so is placed under their armpit. Then the doctor places his elbow on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his hand while extending it downward.
And he pushes the ball with his foot, so that he returns to his place. If you wish, you may raise him up in this manner: bring a man taller than the patient and have him stand on one side of the bed, inserting his elbow under the patient's armpit and lifting it upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand down towards their abdomen. If the patient is frail, nothing else should be hung from them to weigh them down lest they return the fever immediately. It may also be returned in another manner.
And this is how it may also be done: Take a long, round-topped piece of wood, not too thick or thin, like the shape of a mortar. Place it on the ground and cover its top with a soft cloth. Then place it under the patient's armpit while they are standing upright along the board.
Then he extends his hand downwards from the other side and also leans his body strongly towards that side. The joint will return to its place quickly. If it is difficult to reduce, then use this treatment: take a piece of wood about two cubits long. And make its width about four fingers and its thickness about two fingers, with a round head that makes it easy to enter deep into the armpit like this:
Then tie a soft cloth onto the round head so that the wood does not hurt the patient. Then insert it under the armpit, extend the hand and arm completely downwards along the board, and tie the wood to the forearm and the end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a support. The torso is leaned against and the hand is extended downwards while the rest of the body hangs from the other side. If the joint enters its socket, a moderate-sized ball of wool should be placed beneath the armpit.
Then the bandage prepared from barley flour, incense, and egg white is applied around the entire shoulder as it rotates from above. Then the ball of wool is pulled tightly from under the armpit and tied to the bandage from above. The hand is then suspended around the neck.
He should leave his hand unmoved for seven days, and the patient's diet should be light until the member gains strength, as it hastens recovery. After seven or five days, movement should be resumed; if it holds firm without relaxing, then it has healed.
But if the joint dislocates repeatedly due to dampness or other cause, then it should be reduced using three splints as mentioned in the chapter on reduction. If all this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days but the joint remains unstable
If the bandage and its tension are reapplied several times without success, if it falls and relaxes, and the hand cannot be raised upwards, know that the tendon in the head of the shoulder has either snapped, stretched or relaxed. Know then that the joint will not remain stable in its place.
As for a dislocation towards the chest and breast, or backwards: it is reduced by pushing and pulling with the hands until it returns. The same bandaging and treatment are used until it heals. However, if there is still considerable swelling in the member after healing, and movement is slower than before.
The patient should use hot baths many times until that swelling softens and returns to its original state
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the treatment of elbow dislocation.
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also reduces with difficulty. It can dislocate in all directions, especially towards the front or back. You will easily recognize its dislocation as it is apparent to both sight and touch, regardless of how it has occurred.
If you examine the dislocated shoulder against the sound one, it will be evident that there is a shift in the joint and it cannot bend the arm or touch the neck with it. You should promptly reduce and return the shoulder before inflammation sets in.
If inflammation sets in, it becomes difficult to reduce the shoulder and it may not recover fully, especially if the joint is dislocated backwards. This type of dislocation is the worst and most painful of all kinds, often leading to death.
To reduce the shoulder if possible, an assistant should extend their arms and hands while the doctor places one hand above the elbow and another below it, using their thumbs or the base of their palm to push the joint back into place.
If the shoulder is dislocated forwards, it can be reduced by bending the elbow until the wrist hits the chest near the shoulder. If this does not work, apply strong and forceful traction using an assistant to extend the arm.
During traction, the patient should be held by assistants to prevent slipping. After reduction, wrap a cloth or towel around the arm and move it gently in all directions. Before manipulating the joint, lubricate your hands with oil for easier movement.
Then push the joint forcefully back into place. After reduction, apply a bandage with gentle pressure and egg white for fixation. Secure the arm to the patient's chest using a sling.
Then wait. If the joint remains in place, remove the bandage and leave it alone. But if the joint seems unstable, keep the bandage on for a few days until it becomes stronger, then remove it.
If the joint is stiff, use gentle massage and heat treatment in a bath to loosen it. Or apply a warm poultice made from suet for one day and night before removing it and bathing.
Then, you apply the oil repeatedly, first, second and third times with entering the bath until it softens. And if you wish to make a bull's penis moist and relaxed with lard and fat, do so repeatedly; for it will soften and return to its original state.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
In treating dislocation of the elbow.
Dislocation of the elbow occurs frequently and reduction is easier than other joints, except that it is necessary to reduce it quickly at the time it happens before the place becomes stiff or inflammation appears.
To reduce it, place the patient's elbow on a board and have an assistant extend their hand. The physician should then place their hand on the condyle of the joint and push until it is reduced, but first make sure that the dislocation has gone back into the palm of the hand.
If the dislocation is prominent on the outer side of the hand, place the palm of the hand on the board so that the physician's hand rests on the same condyle of the joint. If it returns, well and good; otherwise, bind it with a bandage that has been soaked in an anti-inflammatory solution.
Leave him alone, do not attempt to reduce it again for it will not tolerate it nor can you succeed in reducing it after some days have passed. The joint will remain on its surface and will not harm the patient except if the hand becomes paralyzed and unable to grasp anything.
In that case, you will know that the nerve has been cut or stretched. There is no remedy for this except to try binding it with a bandage, which may help or may not. After reducing the elbow, apply the bandage we have described and keep it on for five days.
Then remove the bandage and exercise the hand. If its movement is difficult and there is stiffness, soften it with warm water and massage repeatedly until it becomes flexible.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In treating dislocation of the fingers.
If a finger dislocates towards any direction, when it dislocates outwards or inwards, extend the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumb until it is reduced. Then bind the head of the finger and suspend it towards the direction it dislocated to.
Leave it for two days, then release and extend it until it improves on its own during the day. If it happens at night, tie it with the same description; still loosen it during the day and train it with movement, tying it at night. Do this for several days until it strengthens.
And similarly, if it becomes detached towards the inner part of the hand, tie it to about the same side and do as you did initially until it heals. Similarly, do this whenever it becomes detached elsewhere.
Chapter Thirty.
In treating a dislocated lumbar vertebra.
If complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae in the back or neck occurs, or many vertebrae shift from their places, there is no treatment for it because death hastens to the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's feces exit without control, and they cannot hold it in. Often, some of their limbs, either legs or arms or one of them, become paralyzed. But if only one vertebra shifts from its place, it often returns to its position.
If the dislocation occurs in four directions, that which dislocates backwards is called a hump. The treatment for this is to look at it; if the hump has occurred from birth, there is no treatment for it and it will never recover. But if it has happened due to a fall or a blow or something similar...
(The early authors) mentioned various treatments for this with lengthy discussions, but most of it is not useful. I have summarized what is beneficial from that and clarified the tool differently than they described it and explained it differently than they did.
I say that the hump which occurs in front of the chest and also those on both sides cannot be treated or healed. Only the ones occurring in the back can be treated, particularly with the method I will describe: lay the patient on their face.
Place a flat, level bed near a wall and put a wet cloth underneath it so that it does not hurt the patient's chest. Then insert an upright wooden post into a hole dug in the ground at the head of the bed, and another one towards the feet at the other end of the bed.
A servant holds one end of the splint, ensuring it is not secure in the hole, while another servant holds the other end in the same manner. Then, a soft, tight bandage is wrapped around the patient's chest and under their armpits, with one end of the bandage tied to the head-end splint.
The other end of the bandage is then pulled over their hips, knees, and ankles, before all the bindings are gathered together and tied to the splint at his feet. Then each servant pulls on the splint at their end without moving the splints from their initial positions.
However, they are not secure as mentioned earlier. The doctor places his hands on the knot with force until it returns or places a board on top of it and leans on the board with his legs until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, he takes a board that is about three arms in length.
A hole is dug into the wall mentioned earlier, near the patient. The board's end is inserted into this hole and its center placed on the hump. The doctor places his feet on the other end of the board and pulls with sufficient force to snap the knot.
And it returns to its place. If you wish, it can be made with a device called the 'screw,' which is twisted by hand: two splints are inserted into the ground at the patient's head-end of the bed, each one arm-length long, and likewise another two splints are placed at his foot-end.
And there should be a span between each splint. Then, holes are made in each splint through which the screw can pass and the wood is securely fixed into the ground so that it does not move at all. The screw rod, around which the bandage will be twisted, is inserted into these holes.
And at one end, there is a hole in which an arm-length rod has been securely fixed for twisting the bandage. The other two splints have similar holes. Then, the bandage that was tied around the patient's chest is wound around the screw at his head-end, and the bandages tied to his legs are wound around the screw at his foot-end.
Then he stands at each screw of the assistant who turns it with the wrench used for turning screws, and the doctor levels the hump as we have shown. This is a picture of the screw, tongs, and the limb.
Then, after the ligature is released and the site is leveled, it is necessary to wrap the dried bandage with egg white, then with gauze, and then place a splint made of wood over the bandage, its width being three fingers or approximately that, and its length being sufficient to cover the hump.
Then, some corrective bandages are applied, and the limb is bound with a bandage that should be used until it heals. If there remains some stiffness in the place after healing, then medicaments that soften and relax should be employed along with the splint we have described earlier for an extended period.
It is possible to use a lead plate for this purpose. If stiffness persists even after bandaging, it might be thought that the spine has become dislocated and that there is an extra bone present. Do not attempt this treatment in such cases, as death may result.
Chapter Thirty-One
In treating a dislocation of the hip joint.
Know that the hip and shoulder joints are only subject to dislocation, unlike other joints which may also undergo slight displacement orluxation. The hip joint can dislocate in four directions.
This occurs when the hip joint dislocates inwardly, outwardly, anteriorly or posteriorly. Most commonly it dislocates inwardly and less commonly anteriorly or posteriorly. The sign of inward dislocation is that when you compare the length of the healthy leg with the affected one, the healthy one appears longer.
The knee will be more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient will not be able to flex their leg at the hip. The area below the hip will feel warm and hot due to the displacement of the femoral head towards that region, as we have explained previously.
The symptoms of outward dislocation are the opposite of those mentioned above. For anterior dislocation, the leg is fully extended but cannot be flexed at the knee without pain. The patient will not be able to walk forward freely due to this limitation.
He retains urine and his buttock trembles upon walking, and the sign of one afflicted with this condition is that he cannot straighten his knee nor bend it before bending his thigh, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
And the thigh is flaccid, and the head of the femur is located at the point of the ischium; but the remedy for this condition is to look, for if the hip has become old with its owner without attempting to set it right and has remained in its state, then there is no cure for it.
So one should not expose him to it, but if the hip is recent and of any kind among the four types of dislocation, hasten to dislocate the joint, extend it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left perhaps.
If it does not return thus, then one should not consider him as having been helped by a strong servant. Instead, two servants should be summoned; one should extend the leg from below either with his hands or using a splint tied above the knee, while another servant extends it from above.
To enter his hands under the armpits, then pull with a soft bandage around the root of the thigh, and another servant holds the end of the bandage while stretching the leg either from in front towards the shoulder or from behind towards the back.
And they all stretch simultaneously until the patient rises from the ground and remains suspended. This method of stretching is common to all four types, but if the dislocation does not return as described above, then each type requires its specific treatment which I will mention.
If the dislocation is inwards, then the patient should lie on his sound side, and a bandage should be tied around the root of the thigh between the head of the femur and the point below the buttock.
Then the bandage should be extended upwards from the buttock towards the shoulder, and another strong servant should take hold of the thick part of the thigh bone of the affected leg with his arms and pull it outwards forcefully until it returns to its place.
This type is easier than other types of treatment used to dislocate this member. If you find it difficult and cannot use this type of treatment, then you should bind both legs of the patient with a strong yet flexible bandage around the heels and knees.
After each of these, leave one person to accompany him, the distance being that of four fingers. The affected leg should be extended two fingers' length more than the other. Then have the patient hang from a wooden beam found in the house, with his feet about two arm-lengths off the ground.
Then command a strong boy to embrace the hip, and another boy to pull him. Push the boy embracing the hip with force, and the joint will quickly return to its place. But if it is particularly dislocated outwards.
It is necessary that the patient lie on the couch as we described for treating dislocation of the hip, and tie the bandage tightly around his affected thigh, particularly his chest. Then place one board under his legs and another under his head. A third board should be placed in the middle of the couch, firmly secured.
Wrap a wet cloth around it so as not to harm the patient, and place the board between his thighs lest he slip downwards during traction. Then each servant pulls from his side while the doctor uses both hands to reduce the hip. If it responds.
If not, then place the board on it and press according to what we mentioned in dislocation of the hip joint until it becomes equal. But the patient should lie on his sound side, and if the dislocation is anterior, then extend the leg of the affected limb while lying thus.
The doctor places his right hand on the affected buttock and presses it with his left hand while maintaining continuous pressure downwards towards the knee. But if the dislocation is posterior, do not extend the limb downwards.
And he should be elevated off the ground, but rather placed on a solid object. This also applies if the hip has dislocated outwards according to what we mentioned regarding his position on the couch while lying face down with the bandages tightened.
Upon what we have mentioned earlier, it is necessary to use the compression board also on the spot where the joint has come out. When the hip joint has returned as desired, its sign will not be hidden from you, for the patient's legs will extend.
When you see them straight and the patient grasps his leg and extends it without difficulty, know that the joint has returned as desired. Then, tie the thighs together and apply the bandage, pulling it tight with a cloth so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient must remain still for three or four days, then remove the bandage and splint, and test the leg by moving it. If you find them equal in strength, know that the hip has healed and allow the patient to walk. But if there is some laxity...
...return and bind it again, tightening it as before. Leave it like that for three more days, then remove it and gradually allow walking on it until strength returns, if Allah wills.
Chapter Two-Thirty.
In the treatment of knee fracture.
The knee breaks into three directions: inward, outward, and downward (i.e., backward). It does not break forward. The sign of its fracture is when the patient cannot bring his leg towards his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is fractured. To set all sides of its fracture, make the patient sit with his legs extended and another person sit behind him holding his waist and pulling him slightly backwards, then you sit on his thighs.
Lean your back against his face, place his leg between yours, then press his knee with both hands and interlock your fingers over it. Then squeeze the sides of the knee with force while another assistant extends the patient's other leg until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of its return is when the leg sticks to the thigh smoothly without resistance. Then bind it, adhering the leg to the thigh, and tie them together with a bandage for three or four days. After that, allow gradual walking until strength returns.
If its return proves difficult according to what we have described, then use the strong bandage with the bindings that are mentioned earlier in treating the hip until it returns.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
In treating the heel bone fracture.
The heel can slip away easily or it can snap completely, its fracture being either inward or outward. The sign of a fracture is that the heel appears swollen and prominent on the side towards which it has snapped.
However, if it has slipped, its reduction is easy; one should gently pull with the hands until it returns to its place. But if it has snapped completely, then the patient should not sit down and a strong servant should hold him firmly from behind at his waist.
Then, holding the patient's foot with your right hand at its upper part and with your left hand below it at the ankle joint, pull the foot towards you with your right hand twice then with your left, then stretch it with your left hand and push the front of the foot with your right hand gently towards the leg.
Repeat this procedure twice as described, then push the front of the foot towards the leg on the third attempt while pulling at the ankle joint. If it returns in one or two attempts and you see that the foot is straight, otherwise repeat the process until it returns.
If it does not return according to what we have described, then lay the patient on their back on the ground and drive two pegs into the ground securely so that they fall between his thighs. Cover them with a cloth so as not to harm the patient, then adjust a servant's thigh.
Then another servant pulls the patient's leg either with his hands or with a bandage tied around the patient's thigh. Then each servant pulls in turn while keeping the post upright between the patient's thighs to prevent the body from sliding down during traction, then the physician straightens the fracture by hand.
Then another servant holds the healthy leg downwards; if the fracture returns quickly, then bind the splint and weights and tie it securely with bandages taking care not to harm the nerve that lies above the heel from behind.
To prevent the bandage from being too tight on him, causing harm, then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, tie it again on the third or fourth day. The patient should refrain from walking for forty days.
If he attempts to walk before this period, it is not safe that the jawbone will dislocate and spoil, and afterwards it will not accept treatment. If he has a hot swelling, do not use what we have mentioned above for its relief except in another place of treatment and bandaging until it subsides.
Chapter Forty-Three.
In the treatment of the jawbone of the foot.
It is necessary to set what has dislocated from it with a slight extension without force, for this is not difficult but easy. If the jawbone of one of the toes on the back of the foot is dislocated, it is necessary for the patient to place his foot on a level place on the ground.
Or, while standing like walking, place your foot on the raised part of those joints and press it with your foot forcefully until it returns to its place and you see that it has been set without any swelling appearing.
Then place a board with two raised ends under the sole of his foot, wrap it tightly and securely for three days. Then release it and keep him from walking for many days until it becomes strong and its return is assured, if Allah wills.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
In the types of dislocation that occurs with a wound or with a fracture or with both.
If any of these happens, neglecting its treatment and care often results in death.
Therefore, it is not permissible for anyone to undertake the treatment of such cases except someone who is skilled in this art with long experience, careful, gentle, cautious, and not hasty or reckless. He should start by using remedies that reduce hot swellings only, and then entrust the patient [to him].
O Allah, decree for him only what You have decreed for his safety from harm with ease of the disease and some hope in him. Therefore, return him immediately to his original state before the hot swelling appears.
If the limb returns to its intended state, use the method that treats hot swellings and apply appropriate dried poultices to the wound. If the jaw is broken with splinters protruding, remove them. And follow what we mentioned earlier in simple diseases as indicated in their respective places.
And strive diligently to avoid the path of error that we have warned you against, for that is best for your honor and safest for your practice, if God wills.
