After I have completed this book for you, my Sons, which is the last part of the medical science with its complement, and after I have reached its end through its explanations and clarifications, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of practice, that is, surgery with manual techniques.
Since the practice with manual techniques was laid low in our region and time, entirely deprived: until perhaps its knowledge perished, and its trace was cut off: and there remained from it only small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which hands have altered: and error and hesitation befell them, until their intentions were closed, and the sight of it was lengthened: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the order of this Treatise according to the way of exposition, and clarification, and abbreviation: and to bring it forth with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work: as is done by the addition of clarification, and by hastening what is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman with manual skills is not found in this time of ours is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained in anatomy before that, as Galenus narrated, until he knows the aids of the members, and their forms, and their connection and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number, and their emergence, and arteries, veins that pulsate, and those that are still, and places of their exit.
And for that reason, Hippocrates said that knowledge by name alone is much, but with practice it is little, especially in the art of manual skills.
We have already said this at the beginning of this book.
Since those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy do not escape falling into error, by which men are killed: just as I saw many of those who pretend to be formed by this science and boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a foolish doctor incise a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck, and he cut some arteries in the neck: wherefore the woman bled until she died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from a man who had grown old, and the stone was large. He proceeded to do so and extracted it along with part of the bladder. Thus the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had already been called to extract it: and upon seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I realized that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received payment from one of our country's dukes for his medical services: and it happened that a black eunuch in his service suffered a fracture near the heel of his leg: and the doctor, with his ignorance, hurried to bind the fracture tightly over the wound with bandages and stiff splints, and did not allow any release for the injury.
Then he discharged him according to his own wishes. After a few days, he told him not to remove the bandage: and he remained like that until his leg became abscessed, and his foot as well, and he eventually met his ruin.
I was therefore called to him: and I hurried to remove the bandage: and peace followed, and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption was already established in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, the corruption ceased to spread in the member until it disappeared.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess: and it became ulcerated after several days, until the malignancy spread throughout the body of the patient.
This is because when the cancer is purely from a melancholic humor, then it is not appropriate to approach it with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it being entirely removed.
And for that reason, my children, it is necessary for you to know that the practice with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation associated with healing; and an operation involving danger in many circumstances.
And I have already indicated throughout this book, wherever the practice involves fear and danger.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious about that and to avoid it: so that the foolish do not find a way to speak of it and disgrace it.
Therefore, take the measure with care and protection, and treat your patients with ease and firmness, and use a better way leading by God's grace to salvation and a praiseworthy succession: and abandon severe illnesses difficult to heal: and remove from yourselves what causes fear, so that hesitation does not enter into your faith and well-being.
For it remains more for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally for your quantities.
For Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat illness badly; do not be called bad doctors.
Now I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
Chapter One.
About cauterization with fire and cauterization with sharp medicine, arranged and ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments and tools for cauterization: and all that is necessary for the procedure.
Chapter Two.
About incision and puncture, bloodletting and ventosity, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures: and all arranged by types of instruments.
Chapter Three.
About restoration, and dislocation, and the treatment of sprains, and similar procedures: arranged and ordered from head to foot, and by forms of instruments.
But before I recall the operation with him, it is necessary for me to say what are his instruments and their defects: and in which complexion they are exhibited.
I say then, that the discourse on the quality of the cautery and its defects is a long and subtle discourse, a science and a hidden secret.
Moreover, many wise people have spoken about it, and they have disagreed on the subject: and for me, a few of their words are enough, fearing to prolong the discussion.
I say then, that the cautery is generally applicable to all complexions, whether with material or without material, except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without material and the dry complexion without material.
However, they disagreed on the hot and dry complexion with material. Some have said that the cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite, namely that the cautery is not appropriate for a disease caused by heat and dryness: for the nature of fire is heat; it is inappropriate to treat with heat and dryness a condition that arises from heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite stated that through the cautery there is a benefit in every disease caused by heat and dryness that occurs in human bodies: for when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the nature of fire, you find the human body to be cold.
And I indeed say through his discourse: because practice has already revealed this to me on several occasions.
However, it should not be undertaken by anyone except one who has already been proven and trained in the final chapter of the cautery exercise, and who knows the diversity of human constitutions, and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the time span of them.
However, you should not fear concerning the other constitutions; especially in cold and moist diseases. For now all the physicians have agreed about them: and they do not disagree on the benefit of using Cautery with them.
And know, my children, that from the secret of treatment through Cautery with fire, and its goodness compared to Cautery with burning medicine is clear: for fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the member being cauterized: and it does not harm another connected member, except with slight injury.
The action of burning medicine, however, reaches what is distant from the members and may cause a difficult-to-treat illness in a member, and perhaps even cause death.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm unless it is excessive.
Now it has become clear to us through experience, due to the length of service and study with the art, and standing upon the truth of things: and for this reason I am excused from prolonging my speech.
And if it were not that it is not permitted to this book of mine, I would bring you a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies through which it expels diseases, demonstrated by philosophical speech, which would sharpen your minds.
And know, my sons, that they disagree on the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery, and they place a better time as true.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times: therefore, because the harm caused by the time is overcome by the healing attraction brought about with cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains caused by necessary, severe, and urgent conditions that do not tolerate delay: therefore, because it is feared that from them a greater harm may occur than the slight damage incurred due to waiting for the right time.
And let it not enter your minds, my sons, that which is not considered except by the common people and foolish doctors, namely that to the illness cured by cautery there is never a recurrence: and they consider this as a consequence, but matters are not as they suppose: because cautery is nothing other than in place of medicine that alters the constitution and dries up the humors which are the cause why pains occur.
However, cautery is excessive over medicine due to the speed of recovery and the power of its operation and the strength of its authority: and it is possible for illness to return at some point in time according to the patient's constitution, the location of their illness, and its power: and what prepares itself in their body from the aggregation of excesses within them: and what reaches them through their diet and similar causes, unless an illness occurs that cautery is administered for.
An illness that is subtle and consists of a few excesses and humidities in a member, such as tooth cautery due to pain and similar cases, it is possible for the pain not to return. But that is done in a few [steps].
However, the common talk again, which says that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is correct: not in the sense that they themselves intend by it; for they believe that there is no cure that compares with medicine, nor with anything else after the use of cautery.
On the contrary, that matter and intention, that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is not so except in this way: when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help; then at the end we administer cautery, which does help. From this it follows that cautery is the last recourse of medicine, not according to the understanding intended by common people and many foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality and superiority of gold's nature: and they also said that the place where gold cautery is applied does not produce pus. However, this is not absolutely true: for I have already tested it and found that it does not hold in certain bodies without other factors.
And cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you heat gold for cautery in fire, it does not become clear to you when it is ignited according to the quantity you wish, due to the redness of gold: and when it quickly cools down, and if you add more heat to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into difficulty with that process: and because of this, cautery with iron is quicker and more convenient for us, due to its straightforwardness in application.
And I have now arranged this Chapter on Cauterization according to the chapters; and I have arranged them from head to foot, so that whoever seeks may find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
Here cauterization is applied to the domain of humidity and coldness above the brain: there are two causes for soda, and an abundance of fluid flow from the head to the parts around the eyes and ears, and an abundance of dreaming, and pain in the teeth, and throat pain: and generally all illness that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, soda (sweating sickness), epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the patient: to first evacuate with dissolving and cleansing medicine for three nights, or four, depending on what the condition of the patient requires, their age, and their usual habits.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then have him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with a cautery.
Then heat the olive-shaped cauterizing iron: this is its form.
Then place it on the marked place with a cautery, while gradually tightening the bandage with your hand, and you rotate it. Then quickly withdraw your hand and look at the place.
If you see that the amount of the head of Alkiele or the amount of Zevherbi is now exposed from the bone, then raise your hand. And if not, continue using your hand with the iron itself, or use another one if it has cooled down: until you can see the bones that I told you about.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and apply it to the wound, and place it on the affected area: and leave it for three days.
Then place on the wound a dressing soaked in butter, and leave it on the affected area until the burnt tissue falls off. Then treat it with the tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, the more it discharges pus: therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone: and the cautery should be held in place until a portion of the bony tissue is burned.
Then scrape off what has been burned from the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that with the cautery one must reach as far as possible until it leaves an impression on the bone, so that part of the bone falls off, resembling the shape of a kirate: or an instrument that women place for small letters when pouring; they believe that vapors from the head are expelled by this, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it is healed and firm.
However, these two types of cauterization do not seem to be necessary except for some people due to fear.
And to let him go is better with me, for his safety.
For the head weakens from the dissolution of its natural continuity, as we have testified with other limbs; especially when the sick person's head is weak by nature. And indeed, the first type of cauterization seems to be safer and better to me, and I use it: therefore, to work with it for the patient's safety.
Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head and it persists in the sick person, they use hot irons, decoctions, purgatives for the head, oils, and emplastros. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the method we have mentioned and none of those treatments help: then consider. For if the sick person's head is of strong natural constitution and is not weak, and finds extreme cold: then cauterize with a different method under that one slightly. Then cauterize it over all the points of the head with the cautery, but do not penetrate the skin, and expose a certain amount of bone as we have described. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of the head at a place called vas, which is where a vial would be placed: raise your instrument in this location, and do not expose the bone. For this causes him great pain, and a different kind of pain from that of the other anterior head wounds.
And I will call this Caustic in its place: and it must be such a caustic that the horns of the head are cauterized with it, and its occiput more finely with a caustic that cauterizes the middle of the head.
Chapter IV.
When pain and tension occur in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is evacuated with purifying medicines for the head, and the remaining treatment is administered as I described in the divisions of illnesses, but this does not alleviate it entirely: then cauterization is performed there in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicinal agent, or with iron.
The cauterization with a sharp burning medicinal agent is done by taking one tooth of the leek, peeling it, and cutting off its extremities from both sides. Then cut open the site of the pain with a broad lancet until a place under the skin is reached where the tooth can be placed.
Insert it under the skin at the site until it is concealed; then bind it with a small piece of cloth in an appropriate constriction and leave it for fifteen hours. Then remove it, extract the leek, and leave a bandage on for two or three days: afterwards apply a poultice soaked in butter until pus forms at the site; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on burning medicines.
The cauterization of it with iron is done in the following manner. The cautery tool, which has this form.
And it is called a Nail because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, which has some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand firm: and you should rotate the iron gradually with speed: and the amount that is burned should be according to the thickness of the skin, as its middle part. And raise your hand so that the artery below is not burned, and to prevent excessive bleeding.
Then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then apply a cloth with butter: afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this headache with the second cutting edge of the cautery tool. And be careful not to cut the artery in this headache, especially if it is not an old one.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in an old headache.
When treating a headache with what we have mentioned from previous treatments and the divisions of ailments, and if treatment is not effective: and you see from the ailment that what we said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire is insufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cutting cautery until it whitens. After marking the spot of pain with a line whose length is half a finger’s width, or about that, place your hand aside once, and press it until you cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful not to touch the joint of the jaw, which moves during chewing, so that the side is not burned or the nerve that moves it is not affected, from which a spasm may occur.
And be careful about the protection and caution regarding the flow of blood from the artery that has been cut. For there is fear in cutting it, especially for one who does not know what they are doing, and who is neither diligent nor experienced, and thus leaves the procedure unfinished.
And I will proceed with the reminder of the management of blood flow from an artery according to its method and in its place in this book.
If you see from the condition that this cautery is not sufficient for the patient and you see that the patient's body can tolerate a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have described, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery using a cautery with two knives. For this cautery is better and more beneficial.
¶ On the method of cauterizing for pain in the Ears.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with solutives and other treatments as we described in the division, but the pain does not subside, then apply cautery with fire: and this is what is called a punctum, whose form is as follows.
Then mark points around the ear, as it turns, with them after its burning: or around both, if pain is felt in both at once. And move away from the base of the ear for a moment with the cautery after marking the places with wax: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on each ear, or so.
Then treat the places until they heal.
¶ On the Method of Cauterizing in Tortion.
Chapter VII.
Tortion that is treated with cauterization is only due to types that occur from phlegm, as we said regarding the classifications of illnesses.
And avoid cauterization for the type that occurs due to dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of tortion with herbs, purgatives, and gargles, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient three times: once near the base of the ear, and the second slightly below its usual position, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part. Since softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is such that you should cauterize with the cautery directly at the upper extremity of the ear near the horn of the head slightly: and another at the temple: whose length should be according to the length of a thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the thickness of the skin halfway burns.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type made from a small knife, whose shape was described before; however, it should not be much thinner than that, as you see: and it must be slightly thicker than a small knife.
Then treat the areas as was described before until they heal.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in cases of chronic apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes chronic and your treatment does not improve the condition, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on each corner of his head, one in the middle of the head, as was said, and one at the back of the head, as described before: and the method of cauterization should be as previously instructed.
It is also cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach: and this is more of a last resort.
Then treat it as was described before.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary to give the patient large herbs and pills that cleanse the brain first of all, mixed with water.
Then shave the patient's head completely, and place a mustard plaster on the back of his head, as described in the chapter on plasters: and apply it several times.
For this is the method of Cauterization: and perform it according to the same order which I mentioned there.
If he is healed by that method, it is good. If not: then perform three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which should descend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and place each cauterization with the width of a finger apart.
Then proceed with the cauterization as described previously.
If you wish to add more and the patient can tolerate it: then perform a cauterization in the middle. If you wish to add more: then cauterize him above two horns.
Then treat it until it is healed: let the cauterizing agent be olive-based, according to the form which has been described.
On the method of cauterizing in Paralysis and for softening.
Chapter 10.
You should proceed with the cleaning of the head using herbs, as well as what we have mentioned.
Then shave the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over every point of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you need to soften the body in a severe illness with more cauteries, and the patient can tolerate it, and the illness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and the last one until it burns much of the skin, and raise your hand. Then treat him until he is healed: and use the olive-based cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
An epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
Therefore, you should clean his brain first with herbs and with the remaining treatment we have mentioned in the division: when the patient is very ill or can tolerate medications.
If however the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer gargles and brain-cleansing mastications before that for many days with the improvement of food.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, as has been described in the method: and with another cautery on the back of his head, and above all horns of his head with a cautery. If the patient is strong and can endure it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned for one suffering from paralysis, and apply relaxation to the body over the vertebrae of the neck and back: and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the method described previously.
但如果病人是儿童，那么放置一个细小的 cautery，按照此方法。
Regarding the method of cauterizing in melancholia.
When the cause of melancholia is corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cautery methods we have described for one suffering from paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess inclination towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, as was described previously in the division. Then shave the patient’s head, and afterwards make a properly formed bandage from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient, sitting squarely, should be held from all sides.
Then apply the ointment. And it is appropriate to use an ointment made from ancient sheep's butter. And warm it over a fire with a moderate heat that the finger can tolerate when inserted into it. Then apply it in the middle of their head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do this for the patient once every week, along with the rest of their good regimen, until they are healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures, while holding the cautery with your hand: let it be done with an aromatic substance.
For this type of cautery moistens the brain with a specific quality.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter or chicken fat on it.
Regarding the method of cauterizing with water flowing to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the beginning of water in the eye is declared to you by the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and have the patient drink, ensuring that their head is cleansed.
And keep the patient away from all moistures, and have them sit in a bath for several days while fasting.
Then instruct them to shave their head, and cauterize it in the middle of their head. Then cauterize them above both temples with two applications of cauterization, if the beginning of water descending into the eyes is in both eyes at once: or from one side, if the beginning of water is in one eye: and cut off all veins and arteries that are under the skin with the cauterization: and let the cauterizations be long in width across the temples: and beware of excessive blood flow.
If you see something that requires it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I give permission with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them, and caution against excessive blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two final extended applications of cauterization.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and constant: and they are above the veins, and arteries which are on the exterior part of the head, it is verified that this is from excesses of cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the cautery which I have described at the beginning of the descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries in the neck under the two bones. And if you need to add more, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye carefully, above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
§ On the Method of Cauterizing for Nasal Discharge.
When you treat it with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not succeed: then hurry, and give him three nights of infusoria in his drink: then shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, using an olive oil cautery. Then cauterize it with a needle cautery using two cauteries above the two eyebrows slightly under the hair.
And be careful of the artery, so as not to hit it.
And this is the form of the needle cautery.
§ On the Method of Cauterizing for Softening the Eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above both eyebrows with two cauteries in every part; and they should be distant from the two temples: and let the length of each cauterization be according to the lengths of the eyebrows: and do not leave your hand with the cauterium, but rather according to the amount that the third eyelid is burned.
¶ On the Method of Cauterizing the Eyelid When Hair Turns Painfully Irritating the Eye.
The cauterization is performed in two ways: either with fire, or with a burning medicine.
However, in cauterization with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let his hairs grow if he is one of those who usually shave them, until they have grown out and are even. 但如果它们在他处生长时刺痛眼睛：然后用绷带固定他的眼睛，使其不动，直到新生长的毛发不再引起刺激。
当它们生长并变得均匀时，然后将病人的头部放在你的臂弯中：接着用蜡笔在病人的眼睑上标记，标记的形状应像我的叶子：并且标记的起点应该靠近毛发。
然后将浸有鸡蛋清或石松黏液的棉球放在眼睛上。
然后用火进行烧灼，其形状如下所示。
Then cauterize gradually over the shape you have marked in many passes until the surface of the skin, which resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, is completely burned.
And the sign of your work being successful is this: if you see the eyelid already contracting and the hair being raised up around the puncture of the eye.
Raise then your hand at that time: and let him rest for three days.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter on it until the scab is removed. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
If any of the hair returns after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization on that place as you did initially.
If the hair is in the lower part: then cauterize it until it rises to its natural place: and even out so that the hair does not irritate the eye.
It is to instruct the patient to let the hair grow out until it lengthens and lies flat. Make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from a known soap and from unabsorbed lime each one ounce or about that amount: then grind them together finely, and make this quickly so that it does not cool. Then unfold it and place it on the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it over the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place a piece of cloth soaked in egg white under the eye, and have the patient's head in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine, and press it gently. And you should move it each time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he will find its bite like fire.
While the patient continues to feel the bite of the medicine, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite subsides, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And observe if you see the eyelid raised as it is when contracting with heat or with incision; that is good. And if not, then apply the medicine to a place where it has not been previously applied and does not darken, until your work evens out and the eye contracts.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter on it until the burnt skin is removed. Then treat it with an ointment to promote healing or with something else until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the procedure to be extremely careful that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after days and something from the eyelashes causes irritation in the eye, then reapply the medicine to the place that is softened by the eyelid properly, as you did initially. Then treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of the myrtle.
And know that the eyes of people differ in size and smallness. Therefore, according to that principle, let your consideration be this: the way of righteousness is not hidden from one who has a keen interest in this art.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in Lacrimal Fistula.
When you treat a fistula, and your treatment does not conform to what we have said about the classifications of diseases: then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold the patient's head with your hands in such a way that it is not moved or jolted.
Then apply Collyrium infused in the white of an egg or in psyllium mucilage to his eye. Then use a cautery with this shape.
It should be concave, like the shape of an eagle's feather from one end, where the cautery is made. And if you wish, it should penetrate to the other end, and if you wish, place it upwards in this manner.
However, this concave shape is better for your work.
Then express the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and remove its pus.
Then place the cautery on it, which should be very heated.
And hold your hand near the cautery for a moment above the eye, towards the part of the nose, so that your hand does not stray and the patient is not disturbed: then place the cautery on the fatty part of the eye and destroy it.
If you therefore reach the beginning of your cautery procedure up to the mouth, it will be well. And if not, then repeat the cautery once, or twice if you need it: and leave it for three days.
Then apply lint with butter, and treat it with an astringent ointment until it is healed.
If forty days pass and it does not heal: then apply a sharp corroding medicine to it until the bone is exposed: and scrape it according to what is described in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing fistulas, which some earlier authorities have described. Examine the site of the fistula and incise it: then place a fine cannula, known as camahan, into the incision. Its shape is as follows. And pour in a quantity equal to one drachma of molten lead into it, and hold your hand with the cannula securely so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not run to their eye.
And you should place lint soaked in egg white, or in water, over the patient's eye.
For lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed as we have said with cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nostril's opening and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to how it will come to its own proper place.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in cracks of the lips.
Fissures often occur on the lip, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures, as we have said in the division of ailments, and if the treatment does not succeed, then prepare a small knife-shaped cautery with fire, in this form.
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then place the heated cautery quickly on the fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerate until it heals.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in a fistula of the mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it becomes pus and bursts; afterwards it deteriorates, and the pus runs, forming a fistula: then you treat it, and if the treatment is not effective, you must make a cautery according to its size, which should fit within the fistula. Then insert the heated instrument into the opening of the fistula, and hold it there until the heated iron reaches the depth of it and its end. Do this once or twice.
Then treat it after that, as we have said regarding the treatment, until it is fully healed.
If the pus is therefore removed and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted part as it comes to its natural end.
¶ On the Method of Cauterizing the Gums and Softened Teeth.
When the gum softens due to moisture and the teeth become loose, and your treatments with medicines are not effective: then place the patient's head in your lap.
Then take a cautery instrument, the form of which will be described below. Place a tube over the tooth, and quickly insert the heated cautery into it. Hold your hand for a short while until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
Then raise your hand. Afterwards, repeat the cautery several times as you see fit.
Then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, then spit it out.
For the loose tooth becomes firm, the softened gum is constricted, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for tooth pain.
When the pain of a tooth is due to cold, or there is coldness itself, or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cauterization should be done in two ways: either with cauterization using butter; or with fire cauterization.
The cauterization with butter is done by taking cow butter and heating it in an iron spoon or bowl. Then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of a stick. Then dip it into the boiled butter and place it quickly on the painful tooth, and hold it there until it cools down. Repeat this several times until the effect of heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip a cloth or piece of wool into cold butter and place it on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the bottom cavity of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is done by aiming at a tube of brass or an iron tube. And there should be some thickness in it to prevent the sharpness of the fire from reaching the sick tooth.
Then apply the fire cauterization tool, which will be shaped appropriately, and place it on the tooth. Hold your hand there until the cauterization cools down.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed either on that same day or the following day.
And it is necessary when applying that cautery, that the patient fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour: then he spits it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Apply the cautery with whichever end you wish, as is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
Concerning the method of applying cautery in strophulus.
When strophulas are caused by phlegm and cold humidities, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, and you wish to digest them quickly: then use a concave cautery, whose form is as follows.
Having two open ends, so that smoke can emerge from the cautery at the other end: and place it lit upon the abscess once, and a second time if you need it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a cloth infused in butter, until what the fire burned off is removed.
Then treat it with tooth ointment until it heals to the form of the cannula.
Concerning the method of applying cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When the humors prevail over the windpipe of the lungs, and especially when this is accompanied by coldness of temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it gently near the root of the throat in a depressed area; and be careful not to proceed with the cautery to the throat or on the skin, unless necessary.
Then cauterize it with another cautery near the joint of the neck at the last vertebra: and let the cautery be needle-like according to the method that has been described.
Then treat it with the methods that have been described until it is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for diseases of the lungs and cough.
When cough and disease of the lungs are caused by cold humidities, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, nor is it an old disease: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, gentle, and empty areas. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be tube-shaped according to the form described previously.
And if you wish for your cautery to be done by puncturing with a cautery called Punctum, whose form was described previously in the puncture of ear pain: and let there be points from thirty points up to about that many.
Then treat it with the methods described previously until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches: in this form. Therefore, use it for cautery when you do with it one pass to make three cauterizations.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to humidity and does not return to its proper place at the time of its return from the dislocation until it becomes accustomed to the act of returning, then it is dislocated by a slight movement as we have already testified. Then you must reduce the dislocation first. Then the patient should be laid supine on their back, or on their healthy side. Then raise the skin that is inside the Titillico towards the upper part with your left hand fingers: and if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
Then have the cautery with two edges heated by fire. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will be with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three edges, so the figure of the cauterization then consists of six cauteries: and the edges are according to the fineness of the tissue.
And this is the form of the cautery having three edges.
And sometimes one is added to this method, which is why there are eight cauteries.
Then place crushed leeks with salt on the cauterized area. Then ensure the patient remains calm so that the affected limb is not moved for some time until it becomes stronger.
And if the dislocation is upwards, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a nail cauterization or by puncturing it with multiple small cauterizations.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed: and the patient is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture occur in the stomach, and they persist in the patient's constitution, causing an increase in phlegm and continuous methods of treatment are ineffective: then the patient should lie supine on their back, extending their legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauteries: one cauterium the size of the breadth of one finger below the nipple, and two cauteries below it on either side of the first cauterium, until the shape formed by the cauteries is triangular. And space them apart so that they do not connect, when they begin to form pus.
And the depth of the cauterization should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauteries should be in this form without addition. And if you wish to cauterize with a larger cauterium in the middle of the stomach, it should be in this form: and the cauterium used for this should be one according to a circular shape as follows.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking for him who is afraid of this cautery: and it is, as you mark a spot on the stomach with the point according to the quantity which you wish with pitch: then cauterize it with a pointed cautery: then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it heals.
¶ On the method of cauterizing for cold tumors.
When pain occurs in the epigastrium due to coldness and humidity, or from thick wind, until the excess that has departed from its natural condition is expelled, and the patient does not improve with what we have mentioned: then the patient must lie on his back with his neck raised, and mark three cauterizations with pitch according to this figure and size below the epigastrium near the pubis, where a man's elbow reaches: and let there be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And let the quantity to be cauterized be from the thickness of the skin, half its thickness plus a little: and let the patient stand on his feet.
但如果患者不能站立，那么让他躺下，双腿伸直，双臂抬起。
This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful that you do not proceed too far in cauterization so that the thickness of the entire skin is burned, for then the whole body will be burned and it may reach the intestines: since the skin there is thin, know this.
Regarding the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
When an abscess occurs and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in its lining: if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient experiences a dull pain and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the lining of the liver, there is intense sharpness along with pain. And you will see that its treatment has already exhausted his physicians.
Therefore, the patient should lie supine with his head raised. Then shape the area of the abscess with a cautery; then heat the cautery until it resembles a glowing rod. And this is its form. And cauterize with it once until the entire skin is burned and reaches the soft tissue, until all the pus is discharged; then treat it as you would an abscess, until it heals.
And one should not use this type of cautery unless the practitioner has prolonged study in the art of medicine and through whose hands such illnesses have come with experience on several occasions; then, and only then, may they dare to perform such an operation.
However, it is better for me to let it be.
On the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said, apply a cautery with the roots of aristolochia for cold pleurisy in this manner. And it is done by taking one root from dried aristolochia that is longer than the others, which has a thickness like that of a finger. Then soak it in oil and light it on fire. Then cauterize once at the area between the fork of the collarbone and neck, and with two small cauteries slightly inclined below the throat, near the area under the beard.
And with two cauteries inclined slightly toward the back between the fifth and sixth rib: and with another cauterization at the center of the chest, and one above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one at the area between the two scapulae, and with two cauteries on either side of the chest, below the one between the two scapulae.
And you should not press the cautery with your hand, but let it be exposed on the skin so that it can be smelled.
And some of the ancients have said that there are people who use a cautery made of iron like a probe: they ignite it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, allowing pus to escape, as we mentioned in the case of an epatic abscess.
But in this puncturing with a cautery there is fear, that either the patient dies immediately, or it happens in the place of the fistula, which cannot be healed.
Chapter on the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen Head XXXII.
When you treat the disease of the spleen, with what we have said about treatment in the division of diseases, and your treatment is not effective, then cauterization is applied to it in three ways, which are all correct.
One of these methods is to make three cauterizations or four by marking along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauteries used for the liver, whose figure has been described previously.
And there should be between each cauterization a distance equal to the thickness of a finger, or slightly more.
And the method of cauterization, which we mentioned for the liver, should be applied equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie supine on their back.
And another method of cauterization is as follows: take a cautery with two prongs, which we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and raise the skin that lies directly over the spleen, where the left elbow of the patient reaches: and when you lift the skin, do so according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the two glowing prongs deeply until they penetrate the skin from the other side: then remove the cautery. Thus, four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish to use a cautery with another cautery having three edges.
Then take care that the cautery, after you have applied it, allows the discharge of pus for many days: for this is more beneficial than all the previous treatments in the course of healing.
¶ On the Method of Cauterizing in Dropsy.
Cautery is not applied in cases of dropsy unless it is properly warranted.
When you treat cases of dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have described in the division, and if the treatment does not prove effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient four times around the navel area, and once above the stomach, and another time above the pubic region, and one on the spleen, and twice between the vertebrae near the back, and one directly over the chest, and another directly over the stomach: and the depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then allow the open cauterization to discharge pus over a long period of time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment after the cauterization; it is necessary to apply two further treatments to him: and with God's help, he will recover more quickly.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be that of a nail, as previously described: and the shape of the cautery used to cauterize the back should be that of an olive, according to its previous description.
¶ On the Method of Cauterizing Feet and Legs.
When blisters appear in a person with dropsy and are filled with yellowish water, you should cauterize above the dorsal part of the foot at night, which is between the second and third toes. Lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then lift your hand again: and do not repeat this procedure at all.
The yellowish water will drain, and the cautery should be performed in this manner.
Then perform two cauteries on each leg, along the entire length of both legs. Use the sharp edge of the cautery and place one below the knee and the other below that, approximately in the middle of the leg. Also perform two cauteries on each thigh. Leave the cauteries open without treatment for a long time so that some water can drain from them. Then treat them as we have described previously.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for the relief of the abdomen.
Chapter XXXV.
When there is a relaxation of the abdomen due to cold and humidity, continuing until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines, and when treatment methods do not cure it: if you see that the patient can tolerate a cautery of great strength, then cauterize them with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization using the circular cautery. Additionally, use four fine cauteries around the navel and one fine cautery shaped like a key. Alternatively, use one large cautery or two cauteries above the naval area.
And if you see abundant humidity and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize them with a cautery on the pubic region and a cautery on the entire iliac area. You may also add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
For progress in treatment is achieved when assistance does not go astray.
Regarding the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one that is from thick, cold humors or corrupted humidities, and they do not respond to the treatment described in the division: then cauterize three times above the lower spinous process of the vertebra near the buttocks in a triangular pattern, and once below the navel by about two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and that his food is not being digested, and you see his face swelling up, then cauterize him above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and cauterize above the liver, and another one on the spleen with a needle-like cautery: leave the cautery open for some time; then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut out the althelu, then ignite the cautery which resembles a rod. Then insert the ignited cautery into the excised althelu; and move your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If there are many althelu, then cauterize each one as we have described. Then treat them with what they receive from ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over the ulcer, it is more of a last resort in treatment.
¶ On the Method of Cauterizing a Pile (Fistula in Ano).
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not submit to surgery and is frightened by it, perhaps he can be healed with cauterization.
When therefore a Pile occurs and persists, pus runs from it, and corrupted humors flow. It is therefore fitting that you should examine it with a fine probe. Then determine the depth of it with a probe.
Then heat the cautery, which is like a rod. Then insert the heated cautery into the Pile and determine how far it goes.
And apply the cautery repeatedly to it until all the corrupted tissues are burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve, if it is there, or large veins: or if the Pile goes towards the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious of all these places.
And do not perform this procedure unless the Pile is in fleshy tissue: and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
If the place is sealed and material is removed from it, and it remains this way for a long time: then you will know that it is now completely healed.
And if no material is removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted opening deep within it, or something similar to those mentioned: the memory of which will come at its place.
On the method of cauterizing the Kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or from thick wind, and it decreases because of this for the sick person, then you should cauterize him above the almethena above the kidneys, using cautery over the entire kidney with a nail-shaped cautery, the previous method of which has been mentioned.
And perhaps we should cauterize him a second time at the same almeidatus. Therefore, three lines will appear. Therefore, they will be more beneficial for treatment.
On the method of cauterizing the Bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity, such that the sick person cannot retain urine, then cauterize him at the lower part of the thigh above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin. Use one cautery from the right side and another from the left: the length of this cauterization should be according to the width of the joint of the thumb. Also, cauterize with a lower back cautery or with two cauteries if you need it; let it be as previously described for the nail-shaped cautery.
Of the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and dampness occur in the womb, preventing impregnation, corrupting her menstrual cycle, delaying its onset, and causing pain upon their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we said regarding the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery above the sacrum or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be needle-like.
Of the method of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
When the mucous fluids are spilled into the ankle pan, causing it to depart from its place; and the sign of this is that one leg is lengthened compared to the other when they are compared side by side: and the location of the dislocation is found to be empty.
Therefore, you should cauterize the affected area above the ankle pan with a cautery similar to a circle: after marking with pitch around the perimeter of the pan, as it revolves: and let the pan fall in the center of the circle.
If you do not have this cautery available to you, then cauterize it three times with a large olive wood cautery: and the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin throughout.
Then treat it until it heals.
Of the method of cauterizing for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the buttocks due to cold and humidity, and treatment according to what was mentioned in the division does not help and the condition persists, then it is necessary to free the patient from thick humors using fetid pills, or artificial pills, and similar remedies. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is in two ways: either with cautery using medicines that burn, or with fire.
Cautery with fire is in many ways.
One of which is to cauterize above the affected buttock with three triangular cauteries in this form. And make their depth good or bad. And the space between each cautery should be the width of a finger. Let the cautery be olive-shaped.
Sometimes the cautery is made in the middle above the affected buttock. Therefore, there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form was mentioned earlier in the cautery for the dislocation of the hip, do so as follows: let the circle enclose the entire buttock.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica when the pain adheres to the hip itself and does not extend up to the thigh and leg.
If however it extends up to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the hip, at the place which the patient indicates where the pain is, and let your cauterium be four digits towards the side: and let the cauterium be knife-shaped.
And the depth of the cauterization should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends up to near the toes, then cauterize it there where he points with a puncture cautery, three, four, or more if necessary.
And if he indicates that the pain is below the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with one knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in all your cauteries that you do not proceed so far as to burn a nerve or large artery, and thereby draw upon the patient harm or contraction.
And I have indeed seen one and another of those who cauterized towards the side and proceeded too far in the cautery, resulting in the leg becoming swollen until a tumor spread to the foot, which became perforated and completely corrupted: then peritonitis occurred, followed by death.
If the pain is in both parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
And certain wise men have said that in the cautery of the hip, this is the method of the cautery. Make a tube of iron whose diameter is half a palm: and let it at its opening be as thick as the thickness of a date stone, or slightly less: and inside that tube let there be a third tube.
And let the space that is between each tube be as long as the width of a thumb joint: and let the tubes be open at both ends: and let their height be about one or two joints: and make handles for them appropriately fitted to the tubes from iron.
Then heat it in the fire until it turns red and sparks: then place it on a tray of pitch when the patient is lying on their healthy side. Cauterize him with three round cauteries at once.
Then let him rest for three days. After that, apply plasters with butter: and let the wound remain open for many days. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, we have used this type of cautery on our sons rarely, due to the fear caused by its appearance: and also because few are found who can endure it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries for those who can endure it and find the appropriate place to use it.
However, when using a cautery with medicines that cause burning, you should make two tubes having a perforated ring, into which descends the pin of its door from brass or iron, the length of the wall: and their height should be about two joints, or close to it.
And let there be a space between the two quantities of the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let them fit together in this manner.
Then place it on the anvil box while the patient lies on their healthy side. And press your hand down hard on the anvil box. Then pour hot water, heated for a short while over the fire, between the two circles, and hold it for a period of time: and let the patient tolerate its burning sensation and scalding, as he will feel it like fire, until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the hot water from the anvil completely with fresh water: then leave it for three days.
And apply butter to it until the blackness of the scalding is removed: and leave it for several days, and pus will discharge from it. For this is the final treatment.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make a bath for him that contains water, as you did for the anvil equally.
And this is the method for hot water: and I have already written about it in the chapter on the preparation of medicines. Take one part each of alkali and unslaked lime: grind both, and put them in a new pot whose bottom has a small hole according to the size that can be covered by your radius: place another earthenware pot under the first pot: then pour over the alkali and lime fresh water so that it covers both up to your finger: after which you press them with your hand firmly: and leave the pot until the sharp water has drained into the lower earthenware pot.
Then gather that water entirely, and pour it over another dressing: and press it out until it is renewed.
For it will then be very sharp in acuteness, which is used in many medical operations and in cauterizing the remaining limbs. Because it accomplishes the work of fire itself.
And among the medicines with which the thighs are cauterized are honey and tamarisk, and almond oil, as well as lime mixed with soap, so that both are thoroughly mixed.
And Galenus indeed recounted the treatment of a man from ancient times who was cured of thigh and sciatica pain, and he highly praised its effectiveness. And he said that it did not require any other treatment, and since he was healed in one attempt, he mentioned that perhaps the patient was carried into a bath and emerged from it already cured.
And it should be taken from green myrtle; and if the green one is not found, take the fresh dry one, and grind it much with some fat, and apply it to the thigh where there is pain, or on the leg, or in the hip: and bind it, and leave it for three hours, or until the patient feels a soothing heat from the application. Then introduce him into the bath.
When his body becomes moist, introduce him into the tub. For the pain retreats, and he is healed.
And know that one should not use cauterization with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when goat dung is used to cauterize the sciatic vein, it benefits the patient: and the cauterization is performed in this way. Take wool, soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep spot located between the big toe and the webbing of the toes, closer to the webbing.
Then take dry goat dung and burn it in fire until it turns to charcoal.
Then place the charcoal on the wool and let it burn out until it is extinguished. Then repeat it. Do not cease doing this until the sensation reaches as far as the joint and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the Goat Dung Cauterization.
Concerning the Cauterization for Back Pain.
Pain in the back may occur due to many causes, whether from an accident, a blow, excessive evacuation, or similar reasons, resulting from the infusion of cold and moist matter. However, cauterization is only appropriate for this specific condition caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after the patient has undergone evacuation with foul pills or similar treatments, three lines should be marked on the back where the pain is located, following the width of the area. After marking them with an encaustic, five or more cauterizations should be performed along each line according to the quantity that comes from the patient's tolerance and strength: and the cauterization should be done using a cautery needle.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four, using a central-claw caustic, in this manner.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the beginning stage of Gibbosis.
This illness often occurs in very young children.
And the sign of its onset in children is that it occurs with constriction during breathing at elevation and movement: and you will find in the last vertebra of the spine and its joints that it has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see this and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a caustic in the shape of a circle as follows.
And let the caustic cover all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a point caustic in two lines or three: and let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the area until it is healed as we have said.
And be careful not to administer the caustic in cases of gibbosis that arise from nerve spasm.
Concerning the method of cauterizing for Gout and joint pains.
When the pains in the joints are caused by cold humidities that flow to any part of the body, then when such pains occur in the feet, it is the custom among physicians to call this condition Gout properly.
When therefore gout of cold cause is treated with methods of treatment, and pain is not removed, then cautery removes them.
And it is such that you should cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet, with many cauteries: and let the cauterization be Olivary.
And if you need to puncture on the surface of the foot, then do it with a pointed cautery. If the pains ascend up to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it above both knees with three cauteries, or four from every side, with this same Cautery of Claudius.
If you need to use this cautery more than once, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but let it be about as thick as the thickness of the skin.
If the pains ascend to the knees and the back, then administer what we have said about the cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then puncture around the joints, as two lines are revolved.
If there remains pain in the fingers, then puncture them, on every knuckle and on the wrist.
If the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from every side.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen, from taking medications. For if good treatment is provided and phlegm is evacuated, with this cautery God's help will heal.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the inguinal region and the intestine or gut descends to the testicle, and it is just beginning: then you should instruct the patient to abstain from eating on that day. And let the patient use mild laxatives to help the feces leave his stomach.
Then have him sit between your hands on his back: and instruct him to hold his breath until it comes out, or the gut or intestine becomes apparent.
Then push it back with your fingers, and mark with a cautery under the rupture above the pubic bone, with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then heat the cautery, which has this shape, until it turns white and sparks. Then return the intestine or gut to its concavity. Then let the assistant place his hand on the area to prevent the intestine from coming out: and you now open between the patient's legs, and place a cloth underneath him, and another servant above his legs, and another above his chest holding his hands.
Then place the cautery on that mark, holding it upright with your hand. And hold it until you reach the opening with it; or try again another way if you do not succeed in reaching the opening on the first attempt.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine during your cautery time, so that you do not burn it, and it does not result in death or great harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the opening with the cautery, your procedure is ineffective.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine, according to their measurement.
Then treat with the remaining ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to provide nourishment for the duration of their treatment, which will soothe their stomach: so that nothing exits through the intestines during straining and expulsion.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, administer a properly made bandage and let him wear it for another forty days.
And reduce his labor, and decrease his intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices.
For when he follows this regimen, he is healed completely.
And I will describe the treatment for ruptures with incision in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the abdomen and are just beginning, and you wish to prevent them from worsening, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let what is burned be as thick as a third of it. Then treat it as we have said: and nothing shall be added.
And certain early authorities have said that the Rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, in this form.
After marking it with encaustic, and placing a line which is across the width on the upper side of the Rupture, and another line to the lower side. And place your hand in the middle with a nail-shaped cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for pains caused by an accident or impact.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in certain limbs due to an accident or impact, and that pain persists for a long time without being alleviated by medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a puncture cautery.
And the cautery for every limb should be according to its size, and its condition, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
If therefore it is healed by the first cautery, it is well. If not: then repeat the cautery on it.
For it is the custom of these pains to shift from one member to the adjacent one. Therefore, it is necessary to follow them with the cautery until the patient is healed.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes helped greatly by cautery. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: when you wish to cauterize it, take care.
If leprosy is beginning and you have treated it as we discussed in the division, and it neither descends nor stabilizes: and you fear that corruption will spread over the entire constitution of the patient: then cauterize him on top of his head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two on each side of the temples, and one behind above the nape of the neck.
And hold your hand with the cautery for a short time until it leaves a small impression and the crusts are dislodged: so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated, and cauterize over the spleen as well, as previously indicated.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible: then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we mentioned for the head, and one cautery at the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large cautery near the coccyx, and another above it in the middle: and two on each hip bone; that is, one on each hip bone, and two on each knee: one on each knee, and two on each shoulder, and two on each elbow, and two on the soft parts of his chest: and cauterize him over every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet: and cauterize over the entire heel of each foot, and over the palm of his hands.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the heel.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery over the pubic bone, and another over the navel, and another over the epigastrium.
And know that the more you add cauterization, it is more beneficial and more effective.
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from cauterization as healthy people do: because his body is already numbed.
And the cauteries must be in size and shape according to the members and joints: as specified by the types of tools.
Then treat the cautery with flour of the herb mixed with honey, and continue the treatment until it heals.
¶ On the Method of Cauterizing in a State of Numbness.
When a member becomes numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its shape.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly beneath the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterization is performed to treat numbness that occurs in the hand or foot at the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that member: and the numbness is removed.
Indeed, let no one undertake that except one who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves moving the body.
Chapter LI.
When Albaras is old and does not benefit from any medical ingenuity: then cauterize on it with a deep cautery for a little while, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white part is removed and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of the herb, lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and dove's blood, and swallow's blood: let there be an equal part of each. Mix all these together and apply them to a cloth, which should adhere to the place until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
When the cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop its progression: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it spreads.
The wise ones have said that it should be cauterized with the deepest cautery in the middle.
I do not think that is the case: for I fear it will cause ulcers: and I have already seen this happen several times.
It is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said: or with multiple cauteries.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
When someone has an abscess that is slow to mature, whether due to excess matter causing it, or due to the patient's age when they are weak and have little blood, or because of the time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess, then cauterize around it with small cautery points using multiple applications. Then release it. For it will hasten in its maturation.
If you wish to puncture it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, which has this form.
And place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be from what follows to relieve the flow of pus.
Then care for it until it heals.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in corrosive disease.
Chapter LIV.
A corrosive is nothing but corruption moving within a member and it eats away at it, just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat many cauteries, small and large forceps, as appropriate for the location where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate the entire root of the corruption, and nothing of it remains inside.
Then leave it for three days, and apply ground sulfur with oil to the cauterized areas, until all the scabs have fallen off and all the corruption is eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days healthy flesh is born, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply the cautery to that which remains of the corrupted places.
And when corroding, it is sometimes treated with sharp medicine. For indeed it rises in the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is more rapid in providing aid: and I have already mentioned the use of cautery with sharp medicine in the division: accept it therefore there when you need it.
¶ On the method of applying cautery to Knees and Warts.
Chapter 55.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered substance that injures the foot.
And cautery in these cases is according to two methods: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
When it comes to cautery with fire, make the cautery concave like the tip of an eagle's feather: let it be made of iron according to the size that will contain the wart from all sides: and let it have fine edges.
Then place the heated cautery on the wart. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart: and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply plasters with harmful woodland herbs, crushed with salt: and leave the plaster on it during the night. For he will be uprooted from his roots.
Then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
If they do not turn and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply cauterization with hot water: and it is as if you take a tube made of metal, or iron, or from a vulture's feather: and place it on the affected area, or thorn. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube: hold your hand and rotate it with pressure from your hand for a short while, so that the edge of the tube imprints on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for about one hour over the sting of the hot water.
Then leave it alone, for the nail is uprooted with its roots.
Do this one after another until you have treated all of them on the body.
Then treat them after they are removed, with flesh-generating ointments.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in Tremor.
When tremor occurs in someone due to cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or other causes: then it is necessary to cauterize four or five times over the vertebrae of the spine, and between each vertebra with a cautery, and on their chest with a cautery, and above their stomach with a cautery.
For the tremor is calmed by olive oil cautery, and the health hastens from the cold sickness.
Concerning the method of cauterizing by Albucasis.
Chapter LVII.
At times, Albucasis removes ugly blemishes from the body, that is, pimples, which are caused by corrupted thick substances.
Therefore, when they first appear, it is necessary to cauterize all the pimples with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, whose end is lit with fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the onset of their expulsion according to this method: and they do not increase; and the excess that causes them is dispersed, and they heal from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Concerning the method of cauterizing when blood flows from an artery in a wound.
Often it happens that blood flows from an artery that is cut near a wound, which occurs externally, or near the incision of an abscess, or a cautery of a limb, and similar cases: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When this happens to someone, quickly go with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger upon it: and press it firmly until the blood is compressed under your finger, and nothing flows out from it.
Then place small olive oil cauteries and a larger number of large ones in fire, and blow on them until they burn strongly.
Then take one of them, either a small or large one, according to the wound and the place where the artery is ruptured, and place the cautery on the vein; then quickly remove your finger: hold the cautery until the blood stops.
If it is expelled when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery and extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those which are prepared in the fire.
Do not therefore stop doing it with one after another until the blood stops.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, so that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract, and the blood is stopped. Or it may be tied with a strong thread. Or medicines with the property of stopping blood may be applied to it, and it should be bound with a suitable bandage.
He who administers the cutting of it with a ligature, and binding with a cloth, or placing of burning substances, and similar treatments, does not truly help it, except rarely.
If it should happen to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine: then begin by placing the tip of the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have described, and constricting it very tightly until blood is blocked above the wound, and above the artery. And do not remove the finger; instead, always apply very cold water from above it, until the blood freezes, thickens, and clots.
And meanwhile, consider what is needed from cautery or medicine.
¶ On Incising, Piercing, and Bloodletting in Wounds and Similar Conditions.
In the First Chapter, we have already discussed every ailment in which it is appropriate to use burning cautery and medicine, along with its occasions, causes, and instruments, as well as the forms of cauterizations.
And I have placed there chapters from the head down to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path: so that what is sought may be alleviated for the seeker.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, what is in this chapter concerning the fear mentioned in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary to be more cautious, since in the operation described in this chapter, there is often a risk of blood loss with which life depends on the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening an exit, or treating a wound, or removing an arrow, or incising over a stone, and similar procedures: all of which are associated with trembling, fear, and in many cases, death.
And I warn you, do not let hesitation fall upon you, for at times methods of men with methods of illnesses fall upon you in this art. For among them is he who becomes angry because of his illness, and death is light to him due to the intensity with which he encounters his condition and the bitterness of its duration. And illness is from fear, which signifies death.
And among them is he who gives his trumpet call to you and enriches you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is perilous.
Therefore, it is not necessary to agree with him who comes to you from among them, whose method is such. And let your caution be stronger than your desire and your greed. And do not presume upon anything of that without certain knowledge, which verifies for you that to which a commendable succession leads.
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your patients to determine what will be conducive to their health.
For in that lies your assistance for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, children, with His understanding, and may He not take from you direction and inspiration, for it is in His hand.
And indeed, I have organized this Chapter by dividing it into sections, as it preceded in the chapter on Cauterization, from the neck down to the feet: so that you may find relief when seeking what you want from it and what you need.
Of the Treatment of Water That Aggregates in the Heads of Children.
Chapter I.
Know that this illness often occurs in children at birth: or when the midwife presses the child's head too harshly.
And it also happens at times for hidden causes that are not known.
And I myself have not seen this illness in anyone other than children: and death hastened towards all of them. Therefore, it seemed to me to abandon treatment in such cases.
And I myself saw among them a child whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled each day until he could not sit on his own due to the size of his head: and the swelling increased until he died.
And this humidity aggregates either between the skin and the bone: or beneath the bone on the surface.
And if the operation is needed when the humidity is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a single incision down the middle of the head with a width of about one finger: and the length of the incision should be approximately two fingers, so that the moisture can run out.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in this form.
And if the humidity is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see the seams of the head open from all sides: and when you press it with your hand, the water is pushed inward but does not hide from view: then you should make three incisions down the middle of the head in this manner.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then close the wounds with bandages and lint. Then dress it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with strips and ointments.
And do not allow the head to be bound with evenness. And feed the patient with all dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method for the incision, which involves considering where the size of the abscess and the collection of water appear.
For sometimes there is more in the occiput, or on the top of the head, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, when making the incision, go where the abscess and accumulation of water appear to you, and cut it as much as possible.
And be careful not to cut an artery, and let there not be a flow of blood, and may the patient not die from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Regarding the incision of arteries that are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrh occurs in someone's eyes or chest and persists without improvement from medicinal treatment, then the last resort is to make an incision in these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, the patient should shave his head. Then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible. Then the patient should squeeze his neck with any cloth of his. Then observe where the vein pulsates. And the locations of both are the areas that are behind the depressed parts of the ears: and they are rarely hidden, except in some individuals.
Then mark with wax on both sides: and cut both with a sharp scalpel from both sides to the bone: and let this be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery, and cut it upwards with an incision.
And the length of the incision should be about two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which leaps into the interior with frequent jumps.
If the artery does not appear to the senses, then you should measure three fingerbreadths from the ear. Then mark with wax and cut down to the bone.
And what needs to be released from the blood is six ounces, and you may release more or less than that. The entire amount should be based on the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if there remains something to be done for the wound, cut it open so that a hot abscess does not occur; then dress the wound with lint made from linen cloth.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
¶ On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a person suffers from old headaches or acute catarrh due to acrid humidities and heat in the temples, or severe chronic pain similar to these conditions: and they are treated with methods of medical care but do not benefit from it; then we have found that in such ailments the extraction of arteries from the temples or cauterization of them is necessary, as we have described.
And the method of operation in extracting them is that the patient should shave the hair that is on the temples, and then locate the visible artery in the temple. Indeed, it reveals itself to you through its pulse, and it is rarely concealed except in a few people or due to extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the patient should bind their head with any cloth they have; then rub the area with a rough cloth. Or steam the area with hot water until it becomes clearly visible to you. Then take the spatula that I formed a little while ago. Then use it to gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery. Then throw in an hook and draw it upwards until you extract it from the skin and make it emerge from the tunics that are beneath it on all sides.
If the artery is fine, then wind it around with the end of the hook. Then cut from that part according to the amount by which its ends are extended and drawn together, so that there is no flow of blood. For if it is not cut and separated, the blood does not rise completely.
Then evacuate six ounces of blood, up to three times.
If the artery is large, then it is necessary to ligature it in two places with double strong silk thread or ahhoud cords so that it does not rot before the wound heals, and thus cause a flow of blood.
Then cut away the excess that is between the two ligatures. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the opening, using a knife-cautery: until its ends are cut and it will remain in place for the same work.
And it is better work unless the patient has a fever or a heated constitution. For cautery is one of those things that help to end moistures. Therefore, it is a better remedy.
And after the arteries have been extracted, it is necessary for the place to be filled with old cooked dough: and let there be placed upon it poultices properly prepared.
And after the dressing is removed, it should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with honey, until it is healed.
And if during the work a flow of blood occurs from an artery, then hurry to cut it with a cautery, or fill the place with zegi, and press your hand until the blood is stopped. And if none of those things are present for you, then place your finger upon the place until the blood clots. And apply the place with water of extreme cold until the sharpness subsides, and press as is necessary.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives: let the sharpness of both knives be similar to that of an awl. However, they have much less sharpness than the two knives. For if they are sharp like two knives, both require cold quickly: and they do not cut the flesh with ease. When there is a certain thickness in them, the heat of the fire remains in them, and the flesh is cut off quickly. Therefore, this work is better than all others, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with pitch: and place both extremely hot until they reach the opening, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its extremities may be lengthened. For they are not thoroughly healed with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Concerning the treatment of continuous sharp tear duct pains from the eyes.
When the tears are continuous and their course is from veins that are on the outer surface of the skull: and medicine does not help them with remedies, and you see the face of the sick person already red, and he feels a creeping sensation in his forehead, as if ants were crawling: and his eyes are thin, moist, to the point that the hair around them is corroded: and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients used this operation for their treatment, and they called it treatment with a knife.
And you should instruct the patient to shave the hair that is on his forehead. Then make three cuts in the forehead equidistant along its length: and let the length of each cut be about two fingers wide, with one cut equidistant from the length of the nose at the center of the forehead, and the second slightly to the side where the temples are, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting arteries that are on both sides: and keep your hand away from the connection of the two jawbones, and let the total length of all cuts be three fingers wide: and prepare a piece of sponge or dry cloth with which to dry the blood.
Then insert two sharp pointed instruments, the form of which is as follows. From the incision which is on the side of the temple to the second incision: and scrape away with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, as if it were over the eye. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove this spatula and insert again into the first incision another instrument called a sharp small knife, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached with the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and push it until it reaches the median fissure: and cut away with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until it reaches what appears under the skin.
Then do this in the median fissure until you reach another fissure.
And after an amount of blood has flowed out, press the areas from clotted blood fragments.
Then place linen strips from old pottery in every fissure, and put poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar on them. And see that a hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer much infusion with warm water. Then treat it with royal ointment and other remedies used for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
Concerning the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs from the eyes originating within the head.
When acute, bitter, and persistent catarrhs occur in someone, and you see their eyes become thin and small, and their appearance is already weakened: the eyelids are ulcerated, hair falls out from them, there is a sharp pain deep within the head, and sneezing follows: then take these symptoms into account, for such materials and catarrhs do not come except from many veins.
And the better treatment for them is as follows. And it involves instructing the patient to shave their forehead. Then make an incision in the forehead either as a single cut down the middle or slightly wider. Begin the incision from the left temporal region to the right temporal region, and extend it up to the bone. Keep your hand away from the temples, which move during chewing, until the bone is exposed. Then dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two edges of the incision with an old cup or with lint made from linen. Then apply bandages from above with lint. Soak the lint in wine and oil so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you unwrap it and see that the hot abscess is beginning to subside: then it is necessary to rasp the bone until new flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of flesh: for example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: prepare an ointment from these ingredients and apply it to promote the formation of new flesh at these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Regarding the treatment of what falls into the Ear.
Anything that falls into the Ear is of one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something like a stone, such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, such as peas and beans: or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and similar liquids: or it is some kind of animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or something of the nature of stones which are not added to nor grow in the ear, expose the Ear alone: if you see the stone, then drip something from violet oil or castor oil into the ear. Then administer the removal of it, and make the person sneeze with prepared substances, and clear the nose at the onset of a sneeze, after which you place fragments of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear upwards.
Indeed, it often exits with this treatment.
If however it does not exit, then administer its removal with tweezers, that is, fine pincettes: the form of which is as follows.
If it exits with the tweezers, that is good.
And if not, then administer its removal with a fine blind hook of few foldings.
If it does not exit with that, then make a tube of metal, and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal much, and clear what is around the tube with softened cloth soaked in oil, so that there is no passage to wind except through the tube: then extract it with the force of your breath.
For often it happens as we have narrated. If it does not come out this way, then take a small amount of helkalimbat or flax glue, which is used to catch birds, and place it at the end of a wick after you have properly wrapped it in cloth. Then gently insert it into the ear canal after you have dried the ear of moisture.
If it does not come out with all the methods we have described, then hurry to cut before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting is to first bleed the patient, especially from the head veins: and draw blood from him according to the measure of his strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near its fat in a depressed area: let the cut be in a crescent shape until you reach the cartilage: then remove what is possible for you to take out with your instruments.
Then treat the incision quickly and with care from your hour onward until it heals.
If something falling into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell: then administer its removal.
If it does not obey and come out for you, then take a thin, fine spatula in this shape.
And use it to cut out that type of grain that has fallen into the ear, but do not attempt this if you think the grain has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear until you have broken it into many pieces: then remove them with hooks or a fine probe or by suction, as we said, for its extraction is thus made easier.
When water enters the ear, the patient must use sneezing first of all; and now he has filled his ear with a little cooked saltwater; and he lies on that ear, in which there is water. If it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, as long as a finger, thin and soft, and warm them slightly with fire, and let the patient insert one of them into his ear's opening: and jump on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear. Do not cease doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out in such a way that you take one piece of parchment or reed and insert one end into the ear: and light the other end with fire until it burns extensively. Then take another reed and do this many times until all the water comes out: and remove it with a tube as previously described with the stone.
In the removal of an animal entering it, if it has a small body, like a flea or something similar, treat it as I have said in the division.
But if it has a larger body that can be seen: then administer its removal with hooks and forceps: and the treatment of it is easier than all those that are held in the ear.
In the removal of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations, and your treatment does not help: then you must look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something appears there from worms, then remove it with forceps, or with fine hooks.
If however nothing appears there, then take a tube, which has this form: narrow below, wide above; and insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck with it forcefully. Do this multiple times until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey and come out for you, then scrape around the tube with a curette, as I said about stone.
If they do not come out with what we have said: then administer distillations which the ancients have already used in killing worms: and you will find this in the chapter on distillations.
And let your application be with which you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver or brass, narrower below, with a small hole, and wider above.
Let it therefore be such that the part which pushes from the concavity of the tube be made appropriately of brass. And if you wish, take a rod and wrap its end in cloth appropriately: then pour oil, or juice, or whatever you wish from these medicines into the tube; and place it in the ear. Then insert the rod with the cloth above, and press it gently with your hand until the oil is pushed into the concavity of the ear, and the patient feels it internally. And what is poured into the ear should be warmed over fire for a little while: and beware that what is distilled into it is not very cold, for medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
Concerning the treatment of the accidental perforation of the Auricle.
Sometimes certain infants emerge from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it also happens to some people that an obstruction occurs in the passage of the ear due to a wound or flesh grown there.
And this obstruction sometimes occurs deep within the opening of the ear, where vision cannot reach; and at other times it happens near the outer part of the opening, and can be seen by vision.
Therefore, the obstruction that occurs deep within the ear and which cannot be seen is difficult to treat in most cases.
And for the obstruction that can be seen, you should place the affected ear in sunlight and look into it. If you see a visible blockage, open it with a fine probe, which has the shape described below: one end should have a small width with an acute point, while the rest of the probe should be smooth on both sides to avoid damaging the ear.
If the obstruction is caused by flesh grown in the passage of the ear, then grasp it with a fine hook and cut it with great care until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is deep within the ear, then take a fine, smooth probe and warm it slightly with fire. Then insert it into the passage of the ear.
If you detect the obstruction when the patient complains of hearing difficulties, attempt to open it with care, and be cautious not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place licorice in the ear according to the size of the perforation, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound.
Or take licorice and pour it into rose water, and sprinkle finely ground sugar on top of it, and use it.
If you see the ear starting to form an abscess, then it is necessary to remove the licorice and allow it to be treated with new licorice that you wrap in cerate made with rose oil until the abscess softens: then treat it until it heals.
If there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear: use the remaining treatment that stops the bleeding as described in the chapter on distillations.
§ On the Treatment of Ptosis of the Eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
These cases of ptosis that occur in the eyelids are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, you should treat them with gentle pressure: or use a hook, and cut them from the roots with sharp scissors. Then apply finely ground sugar to the area.
If bleeding occurs from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And cauterizing them is better after making an incision. For they often return when something remains of them from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned up, and they do not return.
¶ On the Treatment of Granulations of the Eyelid.
Chapter IX.
It often happens in the eyelids that something occurs which resembles a granulation in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called a Granum: and it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
The procedure with them is to examine whether the Granum that appears on the eyelid moves to all parts and if its nature is easy.
Therefore, find a cleft across its width on it. Then scrape it off from all sides easily until it comes out. Then lift it with a hook and remove it.
However, if it does not prepare for you to remove it until after you penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then it harms the patient in some way.
If the cleft is large, then close it with stitches and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For an ointment restores it and causes it to become flesh.
And if the lump is inclined toward the inner part of the ear towards the inner surface, then turn back the eyelid, and hook out the lump with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is extended by an incision, it does no harm in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the lump with salty water: and treat the area with something that promotes healing until the patient is healed.
¶ On the treatment of chalazion of the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a fatty substance that forms in the inner folds of the upper eyelid: and it most commonly affects children: and it weighs down their eyes, and they suffer from morning catarrh, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to them, and for this reason you see them lying on their faces always, and sleeping with them, and their eyelids are moist under their eyebrows, which inflammation has already covered: and indeed the prominence of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.
And the method of treatment is for the patient to place their head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen and prepare it with myrtle juice, and make a circle from the myrtle juice according to the size that contains the Axirnath on all sides. Then place it on the affected area, and press with your fingers from all sides so that the Axirnath gathers in the center of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a spatula pressing for cracks across its width, and let there not be a crack greater than that which occurs in bloodletting at a depth.
Or it is necessary that you cut the entire skin until you reach the Axirnath, for in many conditions the Axirnath proceeds from a crack according to the shape of the fragment of white fat.
Therefore, extract it with a cloth that you have soaked between your fingers to the outer parts; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed: and be careful not to add anything in the crack, so that you do not reach with a spatula to the eye, and injure it.
But if the Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, you should add a little to the crack gently until the Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the affected area, and apply pressure with powders.
And there are those who grind salt and place it in the hollow of the crack, so that it melts what remains of that moisture.
Then treat it until it is healed.
But if an inflamed abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
concerning the methods of Ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid softens and becomes wrinkled as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When extra hairs grow on the eyelids in addition to the natural ones and become old: then they harm the eye and cause various illnesses, such as continuous tears, swelling of the eyelids, and cataracts, until they become the cause of destroying the eye.
And Ataxmir's treatment for the eye is according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as mentioned before in the chapter on cautery. Or Ataxmir is treated by incision and suturing. Or by using tubes, as I will explain.
You must place the patient's head in your lap. Then turn the eyelid with your left hand.
If it turns accordingly, it is good. And if it does not turn: insert a needle where the thread is located at the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and place it near the actual hairs, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a forceps.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a fine probe from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct.
Then remove the thread, and place a small piece of cotton or cloth under the eyelid; then mark on the eyelid with cerement, which should resemble the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be done according to the shape according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: since this now varies among people.
For there are those who need a large portion to be cut from the eyelid, according to the amount that is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the scalpel, cut along the two lines you marked, and start from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, and let the incision be close to natural hair, as thick as the width of a finger.
Then insert the hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then remove all the tissue from it. Then sew together the two edges with a needle and fine wool thread: and clean the blood, and make adhere what is excessive from the threads over both eyebrows, with certain gluing substances, if you wish to do this: and if not, do not worry about it.
Then leave the stitches and threads for three days or four: afterwards attend to it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches and treat it with something that dries and contracts it. For the eyelid will be raised at the time of sealing the wound and its union: but it will be better in the future.
This method of treatment was taught by the ancients to Ataxmir.
There is concern for the sick person in this, and it results from good practice, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method used by Ataxmir: it involves marking a figure on the eyelid that resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks, following the shape described below. Then cut away what is excessive using small forceps according to this form, with equal precision in the incision.
但如果无法使用钩子或无法保持其稳定，那么取一根带有线的针，将其插入形状的中央。再在较大的泪腺附近插入一根线，在较小的泪腺附近插入另一根线，并在手指间均匀地拉紧这些线。
Then raise your hand with an even motion, and lift the skin where the mark is, as we have described.
Then bring the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
但如果在你的切口或裂口中发生脓肿，用樟脑、类似药物或其他镇静药膏来缓解它。
有时也会发生眼皮上的毛发变向的情况。
因此，你应该使用我们所说的切口方法：但是，对于两者而言，缝合更为人工处理。 Concerning the treatment of Ataxmir with canes.
Let it be done as I have described, turn the eyelid and cut the cleft that is inside as I have narrated. Then make two canes or two slender sticks: their length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be narrower than the width of a spider's thread: and now incise at the ends of each on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then attach each one carefully to the excess part of the eyelid, and tightly bind the two canes from both sides with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days. For the tightened skin will die, turn black, and putrefy until it falls off on its own.
If it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then treat it until it heals.
When it has thus healed, the eyelid will rise: and the lashes will no longer sting.
And this is the form of the two canes, which you will make according to this figure, and in quantity with regard to length and width.
Chapter XII.
Concerning the raising of stinging eyelashes in the eye with a needle.
The procedure is to take a fine needle and thread a delicate, soft silk thread through it. Then join the ends together, and tie them with a very fine knot on each side; and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then arrange another fine thread below it for a short distance, and if you wish, tie the ends of this thread.
Then let the patient place his head in your arm, and position yourself near a light source so that the operation can be clearly seen: for the operation is subtle or delicate.
Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you pull it out from above a natural hair.
Then pull the hair up over the thread, and insert that hair into the thread: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out along with the thread from the eyelid with a natural hair.
If, however, the thread is pulled out and the hair does not come out with it: pull the thread down to the lower part along with the thread you arranged in it, until the thread emerges from the upper hole, and you see it with your eye: then you will pull out both the thread and the hair. Remove both of them, and close the eye: leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either attach a longer hair from the natural hairs to it so that it comes out with the longer one: or leave it alone until it grows longer over time, and then pull it out.
Chapter XIII.
When this alxatrati occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
The accidental alxatrati is caused by the healing of a wound, or a cut, or cauterization, and similar treatments.
And the method of treatment is to cut through that hardened tissue, and separate its edges, and place between them a pad made of linen bandages, and bind it until it heals.
And you should not use in its treatment substances that dry and constrict; for if you do this, the alxatrati will become worse than it was. Instead, use substances that soften, such as Greek hay: and embrocate with water in which mallows and flax seeds have been cooked: and anoint with dyaquilon ointment, which has been melted with some oil: and wrap with a linen bandage and treat with this.
And your goal in treatment is to try by every means to prevent it from hardening, according to its original form.
And this treatment we have described is merely a correction of the alxatrati, so that it does not return to its original form completely.
Concerning the treatment of alxatrati which occurs in the lower eyelid, and it is a wrinkle or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This is what is done below and is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental occurs from a wound, or a crack, or cautery, and things similar to these.
And the way of the operation is to take a needle through which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal bone to the right lacrimal bone until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a needle and cut it with a thin blade. If the shape of the eyelid thus returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take a probe and place it in the fissure, and use it to turn the eyelid: and make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two cuts be from the two corners of the incision until they meet and form an angle: until when they come together, they form this shape, which is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that piece of flesh in the quantity of its sharp lower side from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts together: or sew them with thread and wool.
Then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines and licinium until they heal.
And if Alxatrati occurs from a crack, and stitching, or cauterization: then it is necessary that you make the crack flat under the eyelashes, even as it preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a lancet, as we have said.
And the summary of the discourse on the treatment of Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that the procedure should proceed rapidly according to how it is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it is of many varieties in form: and the prudent artisan prepares his method in whatever way it is possible for him, until he restores the figure to its natural form or near it, and the sick person himself, according to what befits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
¶ On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or cornea.
This consolidation sometimes happens to many people, such that the upper eyelid becomes adhered to the white of the eye, and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a hook. Then cut the adherence with a blunt spatula, which should not be sharp for cutting but rather dull: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and do not use a sharp spatula that might harm the eye with its sharpness: and make your incision as if you were gently peeling off the adhesion until the eyelid returns to its natural shape, and the adherence is completely healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye and wash it with water: or distill into it from a sieve made of ziniar dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with lint soaked in licinus: and place on the eye wool infused with egg white: and after three days use a sieve, and with hardening agents, until it is healed.
Concerning the incision of nails and protruding flesh of the eyelids.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is nervous: and it is similar to a hard fiber, subtle. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture: which when you touch with iron or try to grasp with a hook, it breaks off and the hook does not hold onto it.
And both kinds do not begin except at the larger tear duct, gradually proceeding until they cover the sight, and prevent light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in cutting it is: the patient should place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then grasp the nail with a small hooked instrument and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair, or cowhair: and let the thread be strong, and double the tip of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with the thread, and extend it upwards: and strip off with the hair the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were pulling it off with the hair to the very end.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine scalpel or small forceps: and leave the natural lacrimal flesh intact so that continuous tearing does not result from cutting it.
And sometimes the flap is extended with just a hook: or with a thread, as we said. Then it is scraped off with a gentle scalpel, which has this shape.
And be careful that the scalpel does not touch the cornified membrane, so that it does not tear and cause the pupil to be perforated.
Then after the cut, apply some crushed salt or a preparation made from zinc to the eye, and leave it until another day. Then treat it as necessary until it heals.
If the flap is not fibrous and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor does a hook hold in it, then this type of flap is often cured with medications and heals as I have described in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the patient's eye and take a fine, gentle scalpel with a weak sharpness, in this shape. And gently scrape the flap from above with care and subtlety. If you see that it becomes thin and breaks apart, and the scraper presses against it, then instill from your hour in the eye a preparation made of zinc, or red powder, or crushed salt: and treat the eye until another day.
Then repeat the procedure on the same area until everything is completely removed. Unless there is a hot abscess in your eye: then let it be left alone, and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the procedure on it with caution, until it is healed.
However, if the protrusion of the lacrimal flesh causes great harm to the eye, suspend it with a hook and cut a part from it: but do not make the cut too deep, so that the flow of tears is not impaired.
Then apply drops of red silk or made from cinnabar to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Of the cutting of the pterygium, and flesh grown in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
There sometimes arises in the eyes of certain people a red flesh that forms or is placed there such that it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or adheres to the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; and it resembles the flower of the pomegranate tree.
And the treatment for this condition is such that the patient should place his head in your lap. Then open the patient's eyes and remove that flesh entirely using suitable hooks. Hold it with one forceps.
Then cut the flesh first until the entire growth is removed with a scalpel. And be careful around the eye so that you do not injure it during the operation. And let your cutting of it, whether with a spatulated blade as mentioned in the cutting of a nail, or with small forceps used to remove eyelashes, follow its shape according to what will be described in this chapter.
When your cutting is complete and all the pterygium has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt, or instill red powder and similar astringent medicines. Place a poultice mixed with egg white on the outer part of the eye to protect it from a warm abscess.
If any part of the pterygium remains and hot blood controls you, and you fear a warm abscess: then leave the eye as it is and treat it with something that soothes the abscess.
Then repeat over it with the procedure until it is healed.
And do likewise with added flesh that occurs in the eye from this type.
However, it is necessary that others treat any weakened eye either naturally or accidentally by operating with iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that procedure.
Concerning the extraction of Sebel from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Sebel are red veins that form over the eye and prevent the vision from functioning properly: and they weaken the eye over time.
Therefore, you must first consider whether the eye in which there is Sebel is strong, and there is no illness in it besides Sebel: then extract its Sebel.
And you should instruct the patient to place his head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook or two according to your judgment: and the hook should be fine and double-threaded, in this form, or there should be two hooks gradually in one body, in this form.
Then extract with fine forceps those veins carefully, and remove the blood hour by hour until you see those veins removed from the eye and dissolved: and be careful not to injure the eye with the extremities of the forceps.
And let your procedure be at noon in the presence of the sun, and be very firm in your work: so that you do not cut anything except those veins.
And when you have filled it, then drip into the eye with green or red silk: so that its sharpness may corrode what remains of the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of that at that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with something that alleviates the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days until the pain subsides: and treat it with a warm poultice: then repeat over it in the same manner, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
§ On the reduction of the aristed (a projection or pointed part) to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Doctors call the aristed a fistula, which you treat with cauterization or with sharp medication, depending on its previous history.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in dealing with it except to cut into the abscess near its origin, and extract all the moisture that is within it and the pus, until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called the Rough Head.
It should be made of smooth iron, and its head should be round like a thimble, with fine points like those of a file or an aliskilfer (a fine-toothed tool): and place it on the corrupted part of the bone.
Then rotate it between your fingers and press with your hand for a moment until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with drying and astringent medicines.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and flesh grows in it, and the flow of pus is stopped: and after forty days it does not recur, and it does not become an abscess, and nothing adverse happens to it: then you shall know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no other option but to redirect the fistula to the nasal opening, following this method.
And it is necessary to expose the bone secondly with an iron tool or with a sharp medicine: and when the bone is exposed, then take a trepan in this form, with its end made of iron, triangular: and its wooden part should be tapered until the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the lacrimal area: and keep your hand a little away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the trepan until it penetrates the bone, and the patient feels it: by this when the patient covers their nose with their hand, they will feel air coming out.
Then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines, as I have taught you.
When flesh grows and the place hardens: then the matter that was flowing outward returns to the nose: therefore it is easier to treat this condition for the patient.
¶ On the Reduction of a Prominent Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes completely and there is no damage to vision or reduction in sight, then you must relieve the patient: next, bleed him; afterwards, apply cupping to the neck without incision but with suction.
Then apply an ointment to the eye made from acacia, aloes, frankincense, and styrax. Then wrap the eye from above with a plaster covered in many small pieces.
The method of the small pieces is as follows: take soft cloths, many of them, and fold each cloth over four times; make many such pieces. Then place them one on top of another according to the amount needed for the eye. Afterwards, wrap them tightly with a thick cloth using a strong bandage.
And apply cupping with suction without incision again.
Then remove the cups and leave the eye wrapped day and night.
If the bandage becomes loose again, then it must be wrapped tightly once more; afterwards, remove the bandage after one day and night, as we said.
If you see that the eye has already returned to its normal position, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, small pieces, wrapping, and cupping until it heals.
¶ On the Incision of the Eyelid.
Chapter XXI.
When there is a tear in the eyelid that protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain and disfigures the appearance of the person because of it, and you wish to cut it: then the procedure is as I describe: you should insert an needle at the base of the eyelid from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle with double thread on the side of the lacrimal duct, and make it penetrate: and leave the first needle as it is positioned.
Then cut the place with double thread and tie one end of it around the circumference of the needle: and tighten it greatly.
Then remove the needle, and place cotton soaked in egg white over the eye: and leave it until the thread comes off with the needle.
Then treat the eye with what strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eye is tightly bound with a circle of cloth on all sides until the eye becomes very prominent.
Then pierce it with a very fine probe that reaches the depth of the eye, and let the moisture from the egg white run in, and allow the eye to settle: then bind it until it heals.
¶ On the Treatment of Alcomnati.
Chapter XXII.
This disease called Alcomnati is nothing but pus that accumulates in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not otherwise.
And the method of treatment for this condition is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat or a chair.
Then take the patient's head in your hands from both sides and move it until you see the pus come to the lower part of the eye. Then let it be fixed so that it does not descend, and allow the light to clear: and the patient should see objects as he did before. If it does not go down below, know that it is water.
If, however, pus does not come out as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine probe and incise with it slightly above the fatty layer of the cornified skin near the connection with the corneal membrane in the crown, until pus comes out.
When it comes out, then drop warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey: or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled; then treat with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have now described the types of water in division, and which are suitable for piercing with explanation, then take that same description according to health.
Then make the patient sit between your hands, which are positioned square and opposite to the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye, and press it tightly: then with your right hand, if the affected eye is the left eye; or with your left hand, if the affected eye is the right.
Then take an almond with your right hand if the eye is the left eye; or with your left hand if the eye is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the radius in the apparent white part of the eye near the minor tear duct: then push the almond with force: and you will turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the whites of the eye: and you will feel that the almond has now reached an empty space.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the orbit from the deep part to the pupil be equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the dark spot; and this is the circumference of the eye. For you will see these things in the very pupil of the eye because of the clarity of the corneal tissue.
Then place the orbit up to the place where the fluid is. Then press it below once after another.
If the fluid descends immediately, then the patient sees it as soon as their vision opens, and the orbit in their eye.
Then rest for a little while. If the fluid descends, then place it secondly, except where the orbit exits.
When it is fixed and does not ascend, then remove the orbit with ease: and you shall turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve some clear salt of the gem in water: and wash the eye with it internally. Then place on the outside of the eye a poultice of flax or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white: and bind the eye with it.
We, and those of our time, place crushed cyminum with egg white on it.
If the orbit does not obey you when entering the eye because of its hardness, since it is made by humans and the eye is very hard, then you must take a spatula, which is called Alberid, whose form is as follows.
Therefore, insert it only with that connector, and do not place your hand in the opening; you should only create a passage to the almond-shaped space.
Then insert the almond-shaped object as we have said.
And when your work is completed, prepare for the patient a decently made dormitory in which they may sleep on their back in a dark room; and prevent any movement and coughing; and give them food that soothes their nature; and do not let them move their head at all, neither to the right nor to the left.
And let the bandage remain according to its placement until the third day.
Then remove it in that dark room and test their vision: and have them look at objects. Then replace the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not appropriate to do this during the hour of treatment or immediately after cutting; rather, it should be done later because water rises quickly due to a strong gaze.
但如果发生了热性脓肿，那么在第七天之前必须打开眼睛，并用能够缓解脓肿的药物治疗，直到脓肿消退。然后解除其视力限制，在接下来的几天里让他待在暗室中，使用口服药物来调节他的视力。
然后让他逐渐离开暗室，恢复正常的生活环境。
要知道，在进行扎尔特亚（zaltha）治疗时，学生不会被完全禁止视力恢复：那时他可以逐渐恢复正常视物功能。注意“zaltha”这个词如果是指特定的治疗方法或状态，请根据上下文进一步确认其确切含义。
And now someone has come to us from those who are from Alarach, who said that a perforated reservoir was made in Alarach, through which water is drawn.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books. And it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of signs from the reservoir, so that those who do not know it can understand them.
They should be made of pure copper: and their ends should be finely triangular, with acute points.
Chapter XXIIII.
¶ On the treatment of flesh growths on the nose.
Sometimes various flesh growths appear on the nose, one of which resembles a multi-legged scorpion, and from it there is a hard, stone-like, dark-colored cancerous flesh. And there is also one that is soft and not dark in color.
In the case of the flesh that is soft and not cancerous or fraudulent among those mentioned, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing away from the sun, open their nostrils, and throw a hook into these growths. Then pull them outwards and cut what you have caught with a fine sharp scalpel from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If any part remains that cannot be cut away, then scrape it with one of the fine instruments with ease until nothing remains. If blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is appropriate; or if it comes from malignant abscesses, then hurry to cauterize it until the blood is cut off, and all the flesh is removed.
Then vinegar, water, or wine should be poured into the nose after making an incision. If the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you will know that it is now healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that within there is flesh grown on the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach when making the incision.
Then it is necessary to insert a linen thread of some thickness, with many knots in it: and place a distance equal to the width of a finger, or less, between each knot: and the patient should be instructed to send one end of the thread into the nose with a probe, or whatever he can use, after which he should pull it out through his nostril until it reaches the palate and exits above his throat.
And this is often done similarly by young boys named Attom in schools: and it is an easy task for whoever wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one that comes out above the nose, and the other that remains inside the nose. Then have an assistant cut the flesh with the knots in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then remove the thread: and place into the nose after cleansing the blood a linen cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days or longer, until the ointment has worn down everything that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end of the treatment in the nose for several days until it heals.
但如果需要干燥的治疗，就使用它。
为了制作头部净化装置，用于蒸馏橄榄油和其他鼻用药物，用银或铜制成一个类似小灯的东西，开口像海螺一样：其通道也应相似。
如果你想制作一个封闭的管子，就像一根管子一样。
而用于制作头部净化装置的海螺形状工具应该是完整的，开口的：它应该有一个把手在末端，当你用它加热橄榄油或其他从草药中提取的液体时可以握住它。
第二十五章。
常常在鼻子的末端会出现一个瘤，随着时间的推移它会增大并变得更大，直到它的外观变得丑陋。
对于这个问题，需要在它刚开始出现时就进行处理，并彻底根除它。 然后在那个位置放置烧灼剂或燃烧性药物，以固定其位置。
If therefore the incision of it is delayed until it has grown large, then observe, if it is stony, hard, dark in color, and with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron; for it is a suppurating tumor that is cancerous.
For I have often seen that when one incises such an abscess, it results in great harm to the one who has it.
And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be incised all around it, then evacuate the patient, and cut it without fear, without hesitation: and treat the area with something that dries and contracts it until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
Concerning the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, surgery is not very effective, except in certain individuals.
Therefore, when someone sustains an injury from that, you must observe if it is a recent wound with his own blood: and then join the edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
And if the edges of the wound are already separated and each part is clean and healthy: then you must remove all parts down to the visible skin until it bleeds. Then join the two edges with stitches, and bind them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground frankincense over it: and place a piece of diafinition plaster and another consolidating plaster on top of the powder: and leave it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it, and replace the medicine: and leave it alone until the threads come off by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is to join the separated parts together, either with stitches as we have described for abdominal surgery: or join the edges together with thread, as I have taught you.
Chapter XXVII.
¶ On the Extraction of Lip Frenula.
Many people experience hard nodules similar to grain seeds occurring mostly inside their lips; some of these are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore, you must evert the lip, and cut above each nodule, and hook it with a hook, and cut it away from all sides.
Then fill the place after the cut with powdered zechar (a type of plant), until the bleeding stops. Note: "zegi" might refer to a specific medicinal powder or substance used in medieval times; if this term is not familiar, it could be a transliteration error or a term specific to the context. However, following the instruction strictly, no additional notes are added.
Then wash it with vinegar, and treat the area with it where there is contraction, until the wounds heal.
Chapter XXVIII.
¶ On the Incision of Flesh Born on the Gum.
Flesh often grows on the gum, which the ancients called abuluss.
Therefore, you must hook it with a hook: or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and allow the pus to flow, or the blood.
Then place over the treated area powdered zegi or other astringent drying powders.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: for it does not return after being cauterized.
Chapter XXIX.
¶ On the Reason for Treating Teeth with Iron.
Sometimes aggregations form on the surfaces of teeth both from the inside and outside, and between the gums there are rough, unpleasant, and at times darkened patches that can turn yellow or green until the corruption spreads to the gum, making the teeth foul because of it.
Therefore, you must seat the patient between your hands, and place their head in your lap. Scrape the molar and tooth where the cortices appear to you, and what resembles sand: continue until nothing remains of it, and do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other similar conditions until they are clean.
If what is inside them is removed from the beginning of the treatment, it is good. If not, then repeat the treatment on them the following day, second day, and third day, until finally you achieve your goal through persistent effort.
And you should know that a tooth requires scraping with tools of various forms and shapes, depending on the preparation for your procedure: therefore, the tool used to scrape from below is different from the one used to scrape between teeth, according to different forms.
And you should have these forms of scrapers prepared, which you see.
Chapter 30.
On the Extraction of Tooth Pain.
One must treat a tooth of its pain with all skill and delay in extracting it. For there is nothing to replace it once it is extracted, since it is a superior substance: therefore, when there is no excuse for extracting it, then it must be done when the patient is compelled to extract it, so that it may be strengthened, and you are certain that the painful tooth needs to be extracted.
For often the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is a decayed tooth and extract it: then the pain does not subside until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen this from the practice of bloodletters.
When you are certain that the painful tooth needs to be extracted, then you should make incisions around the tooth with a spatula that has some medicinal properties until the gums are loosened on all sides: then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps initially gently, until you shake it.
Then place the forceps properly on it and have the patient's head between your knees: once you have securely held it so that it does not move: then pull the tooth straight out so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of the instruments and gently insert it under it from all sides, and try to move it as you did initially.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then you should fill that hole with a cloth and tightly wrap it with the tip of a fine needle so that it does not break when you clench it with forceps.
And you should act with great care when making incisions around the gums on all sides.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and returns to the patient from which there is greater pain than at first.
And be careful not to do what ignorant bleeders do in their haste and boldness regarding its removal, beyond what we have described.
For they often cause serious illnesses to occur in people, of which it is difficult to break them and leave all or some of its roots remaining, or to extract it with some bones of the jaw, as we have testified many times.
Then rinse after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If bleeding occurs from the area (this often happens), then grind some zegi and fill the area with it: and if you do not have zegi, cauterize it if zegi is not available to you.
The form of fine forceps used to move a tooth should have long tips, short handles, and be thick so that they do not bend when pressed against the tooth: their handles should be as thick as you see fit, so that when you squeeze them, they do not slip or bend: they should have short tips, and be made of smooth iron or properly forged steel, with straight tips: and on their tips there should be teeth, some entering into others, and squeezing with a proper and strong constriction.
And sometimes the tips are shaped like the beak of a bird called a heron, and they have a strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth, and the extraction of broken jawbones.
When part of a tooth that is being removed breaks off, then you should place cotton with butter on the site for one or two days until it softens. Then insert into it an instrument similar to the beak of a bird called a heron, either an algast (a surgical tool) or forceps. The shape of the forceps is as follows.
Their tips should be made like the inside of a file: or like an aliskilfegi.
If these forceps do not work for you, then you should hollow out around the root and expose all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lever, which has this shape.
The tip should be short and slightly thick: and it should not be too flexible, so that it does not break.
If the root comes out with it, that is good: and if not, you should assist with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows.
The shape of the first instrument has a triangular tip, with some thickness.
The shape of the triangular tip is fine and slender.
And with other instruments and tools that have been mentioned previously regarding teeth.
Also let there be an aid with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this shape, with a bent triangular end, in which there is something thickened so that it does not break: and let it not be absorbent.
And you should know that there are many instruments for teeth: and likewise the remaining instruments are not counted, and a wise artisan, subtle in his art, finds an instrument for himself according to what the operation signifies to him and according to the illnesses themselves.
Since there are illnesses for which the ancients did not mention instruments, due to the diversity of their kinds.
But if the bone from the jaw or other bones of the mouth breaks, or rots: then examine it carefully in its place with what is suitable for it among the instruments and forceps which I mentioned for extracting roots, and assist with gestures, whose form is this.
Let there be something thickened gradually to draw it out or hold the bone with it, and let it not repel and go away until the bone comes out: and restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
But if there is a small rot in the bone, then scrape it from the rot, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On cutting prominent teeth that protrude over others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it makes an ugly form because of them: and especially when this happens in women, and girls, that is, prostitutes.
Therefore, you should consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, nor can it be filed or polished: then remove it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has the following form.
It is like a small beak and is made of iron, with a very sharp tip.
And let the cut you make to remove it be done over several days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is disturbed.
But if it protrudes beyond the proper filing, then file it with an iron file, which has this form.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle made of small pointed parts, like a file used to make needles. With this, the tooth should be filed gradually over several days easily, so that the tooth is not disturbed or falls out; then smooth it, and finally scrape it with some razors at the end.
If a tooth is fractured in such a way that it injures the tongue: then you must file it until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it is even, so that it does not injure the tongue or impair speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
Concerning the restoration of teeth with gold wire.
When the front teeth are struck or shaken by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on them without fear of them falling out, and treatment with astringent medicines has been ineffective: then there is a method to secure them with gold wire: for silver turns green and corrodes over time, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium fineness and thickness according to its quantity, so that it may fit between the teeth.
The form of the treatment is such that you should take a thread and insert twice its length between two healthy teeth; then weave with both ends of the thread between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving back to the part where you began: and pull your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not removed at all: and let your binding by which you pull the thread be near the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
Then cut the excess thread ends with forceps: and gather each end, and turn them with your finger: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth so that they do not injure the tongue: then leave them tightly secured as long as necessary.
If, however, it loosens or breaks, tie them with another thread, and it will remain secure in this way for the entire time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of the weaving of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And it sometimes happens that one tooth or two return to their places after an injury, and are retained as we have described, and remain: and this is done only by a skilled and experienced craftsman.
And sometimes a piece of cattle bone is fitted: and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the spot where it strengthens the tooth and is secured, as we said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIIII.
Sometimes this tendon that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the procedure is to open the mouth of the patient in your hand and lift their tongue: then cut that nerve tendon horizontally until the tongue is released from its restriction.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and this is due to the healing of a wound: then hook into it with a hook, and cut it horizontally until you sever the tendon, and release the knot.
And be careful that there is no split deep in the flesh, and that you do not cut an artery there, causing a flow of blood.
Then wash the area around the incision with rose water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a bandage made of linen under the tongue, which the patient should hold throughout the night: so that it does not heal secondarily.
但如果出血，那么在伤口上放置研磨过的茍廷草。 If blood overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a freckled cautery, which is suitable for that; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes it happens under the tongue that there is an abscess which resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural functions; and it may grow so much as to fill the mouth.
And the procedure is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and examine the abscess.
If you see that it is of a dark color or black, hard, and the patient has no feeling in it, then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it tends towards a whitish color with moisture, then hook it with an uncus and cut it with a fine scalpel, and release it from all parts. If blood overcomes you during your time of operation, then apply ground zege to it until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation until you remove it completely.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with the remaining appropriate treatment until it heals.
Concerning the treatment of an abscess of the two tonsils.
Chapter XXXVI.
Sometimes between the throat there occur glands, which resemble almonds that occur outside; and they are called the two tonsils. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then examine them.
If therefore there is a hard abscess, of dark color, with little sensation: then do not treat it with iron.
And if it is of a red color, and its root is thick: then do not treat it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood; rather leave it until it matures. And then either you will pierce it, or it will rupture on its own.
And if it is of a white color, round, and its root is fine: then it must be cut open.
And the procedure is such that you should consider before operating on it whether the abscess has become quiet and warm at rest, or has decreased in some way: then have the patient sit facing the sun, and place his head in your lap: open his mouth, and let the attendant take between his hands an instrument whose shape is as follows, and press the patient's tongue with it below.
It should be made of silver or copper, and it should be thin like a small knife.
When you press the tongue with it and the abscess becomes visible, and your vision falls upon it: then take a hook and insert it into the tonsil, and extract it as much as you can, along with some of the surrounding tissue.
Then cut it open with an instrument whose shape is as follows. It resembles forceps, but the ends should be curved such that the opening of each is directly opposite the other at an angle. Therefore, ensure it is made of untempered iron or brass soaked in a solution.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, which has this form. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one almond-shaped area, cut the other according to this same type of incision.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If however bleeding occurs, the patient should gargle with water in which bark of pomegranate has been boiled: or leaves of myrtle, and similar astringents, until the flow of blood stops: then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them accordingly as I described for the equal cutting of the two tonsils.
And I have indeed already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed between her throat, which was causing darkness, loss of sensation, and nearly closing off her throat: the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and food and water consumption were already restricted for her: she would have reached death if it had remained for one or two more days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it sent out two branches until they emerged above the two nostril openings.
I hurried quickly and hooked one of them with an instrument. Then I pulled it out, and a large piece came out with it.
Then I removed it where it was caught in the nasal passage.
Then I did it to the one that protruded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue: afterwards, I fixed a hook into the abscess; then I removed part of it, and only a little blood followed. Thus, the throat of the woman was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water, then she took food.
I did not cease to cut from that abscess many times over a long period: and the abscess would grow back in the place that I had cut, until it became too prolonged with it.
I then devised a plan and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
She thus remained without any further treatment; then I left her side, and did not know what God did for her after me.
Concerning the incision of an abscess on the throat.
Chapter XXXVII.
When a catarrh descends to the throat and becomes an abscess, and it is long, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is thick at the lower part, round, then it is called a uvula.
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the hot abscess has subsided from it, and it is fine: then you must cut it.
And if what is attached to it is a round mass, and does not have length, and is of a bloody or dark color, and has no sensation: then you must avoid cutting it. For in it there is fear upon the sick.
Therefore, when you see it according to the method I described, from its whiteness and length, make the sick person sit facing the sun; then press their tongue with the instrument that was previously mentioned: then fix the hook in the uvula and pull it down; and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting the two tonsils.
And you must not cut from it except what is added beyond the natural limit without any addition.
For if you cut from it more than necessary, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting, use what we have described for the cutting of the two tonsils: and take care of it until it heals.
If the patient is afraid of cutting, then you must use skill in cauterizing it without fear and without concern.
And the method of cauterization in it is not done except with sharp water: and you should place the patient's head in your arm. Then press their tongue with the instrument that was mentioned. Then take some of the water that I told you about in the chapter on cauterizing, and mix it with unextinguished charcoal, and place it neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of this instrument, which has the following form.
Let the end of it where the medicine is placed be concave, like the bowl of a spoon.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva runs from his mouth due to the internal medicine, so that nothing from it descends into his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you should apply it to the wound for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it become blackened and the pain subsided due to the medicine.
And if you wish to take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of a rod, and pour the medicine onto the cloth, and insert the rod with the cloth into a tube above, until the cloth adheres to the wound.
Do this multiple times until you achieve what you wish for in cauterizing the wound. Then leave it: it will dry up and fall off after three days or four.
If you need to repeat the treatment, do so: and after cauterization, clean around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around it with medicine: and rinse it with cold water.
And treat it externally with applications and internally with gargles until it is healed.
This method of treatment is therefore healthier than cutting and more distant from the risk of fear.
And sometimes the wound is also treated with something subtler than cauterization and cutting: it is treated with fumigation, in this manner. Take a bowl, and hyssop, and oregano, and rue, and saffron, and chamomile, and southernwood, and similar herbs: and gather them all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and let them boil: and the pot should be sealed with clay appropriately: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot through which is placed a concave instrument in this manner.
It should be made of silver or copper: and insert the end where there is a grenade into the sick person's mouth until vapor rises up to the cloth on top of the tube, until the cloth becomes very dark.
Then repeat this process multiple times until it dries.
And be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of an abscess. For it usually adds to the abscess: and you should not do this unless the abscess has begun to show signs of heat.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a tube and attach a piece of cork at its end so that the patient's mouth does not burn: because the cork prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is part of good treatment with safety.
¶ On the Extraction of Spines and Bones from the Throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often, a fishbone or spine, or something similar, adheres to the throat.
Therefore, you should extract what is visible and apparent after pressing the tongue with an instrument near a light source, which makes clear to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must have the sick person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the object will come out attached through vomiting.
Or let the sick person swallow a piece of turnip, or the root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; or take a small piece of dried sea sponge and tie it to a thread, then let him swallow it. When it reaches the place where there are spines or a bone, and it is extracted, then it comes out.
If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in the shape described.
Let it be slightly thicker than a radius and have a curved end, which he should insert into his throat with ease: and he should keep his head raised.
And he should be careful not to touch his epiglottis, so that it does not cause him to cough and push out the object with it, or the physician may insert it himself with his hand.
However, it is better for the sick person to insert it himself: due to his knowledge of the location of the attached object: and he should push it downward or pull his hand with the instrument upward, all of this according to the amount prepared for him, until it comes out.
¶ On the Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with what I mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and it does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in front of sunlight, or near the sun after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I have described to you.
If your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook or with fine forceps appropriately.
If it is not possible to do so with them: then take a concave tube and insert it into the throat of the patient up to near the throat: then insert heated iron into the hollow of the tube with fire. Do this multiple times: and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
Then let him take a vessel filled with cold water and open his mouth in it: and let him gargle with it without swallowing any of it: and stir the water with his hand for one hour after another. For when the leech feels the water, it falls immediately.
If it does not come out as we have described, then fumigate the patient with ants or with wormwood using the instrument I described for vulvar fumigation.
Do this multiple times, for it will fall.
The method of operation in fumigation is to take a pot in which live twigs with fire are placed: and the pot should be covered with a cover, in whose middle there is a hole: and arrange the end of the instrument in that hole.
Then proceed with the fumigation, and let the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will fall immediately.
If it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And if the patient can tolerate thirst, let him eat salted foods and garlic, and do not let him drink water.
It is necessary therefore that he follow this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is removed from the throat when it falls there.
It is like forceps, as you can see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And its end is like the beak of a bird called a heron, in which there are the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let go entirely.
Concerning the incision of Abscesses, and their cutting open, and general treatment.
Chapter 40.
There are many types of abscesses, of various kinds, as they come to mind, namely one by one in this book: and they differ in their incision and cutting open from two methods.
One of these is due to the nature of the abscess itself and what it contains from humidity.
And the second method is due to the locations where they occur in the body.
Because an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from one occurring in the joints: and each of them has its own judgment based on the treatment.
And there are abscesses which should not be pierced until after the putrefaction of the pus within them and its completion: and among these are some that should be pierced while they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
Just as abscesses that are near joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and persists until the contents putrefy, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint may become corrupted, hence it is more likely to cause contraction of that member.
Or the abscess is near a principal limb: for if you delay its piercing until it ripens, it will harm either the area itself or the principal limb through it.
Or if it is near the anus, pierce it even when it is immature: and you should not pierce an unripe abscess that has not completed its digestion, except for one near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or develop into a condition that cannot be healed.
You must know the time for piercing an abscess that has ripened according to its completion: this is when the pain subsides, the fever recedes, and there is a decrease in redness and pulsation, along with sharpness at the apex of the abscess: and other signs.
And you must make the same incision at the lower part of the abscess and at its highest prominence: and the incision should follow the length of the body if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in areas such as the arms, tendons, nerves, arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those cases where reflection occurs, proceed with piercing according to that limb.
When an abscess is in fleshy areas, it is better to postpone its piercing until its digestion has become firmer, as we said according to the supplement.
For if you pierce it before that time, the course of the pus from it will be prolonged, and there will be much filth and contamination, and its lips may become hardened, and its depth increased.
And some abscesses should be pierced according to the width of the body when necessary: or according to what the limb needs.
It is necessary to administer a small piercing for small abscesses and a large piercing for large abscesses: or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
There are abscesses in which it is necessary to hollow out the skin: and to cut it when it has become like cloth, and has reached a stage where it is dead: as often happens with those that doubt (dilate) and with buboes.
And among them are those that are cut in a triangular shape. And there is one from which an incision is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like the groin abscess.
And among them are those in which a round incision and a lunar-shaped incision are made: and similar ones from other types of incisions.
For those that do not have a head, such as soft superficial abscesses, it is necessary to pierce them with a superficial incision, or simply a flat one.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not hurry to extract all of it at once when you pierce it; rather, remove only a portion of it. Then clean the abscess on another day. Then extract some more pus again.
Do this repeatedly in stages until the pus is fully removed: especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person, for the vital spirit of such individuals is often greatly weakened with each expulsion of pus; and the patient may die, and you will not understand why.
Therefore, be very cautious with this chapter.
And after your puncture of the abscess, you must clean the wound: and be careful. If the wound of the abscess is small or the incision is shallow, then apply a dressing made of flax or old cloth. And if the abscess is large and there are many openings from the puncture, then you must insert a dressing into every opening until they reach each other.
And if you have removed a piece of the skin from the abscess or indented it around the edges, then you must fill it with old cloth or wrap it as you would a garment, shaved of its fluff without moisture; and secure it until the third day.
Then remove it, and treat it with what is necessary from an ointment until it heals.
If blood flow occurs during your time of operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which soak a cloth in them: and place this cloth over the place of bleeding many times.
If the bleeding continues, then it is necessary to administer treatment, care, and powders, which I have described in many places throughout this book, and according to the division.
If it is during winter and the site of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should pour in powders mixed with warm wine and oil: and place them on the affected areas.
And if it is during summer and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil, and make sure everything is cold. On the third day, as we have said, it is necessary to open the abscess, clean it, and administer appropriate treatment for its care until it heals.
This is what is necessary to know generally about the treatment of abscesses.
According to the path of distinction, I have already discussed every abscess, detailing step by step how to approach its treatment.
Chapter XLII.
Concerning the incision of abscesses that occur in the skin of the head.
Small abscesses occur in the skin of the head and are of the type called Nodes, which are contained within membranes that resemble little pouches, as if they were chicken bladders.
And their kinds are many.
Of these, some are fatty; and of these are those that contain moisture similar to mud; and of these are those that contain moisture similar to broth and porridge; and there are others like them. And among them are those that are hard and stone-like.
And there is no fear in cutting through all of them and extracting them, as long as the artery does not oppose their division.
And the procedure in cutting them is to try them with an instrument whose form comes next, which is called "Intromissum," until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then dry it by cutting along its length with a shallow cut, in this manner.
And begin the cut from line b to line g. When the moisture is evacuated, then peel off the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not let anything remain inside.
For it often returns if anything remains from it.
Then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if it is available; and if not, in salt water. Fill the wound with it and leave it until another day. For it will corrode what remains of the cyst.
Then repeat the process with cotton and Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and as many times as necessary, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst. Then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the abscess contains a soft knot: then cut it according to this shape, which has the form of a cross: and insert hooks between the two lips of the section, and strip it away from all sides: and try your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If however an artery causes trouble for you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly treat the abscess if it is stone-like, by cutting and curing it in the same way, as we have said.
And the cutting above a stone-like abscess is easier: because it contains little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that are in the head in certain people, in which there is absolutely no moisture.
Which is to say: because I cut above an abscess in the head of an old woman, and found the abscess like a solid, hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if someone were hit by it when thrown, it would wound them.
In other abscesses or accidents in the head, except for those abscesses that occur in the heads of children and near the roots of the ears, the cutting of all of them should be superficial.
Or place the puncture always at the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus is alleviated towards the lower parts.
Then treat them with what is appropriate for them from the methods of treatment.
§ On cutting strophulas in the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses frequently occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes they also occur in other parts of the body.
And concerning those that occur in the neck among them, there is one type and many others: and they generate each other: and every Strophulus among them is within its own membrane, as it is in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many types of these Strophuli. And among them are some that are hard as stone: and there are others that contain moisture: and there are also malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
For the one among them that you see to be of good disposition upon touch, whose color is close to that of the skin and which moves freely in all directions and is not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, arteries, or is deep: it should be cut superficially from its upper part to its lower part along a line, b. to a line, g., and scrape it away entirely: and with an uncino (forceps), or multiple uncini if needed, as we mentioned for abscesses of the head, spread apart the two sides of the skin and gradually remove it.
And be cautious not to cut a vein or nerve.
And let the blade not be very sharp: so that it does not slip from your hand during cutting or disturb the patient, and avoid cutting what is not necessary.
However, if you cut a vein or artery, or if it prevents you from proceeding with the operation, then apply crushed seeds or powders that stop bleeding to the wound, and bind it tightly, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound softens: or until it begins to putrefy.
For the vein is cut lengthwise. Therefore proceed to your task until you complete it.
Then examine with your index finger to see if any remnants of strophuli or other small objects remain; therefore cut them out and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the strophula, then you must not cut it out from its root; rather, you should ligature it with doubled strong thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old lint that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the strophula is completely cut out, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound: and close it immediately once you see that there is no remaining excess.
If however you see that there is excess due to the size of the strophula, then you must proceed to cutting and extracting its root: and apply the suture as we have described.
And for those strophuli that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial incision: so that the site of its maturity becomes apparent to you: and place the incision from where it follows below the body, as we have said.
Then after the piercing, apply licinia with ointment and similar substances to consume what remains from the corruption, until you see that the wound is now clean: then treat it with an ointment that generates flesh, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the incision of the Epiglottis in the case of an abscess within the throat.
The ancients spoke of this incision at the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it: and this is the text of their discourse.
However, in cases of hydrops (collection of fluid), the incision at the Epiglottis must be avoided, as it does not provide help through that method: because all veins and the lung are weakened.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the windpipe, the incision of the Epiglottis should be used to avoid the danger of death that occurs from suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to perform it, we should incise the Epiglottis below three circles of the Epiglottis or four, with a small cut across its width, in the area between two circles by its length, such that the incision is made in soft tissue and not in cartilage: and this place is suitable for the incision because it is away from flesh and the blood vessels are distant from it.
If the surgeon is hesitant, then he should stretch out the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should cut the skin until he reaches the windpipe: he should avoid the blood vessels if he sees them.
Then he should make the incision in the soft tissue as we have described: and it is indicated on the incision of the windpipe from the phlegm that comes out with it when it breaks, and by the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour arrives at which suffocation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wounded skin, and do this alone without the cartilage.
Then apply medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasis says. The summary of the discourse we have narrated has no explanation except when they see that one of these abscesses has already obstructed the throat of the sick person: and the patient is in imminent danger of death, and wishes to relieve his breathing: they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the wound site, and be saved from death: and for this reason they have prescribed leaving the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed, and its duration is three days, or nearly so: then they prescribe sewing up the wound and treating it until it heals.
And what I saw myself is that a servant girl took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and with it she cut part of the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, and I found her moaning, as if it were the groan of a dead person.
I examined the wound and found that a small amount of blood had come out from it. I was therefore confident that she had not severed any major blood vessels or muscles: and air was coming out of the wound.
I hurried, and treated my wound, and cared for it until it was healed: and nothing happened to the servant girl except a hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after days to better health.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in the procedure of cutting the epiglottis.
Concerning the incision of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter XLII (42)
This swelling is called a hernia of the throat, it is a large swelling according to the color of the body: and it occurs frequently in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
In the natural case, there is indeed no need for intervention.
The accidental case, however, occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to large fatty tumors. And the second way is similar to a swelling that occurs due to constriction of an artery. And there is fear in this case, and one should not presume to treat it with a knife unless it is small: and you should examine it and investigate it with an Intromissory instrument. If you find it similar to a large fatty tumor and it is not suspended with any veins, then cut it as tumors are cut: and remove it along with what contains it from the pouch, if it is in a pouch: and if not, then thoroughly examine the entire area. Then treat the area with what is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the incision above the parts affected with knots.
There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division. And here it is necessary for me to describe the difference between a Knot and an Exit, since there is much confusion regarding this.
I say then, that when an exiture is characterized by heat, fever, and severe pains until the boiling over of excesses subsides, and putrefaction completes its course: then the fever and heat subside.
With a Knot, however, there is no heat, nor fever, nor severe pains, and they are contained within a sack called a "sifachin," which is their own pouch and matches the color of the body: and the beginning of them is like a pea, and it develops like a lentil, both larger and smaller.
And they are of two types: either fatty or containing moisture. And the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a Knot, it is necessary to examine it and investigate it first with an instrument called "Intromissum," as its form will come in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of investigation for abscesses and all knots is to take this instrument and insert it into a moister place that you find in the abscess: and you should move your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then place your hand on it according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the instrument, and examine what comes out with it.
If moisture that is flowing comes out, whatever its color may be: then dry it by superficial cutting, as I said regarding other abscesses.
And if moisture does not come out with the instrument, then know that it is fatty: dry it therefore on top of it by cutting in a cross shape, as shown in this form, as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and peel the skin from all parts easily: and protect the container if possible over it, so that you may remove it whole with the lump.
However, if the container ruptures during the operation and it is not possible to remove it intact, as this often happens, then remove it in fragments until nothing of it remains.
For if even a small or large part of it remains, the lump will return most likely.
If it overcomes you and a small part of it remains: then fill the wound at the end of your operation with certain corrosive sharp powders: and treat the wound by binding it tightly, and place something warm above it that sits on the abscess, and care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
If the lump is large, then suture its two edges, and treat it with what causes granulation.
If there is a contrary pulsating vein or non-pulsating vein: then hurry and fill the area with crushed pitch, and leave it tightly bound for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies and the boiling of blood subsides: then return to cutting what remains of the lump.
Chapter XLVI.
Concerning the outer instruments for cutting and piercing.
Of these are the forms of Intromittent Instruments, and they are of three kinds.
Of these there is a large one, and of these there is a medium one, and of these there is a small one.
They should be made of iron with square ends, so that they may enter quickly into the abscess.
And these are the forms of Probes, which is to say, piercing instruments; and one of them is called beris, that is, piercing: and they are of three kinds.
Of these there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They are used to investigate abscesses, exits, fistulas, and buboes by means of them, because they can reach places between the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and blunt, like large needles, to which handles are attached, made of citrus wood, or brass, or iron, or silver.
And the best of them are those made of citrus wood.
And probes are also made of black lead, which are used to examine fistulas whose concavities have reflections, so that they can be gently examined with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because of them there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the size and constriction of the fistula.
Shape of Forceps, and they are of many kinds.
Since they are simple, namely those with one curvature: and they are of three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them are made blind forceps: and they are of three kinds.
And from them are forceps having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and from them are forceps having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped: and they are of three kinds: namely there is a large, medium, and small one.
Their ends with which the cutting is done are sharp, other ends are not sharp: and they are not used otherwise than to provide relief in scraping nodes when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve: and to heal through them the sick person, and to find tranquility for a time from the burning that is felt during the scraping of an abscess.
They are made of brass, and they resemble a Rod with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end there is hidden puncturing points Spatumilis: and through it runs to the inside, and to the outside when you wish, as you see.
The shape of the Spatumilium which are hidden between the fingers during the puncture of abscesses: and the patient does not feel them: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Forms of Wind-Vessels with which the flow of blood is severed: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They should be made of brass or citron wood, rounded, slightly elongated as you see: and they should be very fine.
And it is necessary that you have these kinds of Wind-Vessels, both large and small, so that you can sever the blood flow quickly when needed, and then when medicine is not at hand.
However, do not use them to sever the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as the thighs, hips, arms, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar moist flesh regions.
And sometimes they are made into other small instruments similar to the skins of figs, according to their shape: with which the blood is severed when it flows from a phlebotomy site, or during the incision of a vein or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Chapter XLVII.
Concerning the treatment of the mammary glands of individuals that resemble those of women.
At times, the mammary glands of certain individuals become inflamed at the onset of nocturnal emissions until they resemble those of women: and they remain ugly and diseased.
Whoever wishes to avoid this condition must cut above the mammary glands in a crescent shape, following this form from line b to line g. Then remove all the fat tissue. Then fill the wound with a medicine that promotes flesh growth. Then join the two lips of the wound with stitches and care for it until it heals.
If the breast inclines downward and becomes soft due to its size, as often happens with women: then it must be cut on both of its upper sides into two sections shaped like a crescent moon, each section being joined at its ends until one line encompasses the other, in this form from line b to line g. Then remove the skin that is between the two lips, take away the fat, and apply what we mentioned about stitches and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it is cured.
If you cannot fill the incision as you should because of the patient's restlessness or due to bleeding: then you must fill the wound with a cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it, until what remains of the fat is corroded. Then care for it until it heals.
¶ On the puncturing of an abscess that occurs under the nipple.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses that occur under the nipple are of the species of hard Strophulus, which contains cysts, and among them are those that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut in a crescent shape, as follows, from line b to line g. When everything inside the abscess that is pus has been evacuated, then fill it with an old cloth and leave it until another day.
Then remove the splinter, and treat it with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
If it is an abscess of the type of nodules of the Strophulus, then cut into it as we have said in the section on equal treatment of Strophuli.
If the wound extends so as to discharge pus, then apply a cautery to it as we have said previously.
Chapter XLIX.
Paragraph on the incision of an abscess that occurs due to an artery and vein.
When an artery bursts and the skin above it becomes hardened, an abscess often results. The same can happen with a vein, leading to an abscess and swelling.
The signs by which it can be recognized that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or vein are as follows: when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long and aggregated deep within the body. And when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a sort of whistling sound.
And the abscess that is due to a vein is round and located on the surface of the body.
And incising this abscess is an error, especially when it occurs under the armpits, in the groin, on the neck, and in many other parts of the body; it is a very serious matter. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid treating such an abscess with a knife, and those that occur at the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
Therefore, concerning that which is due to swelling of the artery opening, make an incision in the skin along its length. Then open the incision with hooks, then the artery: and free it from its sheaths until it is exposed.
Then insert a sharp object under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread at two places, as I taught you in the removal of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the place between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood that is there comes out, and the abscess dissolves.
Then administer the treatment that generates pus until the ligatures fall off; afterwards, treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much as possible of the abscess along with the skin. Then insert a sharp object under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and use double thread in it until you extract it from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligature as I told you about tying off an artery, from both sides with both ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert another sharp object with a different thread under the entire abscess near the needle incision: press it and tie your threads at four places.
Then dry out the abscess in its middle until what is inside comes out; then cut away the excess skin and leave what is tied from it.
Then place a piece of lint that you have immersed in wine and oil. Then administer treatment with licoris and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
Concerning the abscess that occurs due to twisting of the nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in an artery and vein, so too can an abscess occur in the nerves: it happens due to a blow or from excessive labor and similar causes; it most frequently occurs in places of support, such as the heel, and in any place where joints move; and this abscess is severe.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is usually found in various conditions without pain; but when pressed with force, the patient feels a sensation like being stunned.
And this abscess does not form deep within the body but is located beneath the skin, and it can move to any part, neither moving forward nor backward.
Therefore, when it occurs in the joints, it should not be treated with iron. Perhaps a contraction may occur.
In the case of one that occurs on the head or forehead, make an incision in the skin with a scalpel. If it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and remove it from the root.
And if it is large, then lift it with a hook and scrape it; then remove it and close the wound with stitches; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter LI.
Of the incision of an abscess which occurs in the abdomen.
In some people, there occasionally occur in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies growths called Fungalia, which are similar to mushrooms.
Their root is subtle, and their head is large, and their lips are inverted. And some of them are small; and there are others that are greatly enlarged.
And I myself have seen a man who had two such growths in his abdomen, which were more similar to mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, they were white, had small roots, their lips were inverted, and they continually discharged moisture.
I therefore cut them open and found that one weighed about X and VIII unciae and the other about VI unciae. The procedure for cutting them is such that you should consider whether the patient is humid, and if the color of the growth is white, moist, with a subtle root: then cut it open using a broad scalpel, and have cautery instruments ready over fire.
For often during the incision, much blood is expelled: if therefore you are overcome by blood, then cauterize it.
But if you see the patient is fearful and timid about the incision with iron, then take a properly made lead thread and tie it around the growth: do this in the manner we have described, and leave it for two days.
Then add lead strips to the constriction. Do not cease to compress the lead whenever it is applied to the wound until it cuts through, and falls off by itself without effort.
If, however, the wound has a large root, then there is something to fear and be wary of during its incision, especially if it is in the abdomen.
Nevertheless, it is possible to cut through half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then treat it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to presume to cut a wound that is dark in color, has little sensation, and an ugly appearance; for it is a cancerous abscess. I will return to the topic of cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
¶ On the Treatment of the Navel Hernia.
A navel hernia occurs for many reasons. It can occur due to cracks above the abdomen near the navel, and through which either fat or intestine may protrude, as happens in other hernias. Or it can occur due to blood that flows from a vein or an artery, as previously mentioned. Or due to trapped wind in that area.
If it is due to a crack in the fatty tissue and the protrusion of fat, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body, it is soft without pain, and its appearance varies. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its condition, as we have described, shows a much greater diversity. When you press it with your fingers, it becomes concealed; then it returns, and perhaps a sound accompanies it: and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and the labor is very severe.
If it is due to moisture, it is soft; then when you press it with your hand, it does not become concealed, nor is there constriction or addition.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs, an abscess appears turning black from the clivus.
If it is due to flesh grown naturally, then the abscess is serious, large, hard, and fixed in one quantity.
If it is due to gas, then its touch is soft.
And the procedure there is to consider then, if the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas: then you must refrain from treating it. For there is fear and caution in that case, as I taught you in the chapter where I discussed abscesses due to an artery and vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or colon, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and stand with their body extended. Then mark the signs around the entire circumference of the navel with sealing wax. Then instruct him to lie supine between your hands on his back. Then surround with a spatula having a broad blade around the navel above the place which you marked with wax. Then extend the middle of the abscess to the upper part with a large hook. Then tie it firmly around the circumference with thread, or with a silk cord of strong ligature: and let the knot of the ligature be secure.
Then open the middle of the extended abscess above the ligature. If you find it already caught by the ligature: then remove the ligature and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a swelling, then take it with a hook, and cut away its excess.
If, however, it is an artery or vein that is opposite to you: then surround it extensively. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and thread two strong threads through them: and insert the two needles around the circumference you made around the abscess in a cross shape, making them penetrate.
Then tie the abscess in four places above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area open until the extended flesh becomes rotten and falls off by itself: or cut it when it has become thin and rotten.
Then care for it with what is necessary from ointments until it heals.
If the prominence of the navel is from flesh or moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find there.
Then treat it with something that strengthens the area.
Chapter LIII.
§ On the Treatment of Cancer.
We have already discussed the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines; and one must be careful not to cause an ulcer when treating it with iron. We also spoke about cancer generated in the womb and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to remove it completely: such as cancer in the breasts or in the thigh, and similar places, where the entire affected part can be removed, especially when it is small and just beginning.
However, when it has become old and large, you should not approach it.
For I was unable to heal anyone from it, nor have I seen anyone before me who succeeded in treating it.
And the treatment when it is located as we have described is to precede with inducing the patient to suffer from black bile several times. Then bleed the patient if you find them with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation suitable for the procedure.
Then apply hooks that are appropriate for the cancer. Then hollow out the cancer from all sides with the skin, according to your examination, until nothing remains of its roots. Let the blood flow and do not cut it quickly; rather, press the areas and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or any suitable instrument available.
If the flow of thick blood from cutting an artery or vein causes difficulty for you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped. Then treat it along with the rest of the care until it heals.
¶ On the Treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter LIIII. Now we will discuss the types of dropsy and how water accumulates, as well as the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines.
And the type that is treated with iron is only the asclitis variety alone: the timpanitis variety does not approach treatment with iron, nor does the hyposarca variety entirely; for that one is mortal.
When you have already treated this type of dropsy, the timpanitis variety, with medicines and your treatment has not been effective, then consider the situation. For if the patient has already become weak, or suffers from another illness in addition to dropsy, such as coughing or diarrhea, and similar conditions: then be cautious about treating them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
But if you see the patient to be of vigorous constitution, and they do not suffer from any illness other than dropsy alone: and are neither a child nor an elder: then the method of treatment is to lift the patient up while they stand between your hands, and have an assistant press on their abdomen with their hand, driving the water towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spinal spatula in this form. Let it be of two pointed parts, long, with sharp ends like a spatula. However, let it be somewhat shorter, so that you do not pass through with it during the procedure to the intestine and injure it.
Then consider. For if there is a generation of hydrops due to the intestines, then you must extend the incision from the navel by the length of three fingers, downward directly above the pubic region.
If, however, the generation of hydrops is due to liver disease: then let your incision be three fingers to the left from the navel.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side: and it should not be made on the side on which the patient lies, so that the excess fluids do not flow to a weak area.
Then pierce with the instrument the entire skin. Then insert into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin, as if you were peeling it off: and let the amount that is peeled off be the size of a fingernail, or thereabouts.
Then pierce as if peeling, until the spatula reaches an empty space: and this is the place of the water. Then remove it, and insert into the incision an instrument, which has this form. And it is like a tube: it is made of silver, or copper, or brass, smooth and polished: at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: the end of it is cut in the manner of the incision of a reed, as you see: at the upper end of it there is a ring.
When the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water a medium quantity.
Since if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, the patient may die by the dissipation of his vital spirit in an hour; or a syncope may occur, which approaches death.
Evacuate from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to how the patient's condition indicates to you through the quality of his pulse, and through his well-being.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
This means that it is retained immediately because of the skin which retains the opening that is above the cheek: about which I have narrated, to pierce it according to that method.
Then reintroduce the instrument on the second day, if you see that the patient can tolerate it: and also remove a small amount from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard against error: until there is only a little left in the water.
But if you are afraid for the patient and let a lot remain in the water: then treat him as if burying him in warm sand, and make him sweat profusely in a bath and under the sun, and let him endure thirst: and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and on the liver and spleen, after removing the water: according to what I have narrated previously.
Regarding the care of infants who are born with their urinary passages not perforated.
Chapter LIV.
When a child emerges from its mother's womb and the fontanel on its head is not open, or it is narrow, or it is in an improper position.
Therefore, one must assist with its opening immediately upon birth using a very fine spatula, following this method.
Then place a small nail made of lead in the fontanel and secure it: keep it there for three days or four.
When the child needs to urinate, it should be removed and allowed to do so. Then return it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine flowing over the area will prevent it from closing properly.
He whose fontanel is narrow should be treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it enlarges.
Those in whom the fontanel is in an improper position are harmed. This is because in those who are born, the fontanel is at the end of the top of the head; therefore, they cannot urinate forward until they lift their head with their hand upward. Nor is there proper generation because sperm cannot reach the uterus properly; and it is a very ugly illness.
And the method of treatment in this case is to have the patient lie supine on their back. Then extend the head of the rod with your left hand forcefully, and cut off the head of the rod at the place of the penis, with a sharp point or a small sharp knife: just as the cutting of a reed is done, or as you would cut some radish, so that its middle becomes similar to the head of the rod: and so that a hole falls in the middle as it should.
And be careful during your procedure regarding the flow of blood. For that happens very often. Therefore, apply to it what stops the bleeding, and take care of the wound until it heals.
¶ Regarding diseases that occur in the foreskin and head of the rod, and regarding corruption, blackening, and adhering.
Chapter LVI.
These Albather conditions often occur in the rod, and it is an unpleasant flesh growth.
And some of them are malignant, and others are not malignant.
Therefore, you should suspend the non-malignant one with a fine hook and cut it away until you have completely cleansed it. Then apply to it cerotte soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it afterwards with the ointment dyafinicon until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant and of an unpleasant color, then it is necessary to apply cautery after cutting it and treating its cause.
If the foreskin of a captive who is uncircumcised has part of the abscess inside and part outside, then you must first remove the part of the abscess that is inside until it begins to heal; then treat what remains externally. For if you try to treat both at once, the foreskin will be forced back before it is secure.
And now there can also occur in the testicles and foreskin blackening and corruption. Therefore, you should hollow out everything that is already blackened and that tends to become corrupted or is already corrupted.
Then apply linen on it after applying honey mixed with flour of red cedar bark and finely sifted plantain herb.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs, then apply cautery with a lunar cauterization method, as follows.
For cautery is beneficial for two conditions at once, namely for bleeding and when the wound becomes corrupted.
If the head of the penis becomes severely corrupted and is completely destroyed within an hour: then you must insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and who has not undergone circumcision: and sometimes it happens due to a wound or abscess. Therefore, you must remove it with a blunt spatula until the ligament loosens and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then you should scrape something from the head of the rod and from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin, it may be pierced quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the rod using a fine linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with stimulating wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
Concerning the cleansing of infants and the treatment of errors that occur to them.
Circumcision is not the same as the healing of other wounds; however, since it is performed by our hand and at our will, and its use is specific to children, it is necessary to mark this operation with one that is better and leads more easily to recovery.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and we know about it only through experience.
This is because I find that the majority of practitioners and phlebotomists use cleansing by circumcision with scissors and forceps, and they employ cauterization, ligature with thread, and incision with a scalpel.
And I have indeed tested all these methods and have not found a better cleansing method than using forceps and tying with thread.
Since during cleansing with scissors, the skin often escapes. Since the foreskin has two layers of skin: therefore, perhaps the upper layer is cut, and the lower layer remains intact: hence, it is necessary to cut through the other layer as well, and future pain is anticipated. And when cleansing is performed with aloeswood, that is, using the finger as tailors do, the cutting of the extremity of the male member does not occur: since perhaps it might enter its opening.
In cleansing with a fingernail, the tool might slip and spoil your work: and the skin of the child is of short nature, and often they are born in such a way that they do not require cleansing: and I have already seen this.
However, the cleansing with forceps and a ligature with thread revealed a good practice to me: because the forceps are suitable for proportionate cutting: therefore, what is sharp above is like what is sharp below. When you press with your hand, the two sharp points are aligned, and they cut according to a single operation at one time: and a compression is made in a similar shape, holding the skin of the shaft from all sides, so that there is no mistake at all.
And the method of proper operation is to make the child, especially if he is among those who understand a little, believe that you do nothing but tie thread on his shaft: and let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that is possible for you, from the understanding he has received. Then have him stand between your hands in a prepared stance, and let him not be sitting: and hide the forceps in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy sees them in no way at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his penis, blow onto the skin, and pull it upward until the head of the penis emerges. Then clean it from the filth that has accumulated on it.
Then ligature the marked place with double thread. Then tie a second ligature below it for a short distance. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature firmly, and cut between the two ligatures. Then quickly raise the skin upward and extract the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better), and put powder on top: and above the powder place a cloth in which egg yolks boiled in rose water have been mixed with rose oil. Then apply recent good treatment: and let him lie on it until another day: and care for it with the remaining treatments until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows.
The two ends should be blunt and should meet: the claw should not protrude from them: and the length of the two sharp points should be equal to the length of two handles equally.
However, an error occurs during cleansing because the inner skin might entirely escape or a part of it near the incision.
Therefore, you must stretch it out with your nail at your convenience before the abscess forms in the area: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with an awl and cut it.
If, however, three days have passed and what is under the rod remains swollen and abscessed: then leave it until the abscess becomes warm and soft, and gently scrape it off, and cut it as you prepare it: and be careful of the head of the rod. For it will not harm him with that.
Therefore, treat it with what consolidates the wound from powders, which we have mentioned in the chapter about powders: and if it is cut from the skin beyond the measure and reaches the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
Therefore, treat it with what we have mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter LVIIII.
Concerning the Extraction of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to an obstruction caused by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh growth, and similar conditions from what we have mentioned among the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine does not pass and you see that its retention is due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over with his knees raised. Then let his feet be placed on his back, and let him extend his belly at the upper part of his back, and let the patient restrain his breath as much as he possibly can. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is aimed at expelling the stone towards the rear, urine is released.
If it does not resolve as we have said and is severe for the patient, then you must administer its extraction with an instrument called a siringa, which has this form: It should be made of silver, fine, gentle, concave like the tube of a bird's feather in subtlety, about the length of one medium palm; it should have a fine tube at its head.
And the method of urine exiting through it is to take a doubled thread and tie wool or cotton at one end with good knots: then insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the Siringa; and cut any excess wool with scissors, but insert it into the tube forcefully, like lifting.
Then anoint the siringa with oil or butter, and egg white: and have the patient sit on a seat, and direct the bladder, and his genitalia with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the siringa into the genitalia with ease until it reaches the base of the penis.
Then double it above from the navel part.
Then push the siringa inside until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has already reached an empty space: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage through which it goes is winding.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the yellow wax will follow the wool.
Then remove it and make the yellow wax run through the urine channel: and continue to use the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is evacuated, and the patient finds relief.
Paragraph on the quality of bladder enema using a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When it happens that there is a wound in the bladder, or blood has congealed in it, or pus is compressed within it, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it: then use an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
For it is closed, that is, sealed. And there are three holes in it, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave space where there is what impels should be proportionate to its capacity without addition, so that when something is drawn with it, moisture is attracted; and when it is propelled, it expels it to a distance, as a clepsydra does when it projects naphtha, that is, Greek fire in the heat of battle.
When you wish to project the liquids into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the liquid, and pull with it what propels towards the upper part; the liquid will be drawn into the concavity of the clepsydra.
Then insert it into the rod as we have described for the syringe. Then push the moisture along with what you are pushing, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately so that the patient feels it.
The form of a fine enema by which the bladder is cleansed.
It should be made of silver or brass: its head should be higher, similar to a small alcaza, and below it there should be a hollow in which a ligament falls.
Then take the bladder of a ram and put into it the moisture with which you wish to cleanse the bladder. Then tie it between the two hollows with a strong ligature using double thread: and warm the moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the end of the enema into the rod, then squeeze your hand on the bladder with moisture in a suitable manner until the patient feels that the moisture has now reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it completely around its circumference. Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they are pierced. Then join the circle as an aletrium would be joined: after you place on it what you wish from moisture, oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument: and proceed with it as you did with the bladder by squeezing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of the Extraction of Stones.
I have already spoken in the division about the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and I have described the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those in the bladder, along with all the signs of this condition. And I have discussed the stone that falls for surgical operation by hand and section: and it is the stone properly generated in the bladder: and that which adheres to the penis: and I am narrating these things with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say, then, that the stone generated in the bladder most frequently occurs in children.
And from the signs of this condition, it is evident that urine exits from the bladder similar to water in its fineness: and sand appears white in it, and the patient rubs his penis, and struggles with it, and often hangs from it. Then he becomes erect, and the anus protrudes in many of them.
And the treatment is easier for children, from the time they first show symptoms until they reach fourteen years of age. And it is difficult in the elderly. In young adults, it is of intermediate difficulty between the two extremes mentioned: and for those whose stone is larger, the treatment is easier; and if the stone is small, then the treatment is correspondingly more difficult.
When we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with enemas to remove all the feces from their intestines: for this sometimes hinders the discovery of the stone during examination.
Then let the patient be taken with his own feet, and shaken, and moved downward: so that the stone may fall to the bottom of the bladder, or jump from a high place several times.
Then have him sit between your hands that are prepared, and place your hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If you then feel the stone in place, then proceed immediately with a section on it.
If it does not fall completely within your touch, then you must wipe your index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a boy: or your middle finger if he is a full youth: and insert it into his anus and examine the stone until it remains under your finger: and gradually turn it toward the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and push it outward toward the place where you wish to make an incision: and instruct one attendant to press the bladder with his hand: and instruct another attendant to extend the testicles with his right hand upward: and with his other hand, to remove the skin that is under the testicles near the place of the intended section.
Then insert the incising spatula, which has this form. And find the place between the anus and the testicles, but not in the middle, on the left side: and let the incision be made over the stone, with your finger in the anus: and make a transverse cut so that the external part is wide and the internal part narrow, according to the size needed for the stone to pass out without being larger.
Perhaps the finger, which is in the anus at the time of the incision, compresses the Stone and it comes out without difficulty.
And you should know that it is because of the Stone, which has corners and edges, that its exit becomes difficult due to this.
And if it is like a soft gland, round in shape: then its exit will be easy.
For the one who has corners and edges, add it to the fissure.
If it does not come out this way, then you must devise something above it: or pull on it with a properly prepared hook, whose tip is like a crescent moon, which will grip over the Stone without slipping away: or insert below it a fine instrument with a curved tip.
但如果无法从上方取出，那么稍微扩大孔洞。 If something is obstructing you due to blood, remove it along with the clot.
If there is more than one Stone, then first push the larger one towards the bladder opening. Then make an incision above it. Afterwards, push the smaller one after it: and do likewise if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then it is necessary to cut above it with a larger incision. For it happens to the patient that one of two things occurs: either he dies, or continuous dribbling of urine occurs, because the area does not heal completely.
However, manage its removal until it comes out: either use devices in the fracture with pincettes, until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloes, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that an abscess may sit warm.
Then have the patient lie on his back with his head on a pillow, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When you then remove it, rinse the area with water and a lot of oil.
Then treat it with the ointment dyaphinicon and the ointment basilicon until it heals.
If an abscess, corrosion, or similar condition occurs in the wound, and if blood clots in a bladder and prevents urine from passing: this is known by the passage of blood with urine. Insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply all kinds of treatments suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And during the entire period of treatment, you should bind both thighs together because of the medications that are applied to the area.
If the stone is small and is in the passage of the penis, and it sticks there and prevents the flow of urine: then treat it as I describe before you proceed to cutting. For you will often be spared from cutting by this treatment, for I have already tested it.
And you should take an instrument called a perforator made of soft iron, which has this form: the end is triangular and sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take some thread and tie the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the piercing iron into the penis easily until the perforator reaches the stone: and rotate the perforator with your hand on the stone gradually: and try to pierce it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the penis. It will break apart and come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
但如果这种治疗对你不可用，因为某些原因阻止了它：那么就在结石下方绑一根线，在结石上方再绑一根线。 然后在阴茎上的两道绷带之间干燥处理结石上方的部分。 然后将其取出。 之后解开绷带，清理伤口中形成的凝固血液。
And it is not necessary to place a thread under the stone except so that it does not return to the bladder: and another ligature above, except so that when the thread dissolves after the passage of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and closes the wound: and for this reason you must raise the skin upwards when you tie the upper thread, so that at the completion of your work it will close the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
¶ On the Extraction of Women's Stones.
A stone is rarely formed in women.
If, however, a stone occurs in one of them, then the treatment is difficult, and it is hindered due to many methods.
One reason is: the woman may be a virgin.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who will expose herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or even when she has a husband.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, especially the procedure involving manual manipulation.
And the fourth reason is the distance from the place where the stone is located: therefore, it requires deep cutting, and there is fear associated with it.
If necessity requires it, then you must seek out a female doctor who is well-versed in this practice: and such doctors are rarely found.
If you are to treat her privately, then seek out a chaste and skilled male doctor, and also find a knowledgeable midwife or a woman well-versed in this art: have her present, and especially instruct her to do everything you tell her after examining the stone.
First, he should check if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for him to insert his finger into her anus and feel for the stone.
If he finds it, let him press it between his finger and thumb, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's wound and feel for the stone, after placing her left hand over the bladder and pressing down firmly.
If he finds the stone, then it is necessary for him to gradually move it from the opening of the bladder towards below with all his strength until he reaches the root of the hip.
Then let him make an incision above the center of the wound at the root of the hip, from whichever side is prepared for him and where he can feel the stone; and his finger should not be removed from the stone but press against it. And the initial cut should be small. Then insert forceps onto that incision.
Then insert forceps onto that incision. If he then feels the stone, let him enlarge the incision proportionately so that the stone can come out of it.
And you should know that there are many types of stones. Among these are small and large stones, smooth and rough, long and round with branches.
Know the type of stone, so that it may be indicated to you by this, regarding what you wish to know about it.
If blood overwhelms you, then add crushed zeg (a type of herb or substance) to the site, and keep it there for one hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and make sure you have with you from the instruments which I mentioned for extracting a stone in males, to assist you through them in your operation.
If the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that was cut, then apply powder to the place, and bind it with appropriate compresses: and do not change it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. For perhaps the woman will die if she is weak. Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood is thus alleviated after days, and the place putrefies, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter LXII.
¶ On incising a hydrocele hernia.
A hydrocele is not a hard swelling, but an aggregation of humidity in the tunica vaginalis, which is beneath the skin containing the testicle: and it is called a tunica.
And sometimes it is in its own separate pouch, which nature has prepared for it in the scrotal area, until it seems to be a different kind of sac, distinct from the skin of the testicle and between the white tunica vaginalis, as I mentioned: and this does not occur except rarely.
And the generation of this condition is due to weakness that affects the testicles: hence this matter is discharged towards them. And sometimes it happens as a result of a blow to the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or its color inclines toward citrine, or it is reddish like blood, or it is dirty and black, or it is watery and white, and that is the most common.
And the signs by which it is known where the accumulation of water is, are these. For if it is in the white membrane that we mentioned, then the swelling is round but slightly elongated like the shape of a egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own specific membrane, then the swelling is round with a part like an egg, and because of this, the person fears it as if it were another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then it subsides slightly.
When you want to know the color of the moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the swelling with a square probe whose form was described earlier. According to what comes out with the probe, judge about what is between the skin and the swelling.
When we come to treatment with iron, then it is necessary to instruct the patient to be bled if it is possible for him, and you should see that his body is full [of blood].
Then have him lie on his back on something raised slightly, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, who will extend his penis to one of the two sides of the scrotal skin, and to the part near the abdomen.
Then take the wide spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles in the middle along its length, almost to the scrotum: and make a section following a straight line equidistant that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane enclosing them: and peel this off and observe, or be careful not to cut it as you do so: and let your peeling be such that more is taken from the part hanging with the egg: and carefully examine with peeling according to quantity as much as possible for you.
Then pierce the full membrane with a wide incision and remove all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the membrane upwards, and do not touch the skin enclosing the testicles: and cut the membrane in whatever way you can cut it, either entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side. For if you do not examine it carefully, there will be no security from the water returning in its incision.
But if the egg protrudes externally from its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the membrane, return it. Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with stitches.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
If you find the egg corrupted by some blackness, then you must ligate the vessels, which are the suspensory muscles, fearing the flow of blood.
Then remove the testicle with the suspensory muscle, and extract the egg; afterwards treat it as we have said.
If the water is collected in two parts, then you know there are two branches; cut therefore another part as you did in the other equally.
And if it is equal for you that the operation be one, then do this: afterwards clean the blood. And insert into the sections wool dipped in oil, or in scented oil: and place outside another piece of wool that you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the navel area: and place a folded cloth on top, and there are bandages: and tie them above with a ligature, which has six parts as follows.
Then take two cloths and wrap them, filling them with red lint, according to this likeness: and make ends by which they are pressed by a board or wet wool: and gather the compression into the armpits: and one end should reach from the anus up to the back, and the second should reach to the pubic region: and two ends over each thigh below, and two other ends over each groin, and gather the whole compression into the armpit area.
And sometimes this branch is treated artificially with a cautery at the place of the section with iron: and it is such that you take a fine knife-like cautery, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is heated as we have described: until when it reveals a white surface containing moisture: then take the cautery, in this manner.
It is similar to the Greek letter.
Then pierce with it that white surface, and it is heated until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend with forceps and scrape with a fine burning cautery, and cut it as much as possible until you remove all of its roots.
And be careful that the fire does not touch it, for fear of the egg.
And know that this procedure is safer, farther from blood flow, and better than the procedure with cutting.
But if opposition arises for you at the time of cutting or at the time of cauterizing a warm abscess, or blood flow, or something else: then it is necessary to treat what opposes you with the appropriate treatment according to what has been previously stated.
But if the patient is timid and does not wait for this procedure due to its horror: then administer the puncture as I describe it, and that is how it should be done.
When you are certain from what we have said about signs that the hemorrhoid is watery: then it is necessary to make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then puncture the abscess at its lower part with a thin blade: and place the puncture along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide enough for the water to flow completely.
Then place a cloth over the puncture site and bandage it, and allow the remaining water to drain: then treat it until the wound heals.
But if there is opposition to the outflow of water when you puncture it: and this is only because the white membrane causes obstruction at the wound opening and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument used to extract water from hydrocephalus patients, which was previously described: or add this procedure temporarily during the treatment of the wound.
And know that water returns and aggregates after six months, or thereabouts. When it therefore aggregates, then it should be treated in the same manner, and the patient will complete his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the Treatment of Fleshy Warts.
Know that in the treatment of this fleshy wart by cutting, there is often excessive fear leading to harm in many cases. Therefore, it seems to me that its removal would be beneficial for her.
And I am recalling the procedure performed on her and the appearance of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, from which the testicles are composed; and this happens for many reasons, namely.
Or from acute excess, or something sharp and acrid that is discharged towards the testicles. Or from impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found in it: and this abscess is serious.
And perhaps it is a stone-like abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of arteries and their swelling: as has already been mentioned in the previous recall: or from the swelling of veins.
What is caused by the swelling of arteries can be recognized by the nature of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
However, what is caused by the swelling of veins does not scatter when compressed with fingers.
And now it is possible to perform an incision on this type and on other meats as well: and you should cut the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the egg upward, and remove it with a white cloth: and release the suspensory from the vessels, and ligate the vessels: and cut the suspensory after you free it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is firmly attached to the surrounding tissues, then you should pull on the egg and cut it.
And if there is adherence to something from the scrotum or between the vessels: then you should free all of that adherence and cut it with a circular incision.
If there is the growth of flesh in the place of adherence which is behind: then you should cut away all of it and remove the egg, as we have said.
When your procedure is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine: then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIIII.
Concerning the treatment of Swellings, which occur with the Testicle.
A boil is a swollen, involuted mass, resembling a bunch, with softening of the testicles: and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient, as well as walking.
And in the treatment of this illness is due to fear, because of that which its preceding experience has reminded [the patient].
Indeed, we must say that the procedure in this case should be as the first [surgeons] did it.
I say therefore that you should make the patient sit on a raised seat. Then push the suspensory of the testicles downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the vessels that are near the shaft: and another assistant should hold these and stretch them with a strong pull.
Then cut with a broad and sharp knife in a transverse direction directly on the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then remove the skin from all parts, as we have told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert an needle with which there is a double thread into them, and tie it at the first place where the vessels occur: and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut it in the middle section straight along the length of the body, and remove what has accumulated from foul and corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound as you would other wounds, where you wish pus to form, so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles may fall. For it is not harmful through that.
If all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary to remove the testicles with the vessels: so that they do not lack nourishment due to the incision and waste away or dry up, and thus be of no use.
Chapter Sixty-Five.
Concerning the treatment of intestinal hemorrhoids.
The occurrence of this type of hemorrhoid is due to a cut that happens when shaving the pubic area above the groin from the abdominal arch.
Therefore, the intestine descends through that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the pubis or from its extension.
And these two types occur due to many causes. Or from a blow. Or from jumping. Or from shouting. Or from lifting a heavy object, and similar activities.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the pubis. It happens gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly. It is a swelling that extends deeply: therefore, because the pubis compresses the intestine.
And the sign when it is from a cut to the pubis is that it causes sudden severe pain immediately at its onset. It is a swelling that appears under the skin nearby, and this is due to the intestine exiting and extending towards the external part of the pubis.
And sometimes it occurs with the small intestine coming out as well: and this is called an intestinal hemorrhoid and protruding intestine. And it sometimes happens with gas buildup.
And sometimes the feces run into the intestine and are retained there: and it is dangerous for the sick person: for it causes great pain, especially when compressed.
And in the treatment of conditions of this kind, there is fear of using iron: therefore it is necessary to avoid its use in such cases.
And the method of operation is to instruct the patient to return the intestine to the inner cavity with his own hand, if it obeys the return. Then he should lie back onto his neck between your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows above, and cut the entire skin of the testicles along its length. Then fix hooks on both sides of the incision as needed to open it with them: and the incision should be of such a size that it is possible for the egg to come out.
Then remove the foreskin and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white, hard part of the foreskin is revealed: then insert your index finger into what follows behind the testicle, between the white foreskin that is beneath the skin of the egg, and the second foreskin, and separate with it the adherence that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand towards the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this, extend the white foreskin upwards with your left hand: and raise the egg with the foreskin to the part of the incision: and instruct an assistant to pull the egg upwards: and you release the adherence that is behind upon completion.
And feel with your fingers to ensure that nothing of the intestine is wrapped in a hard white membrane. But if you find any of it, then push it down towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle with thick thread made of flax from ten threads: and insert it at the last membrane, that is, the covering which is under the skin of the testicles following the section; then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over others in the shape of a cross: and tie with them the membrane we have mentioned, which is beneath the skin of the testicles with a very strong ligature, until none of the vessels that nourish them can send anything to them: so that no hot abscess may result from it. And place another ligature outside the first ligature, at a distance of less than two digits from it. And after these two ligatures, allow the membrane under the skin of the testicles to extend in length by the size of a finger: and cut the remainder completely around it, and remove the egg from it.
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the testicles where blood and pus flow, as we have described in what was said before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound: and apply the ligature as we have described. And sometimes the white membrane we mentioned is cauterized after cutting it, to avoid bleeding. For it often happens that. And release the ligature until it falls on its own.
但如果它延迟了，那么就用热水敷上：然后放置我们所说的那种东西，直到它落下。
然后按照治疗伤口的常规方法进行护理，直到伤口愈合。
Chapter LXVI.
¶ On Fœcal Fistula.
In this condition, I have not seen anyone who has dared to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it occurs as we have described in the case of the fistula associated with the grapevine. This means that you should ligate the vessels above after sectioning them below with ease; then dry in the middle, and treat finally with what opens it until the vessels fall off: and treat the wound as we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LXVII.
¶ On the rupture that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and a place protrudes but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if something does descend, it is little, and returns at all hours; however, if time extends with this condition, a tear is added to the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this happens due to the stretching of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we said. This is because it extends and spreads; then it softens, a place becomes inflamed and forms an abscess, and it protrudes.
And its treatment is with cautery, as was stated in its previous description.
And at times it is treated with iron, in this manner: the patient lies on their back with their hands between yours. Then dry the inflamed and protruding area of the abscess by cutting across its width, to a length of three fingers.
Then press and remove the pus that is under the skin until the white pus underneath the skin, which follows it, is exposed.
Then take a probe and place it on the protruding area of the abscess, and press it deeply into the belly.
Then tie the two protruding areas above the end of the probe with a suture to connect one to the other; then remove the end of the probe.
And do not cut the pus completely, nor stretch the tissue, nor do anything else as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then treat it as you would treat a wound. When you cut the sutures, clean it and treat the wound until it heals.
For the swelling contracts, and the protrusion of the abscess does not increase.
And cautery is better in this case: because it is closer to providing healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
Of the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles often softens in certain individuals, because of which the flesh between them also becomes softened, and the appearance is thereby disfigured.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to have the patient lie on his back, and then to apply the softened skin entirely onto the natural skin.
Then join the two lips with stitches: and if you wish, first stitch together the excess softened skin with three or four rows of stitches, and make a firm seam.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals and the stitches fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
Of Castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law; and because of this, it would be fitting for me not to recall it in this book of mine: and there is no need to recall it unless for two methods.
One of these is that it should be known to the physician when asked about it: and that he knows how to treat it when it occurs.
And the other method is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our benefit, such as rams, boars, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that castration is performed in two ways. Or by abrasion. Or by cutting and dividing.
In the method that is performed by abrasion, the way of the operation is as follows: We make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and become loose and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and no longer appear under touch.
In castration by cutting and dividing, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then ligate the suspensory, and cut above each egg with one slice until two eggs emerge; then incise them after you have stripped each one, and do not leave any of the foreskin on them except for a thin layer that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one performed by abrasion: because abrasion might leave some part of the testicles, hence the animal desires copulation.
Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
¶ On the Treatment of Hermaphrodites of Two Kinds.
A hermaphrodite of the male kind is in two ways. One of them is because there appears in the space between the testicles, or on the skin covering the testicles, a shape resembling a female vulva, where hair is present: and sometimes urine runs from that area.
In women there is one kind of organ, and the vulva of a woman above the pubis is like small male testicles, protruding outward; one is like a man's penis, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three kinds, two from men and one from women, is as follows: it is necessary to cut away the added flesh until the imprint of them recedes. Then treat them as you would treat other wounds.
In the second kind of men's organs, from which urine exits and is located in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Paragraph on the Incision of the Frenulum and Protruding Flesh in Women's Genitals.
A tentigo (frenulum) may be added over the natural part, until it becomes disfigured and unattractive in appearance: and sometimes it enlarges in some women to such an extent that it spreads out like it does in men, and reaches a point where it affects intercourse.
Therefore, you should grasp the excess frenulum with your hand or with forceps, and cut it: and do not cut too deeply, especially near the root, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it heals.
The protruding flesh is the flesh that grows in the opening of the vagina, until it fills it up: and sometimes it extends outward resembling a tail: and because of this, some call this condition "tailed illness. Therefore, we must cut it as we would cut a hernia and treat it until it is healed.
Regarding the Alratic treatment for an unruptured woman's ulcer.
Chapter LXXII.
The Alratic method is used when there is an unruptured woman's ulcer or when the opening is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental ulcer is caused by a preceding illness and is formed either from added fatty tissue or thin or thick fibrous material. It can occur deep in the womb, on its sides, at the top or bottom, and it prevents intercourse, pregnancy, childbirth, and possibly menstrual bleeding.
And the diagnosis is made by the examination of midwives if the obstruction is apparent and near.
If it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with an instrument.
If the obstruction is caused by thin fibrous material and is near the two lips, then act quickly and rupture it.
And you should place poultices on the two lips.
Then place the index fingers of both hands simultaneously, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread. Then stretch the two lips with force until the thin fibrous material is ruptured and the obstruction is opened.
Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the area. The woman should have intercourse every day to prevent another adhesion forming.
If the fistula is large and thick, then it is necessary to cut it with a knife blade similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the condition is one of tissue growth, then suspend it with hooks and cut it: and have medicines that calm blood flow without causing inflammation, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and storax combined with egg white.
Then apply a lead tube that is wide, so that the wound does not heal quickly; keep it in place for several days. Then apply a dry linen dressing, and proceed with further treatment until healing is complete.
And sometimes a growth of flesh appears within the womb: it is therefore necessary to cut it according to this method: when it is not a cancerous tumor; for a cancerous tumor in the womb should not be treated with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
Concerning the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athelhil, and red botflies in women's wounds.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the dilation of venous openings, allowing blood to flow from them continuously in large quantities.
When hemorrhoids become old, they form nodes: and I have already mentioned their types and symptoms in the division; here I will say which of them receive treatment and which do not.
I say that hemorrhoids which are inside the vaginal opening and do not appear to the senses: then they cannot be treated with iron.
Those among them that are in the vaginal opening and can be perceived by the senses are treatable.
Therefore, you should admit the woman into a cold room. Then stretch out the adthehelil with tweezers, or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder above them near the flow of blood from one of the cut powders without alteration: such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, and similar substances.
Then press her feet against the wall at one hour. Then place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then have her sit in a decoction of sumach, pomegranate bark, gallnuts, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it to apply to her back.
If the blood is cut off with it, that is good: and if not, attach suction cups to her back and breasts without cutting.
Then take wool and dip it in the juice of tarathom, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of alaulat branches, which is called aglanthus, Pontic wine, and apply it to the wound.
When the abscess has subsided, then treat the area with ointments until it heals.
However, the white variety is similar to the red heads of alhaasse, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you should cut what appears from it, as I said about the thelil evenly: and treat it until it heals.
Chapter LXXXIV.
Concerning the perforation of the Hymen which occurs in the womb.
Many types of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, stone-like abscesses, ulcers, adubelati, and alekilati, which is herpes, as well as fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadia, thilil, and hot abscesses.
And I have already described all these illnesses and their types, as well as the signs and treatments for them in previous sections. It is necessary to explain here about the hot abscess that occurs in the womb when it results from abscesses that collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, you must consider this carefully. If the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with a throbbing sensation, accompanied by heat and fever, and if you see that it appears red: and if the sense of touch confirms this, then do not hurry to puncture it. Instead, treat it with what aids maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
Then you should have the woman sit on a chair that tilts slightly forward, and recline her so she lies on her back, with her feet drawn up towards the lower part of her abdomen: her hips should be spread apart, and she should place her arms under her knees, and secure them with appropriate straps.
Then the midwife should sit on the woman's right side and administer the instrument used to open the vaginal opening.
And when you wish to administer this instrument, you must insert it deeply into the woman's womb with a rod: so that what enters from the instrument does not go beyond the depth of the womb and harm the patient.
If the instrument is too deep, then you must place small wheels on the surface of the deepest part of the womb: to prevent the entire instrument from entering too deeply into the womb: and it should have a spiral that runs along the upper side of the instrument: and hold the instrument, and the assistant should rotate the spiral until the depth of the womb is opened.
When the exit appears and is touched by hand, and it is soft and tender: then you must cut it at its head with a small sharp blade.
When the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a linen cloth dipped in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and apply the cloth, and remove the section deep within the womb.
And place externally on the womb and on the pubis clean wool dipped in water in which pomegranates have been boiled.
Then treat it after two days with an ointment that is appropriate for it, until it heals.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed so that they are enemaed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or Aristolochia longa has been boiled: then return to using ointment.
If a wound is hidden inside the womb, then you must refrain from treating it with iron; instead, treat it as we described in the division.
Chapter LXXIV.
Obstetric Practice: How to treat living embryos that have emerged in a figure not natural.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to first know the figure of natural childbirth.
From these signs, it is evident that when you see a woman pressing down below, and desiring to breathe fresh air, and feeling relieved of what is on her from the birth, and the embryo's exit is hastened: then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is over its head, and the afterbirth with it; or suspended, or hanging from the umbilical cord.
When you see these signs, it is necessary to press her abdomen so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the afterbirth comes down with it, and it is cleansed of those excesses by a good purification.
Any departure from this natural childbirth is unnatural and disapproved of.
For sometimes the fetus comes out on its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and one of its hands or feet, or only one foot; or its head and one hand come out: or it is a breech birth, and perhaps it turns over onto its neck, and similar deviations from natural positions.
Therefore, it is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent and subtle in all these matters and to guard against error and deception. I will show every figure among them, and how to handle each one, what it signifies, and how to deal with it properly.
When the fetus exits above its head by its natural exit and forcefully does so upon the woman, and the birth becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a chair, or let women hold her; and vaporize her genitals with fenugreek decoction and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatula between her fingers and use it to cut the amniotic sac, and she should tear it with her fingernail until what is inside from moisture runs out: and press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
但如果胎儿没有下降，那么应该让妇女服用用蜂蜜和苏子油制成的灌肠剂。
然后吩咐她在灌肠后，要屏住呼吸：让她用枕头咳嗽，并在一小时内捏住她的嘴和鼻子。 因为胎儿会立即出来。
如果胎儿的双手首先伸出，你必须逐渐轻松地将其收回。 但如果胎儿不配合进入，那么让妇女坐在椅子上，并将她的双脚抬高：然后轻轻地摇动椅子使其在地面上晃动：并扶住妇女，以免她在晃动时摔倒。
如果胎儿的手不出来，而且胎儿死亡：那么切开其手，并取出剩余的胎儿部分：并用布绑住其手，然后均匀地将其取出：因为这样它会出来。
胚胎脚先出来的娩出方法。 When the fetus steps out on its feet, then it is necessary to push them up: then gradually turn the fetus: afterwards make it straight.
Then take one of its feet and gradually extend it.
When they therefore emerge up to the thighs, then instruct it to be compressed, and make her sneeze while doing so: for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we have described, then gently retract the fetus until you place it in its natural position. For then it will come out with ease.
If it is prevented from proceeding as we have described: then take powdered barley meal, sesame oil, and dissolved gum: and mix all of these well in a mortar: then apply this mixture to the lining of the woman's vagina and below her abdomen. Then have her sit in warm water until she feels relief.
When you see that her lower parts have become warm, then give her a decoction of myrrh to drink and apply it. When she has held the decoction for one hour, then have her sit on a chair. Then make her sneeze: and pinch her mouth and nose: and gently press the lower part of her abdomen. For the fetus will come out immediately.
### Exit of the Fetus on Knees and Hands When it comes out in this form, then he will devise ways to gradually introduce his hands. Then the woman should lie back over her neck, and let her feet hang downward; and she should be lying on the bed and clench her hands. Then press gently on her abdomen gradually. Then remove what is under her feet from the bedding until she is prepared at the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press gently on what is above the pubic region gradually, until the fetus ascends upward. Then introduce his hands and gently guide the fetus: and instruct the woman to push, until the fetus comes out.
The fetus exits horizontally from the hands. He will devise ways to retract his hand. If he is unable to retract it, then lift the woman and have her walk around.
If she is unable to walk, then have her lie on the bed: and shake her legs with a vigorous motion.
Then apply the ointment that you prepared from mucilages.
If she begins to deliver the baby, then have her sit on a seat. Then focus on retracting the hand, and guide the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to push, until it comes out.
The fetus exits with its body extended over its neck, its hands spread, and its face towards the mother's back. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then turn it gradually, and align it with ease.
When it is aligned, then apply what we have described, made from oil and mucilages, to its surface.
Then instruct it to be moved gradually. When you have done that, then have her sit on a chair and instruct her to lean to the right side. Then instruct her to be compressed and to sneeze with preparedness.
The exit of the prepared fetus on its side. When it descends to the mouth of the uterus in this manner with the placenta, then cut the placenta with your fingernail until it is clear of moisture.
If it hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the umbilical cord so that it is not retained and the fetus does not die.
Then push the fetus inward until it is in the proper position, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, for it will then emerge with ease.
The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins often are born, and sometimes three or four are born. However, that is rare and seldom happens.
There are five which are unnatural and do not live completely; and they are contained by one amnion, although they are multiplied, and are separated by the sifach, distinguishing between them a cord tied at the navel of each.
And sometimes they emerge as one fetus would naturally and easily, and they also emerge by an unsavory delivery, as we have recounted.
If some of them are difficult during childbirth and reach what we have mentioned about unnatural figures, then treat them as we have described: let the instrument be subtle, and perform with ease and caution, and devise according to every figure, guided by whatever is prepared from ingenuity leading to safety.
¶ A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has been verified with me that a woman miscarried seven, and another fifteen, all of them formed.
This was done through the measurement by the renowned sage.
Therefore, all of this must be known by the obstetrician. Perhaps she will encounter something similar to that; therefore, she should be prepared with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
¶ Concerning the extraction of a stillborn fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as I said in the division of treatment and it does not come out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then you must consider.
If the woman is of sound constitution and has none of those accidents in consequence of which it is feared that she may suffer harm: then the woman should be laid on her back upon the bed, on her dorsal region, with her head turned downwards and her legs raised; and two nurses should hold her by both sides or secure her to the bed so that her body does not be thrown out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the os uteri with oils that are wet and have a mucilaginous consistency of linseed, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, then insert it into the womb with ease. Then she should look for the place where the fetus's hooks are attached and the suitable areas around it.
Therefore, if the fetus is prepared to descend headfirst: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or in the fork of its jawbone, or in places near its ribs, and below the navel.
If, however, the descent is feet first: then fix the hooks in its pelvic bones and in its middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand and place its curve between the fingers of the left hand, then insert it easily into one of the places we mentioned until it reaches an empty area.
Then fix another hook opposite it, or a third if necessary: so that the contraction is equal and does not tilt to one side.
Then let it be extended equally, and not merely along a straight line, but move to every part so that its outlet may be alleviated: just as is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary for what is between them to be such that the extension may be softened. If a part remains attached to it, then the surgeon must anoint some fingers with oil and insert them from that side to rotate what is remaining.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then move the hooks to a higher place: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If the hand comes out before the other parts and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction: then it is necessary to wrap a cloth around it. Then pull it out until it comes out completely, and cut it either at the joint of the sole or at the elbow: and you must do this with the other hand and both feet as well.
If the head of the fetus is large, or if constriction occurs during its exit, or if water has accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a sharp spatula and cut with it the head, and extract the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary to cut the umbilical cord or extract it with forceps, as we have said. Then pull the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and is stuck at the collarbone, then it must be cut until the moisture in the chest cavity is released.
但如果胎儿没有蜷曲，也不服从于娩出：那么你应该按照可能的方式逐段切割头部。
If there is an abscess or dropsy below the navel, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out of it.
If the fetus is above its feet, then it is easy to draw it out, and its direction toward the mother's birth canal is light.
If it is constricted around the abdomen or chest, then you must extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand: and cut open the abdomen or chest until what is inside runs out.
If the remaining limbs are removed and only the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the opening of the birth canal is wide, then insert your hand deep into the womb and search for the head with it, and draw it towards the birth canal with your fingers: then insert a hook or two hooks into it and pull it out with them.
If the opening of the birth canal is constricted due to a hot abscess that has occurred: then you should not labor upon it, but rather administer liquids and fatty substances, and apply plasters: and let her sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it can be adjusted: then administer what we have said about a living fetus.
If it is not possible to adjust it, then cut it in pieces and extract it.
And you must not leave any of the afterbirth inside at all.
When you have completed your procedure, then apply what we mentioned for warm abscesses that occur in the womb.
If bleeding should occur, then let the patient use astringent waters, and proceed with the rest of the treatment.
And indeed, I have seen a woman in whose womb a fetus had died; then she became pregnant again over the same one, and later another fetus also died. Therefore, after a long period, she developed an abscess in her navel, which became swollen until it opened and began to discharge pus.
I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
I applied some strong adhesive plasters to it, and the opening came out from its place. Then after several days had passed, another opening emerged. I was therefore amazed by this, since there is no opening in the womb.
I thought it was because they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I examined the wound and extracted many bones, with the woman being in better condition; she lived like this for a long time, and now only discharges a little pus from the site.
And I did not reinforce this foreign matter here, except because there is knowledge and assistance in it, which the skilled physician administers with his hand during treatment.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the forms of instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
The form of the spiral used to open the uterus.
Here below is the form of the obstetric forceps, which are equal according to books, to which two spirals are evenly distributed at the extremities of two pieces of wood. However, this spiral should be finer than the forceps themselves: and to make it so, it should be made either of ebony or of boxwood.
And the width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers: and the edge of each of them is about one finger wide, and the length of each is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additional parts made of the same type of wood, which are already fixed to both, their length being half a palm plus a little more: and the width of each is about two fingers, or slightly more.
And these two additional parts are inserted into the mother's vagina to open it when you turn the two spirals.
Another form similar to that one, finer and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the forceps. However, at its extremity there should be two additional parts, as you see here above: and the length of each additional part is about a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When you wish to open the uterus with it, then have the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down and what is between her legs exposed. Then insert these two additions into the matrix: and you should hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, evenly according to the amount you wish from the opening of the matrix's mouth, until the midwife achieves what she wants.
The shape of the vertigo which the ancients called the shape of the impeller, by which the fetus is pushed.
The shape of Almisdac, by which the large head is crushed: and it resembles forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you can see.
And sometimes it becomes elongated, like forceps in this shape, as you can see, which have teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which it is cut and crushed.
The shape of a single-pronged hook.
The shape of a hook having two prongs.
The shape of Spatumilis having two ends for cutting off the head.
The shape of two Spatumilis that are also holders.
All these instruments are practiced with, and the more their varieties are multiplied and prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they are to use in their operations, and the more highly regarded among people because of their variety.
Therefore, you should not despise any of them so as not to have the instrument prepared for you. For their necessity is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Chapter on the Extraction of Afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you should instruct the woman to retain her breath. Then make her sneeze while you instruct her: and place your hand over her mouth and nose. If it comes out because of this, it is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in its cover: and put inside herbs that open the womb, such as rush, rue, dittany, chamomile, fennel, lignum cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs or some of them, and soak them in water, and place them over fire.
Then place a tube of reed over the hole in the pot's cover, and insert the other end into the womb: and have her hold it until the vapor reaches the concavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. The afterbirth will come out with ease.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or barley gruel. Then insert into the wound and search with it for the arrowhead. When he has thus found it, then let him take it and gradually extract it.
If it is attached deep within the uterus, then insert his hand as we have described until he finds the arrowhead, and extract it gradually along a straight line so that the uterus does not be pulled violently away; rather, it must be guided easily to either side as necessary: then add according to the amount of traction required. For then it yields, and is preserved, and escapes from adhering.
If the opening of the uterus is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with sneezing, and by the use of a pot containing herbs.
If it does not come out with all the methods we have described, then be careful not to overexert yourself in repeated attempts at extraction.
However, it is necessary to tie what comes out of the uterus to the woman's hip. Then administer an enema with a four-component ointment. For it will putrefy after days and dissolve and come out.
However, when it putrefies, a foul odor will rise to the stomach and head, and it will harm the patient. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered for it.
Some of the ancients were already experienced with the fumigation of watercress and figs of a certain type.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated for retained afterbirth and menstrual disorders.
Let it be made of glass like an alcama, or of ceramic: and place the wide end over fire: and let the fumigation be placed above embers: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: then do another.
Chapter LXXIX.
Concerning the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which have already been closed by a thin thread. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perforate it with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp Spatumili: and be careful that the child does not touch it.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil upon it. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
但如果害怕它再次闭合，那么在几天内放置一根铅管于孔中，当婴儿想要排泄时再移除。
而且肛门闭合也可能是因为伤口愈合或脓肿导致的。 因此，必须将那处愈合的部分切开，然后像我们所说的那样，在治疗过程中使用铅来处理。
Chapter 80.
On the Treatment of Cysts That Occur in the Lower Part.
Cysts that occur in the lower region are Nodulation and Swelling which happen near the anus externally: or between one of the parts: and there may be one cyst or multiple.
When this Nodulation becomes old, it opens up, and watery white moisture or thin pus runs from it.
And sometimes there are penetrating cysts among these. Therefore, penetrating cysts are recognized by what is expelled during defecation and flatulence when the patient uses laxatives: and perhaps worms may be expelled from them.
And among them are cysts when they penetrate the space up to the bladder, and up to the urethra. And among them are cysts that penetrate up to the hip joint, and up to the base of the tail.
To distinguish a penetrating cyst that reaches the anus from one that does not penetrate, insert your index finger into the anus: and insert a fine probe into the cyst made of air or iron: when there is no tortuosity.
If there is a twist in it, then insert into it a fine probe made of lead, or a hair from horsehair, until you feel the probe, or the hair, on your finger.
If you do not feel it entirely, and nothing comes out of the opening during defecation, neither flatulence nor worms as I said: then you know that it is a non-penetrating cyst; hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra: then its significance is that urine will escape from it, and its prohibition [for surgery] is this, so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If however it penetrates to the joint of the hip or to the socket of the hip: then its sign is that a probe can reach there, if there is no tortuosity up to the bone; and pain will be found around the area, and that pus always exits from it: and that medication does not succeed in it, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for him who receives it from foolish doctors, upon whom it is imposed.
In the one that is not penetrating and is not old, healing is hoped for with thread: as I tell you, and I have now tested it: and let the patient lie between your hands on his back: and raise his legs up above his hips, and let his hips be inclined toward his belly. Then insert a probe of lead or iron, if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
If however the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel the probe on your finger has penetrated by itself, other than what you feel between your finger and the canal or flesh: then you will certainly know that it is penetrating. Do not therefore labor on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say, however, that flesh heals in some people, and from the medicine by which they hope for relief, it is to make a cautery of fine fire according to the breadth of the fistula, as was mentioned before, and insert it when ignited into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all the added filtered tissues, which are similar to a bird's feather shaft, have been cauterized.
Then treat it with lint wrapped in butter until the cauterized flesh falls off; then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if a probe comes out and does not reach your finger, which is in the anus, and there is a thick layer of flesh between it and the probe: and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and proceed to cut with the probe that is inside the fistula until the cutting reaches where the tip of the probe has gone, and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean those filtered tissues, which resemble a bird's feather shaft, so that nothing remains of them.
If blood overcomes you and dissolves between you and the operation so that you cannot cut those tissues: then it is better to cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine for quicker relief.
Since cautery with fire has good affinities for burning the added flesh, cutting off blood, and drying up moisture.
Then treat it with lint wrapped in butter or crushed coltsfoot until the place discharges pus, and the burned flesh comes out in the pus.
Then treat the wound with ointments that consolidate and generate firm flesh: and these medicines contain astringents and drying agents.
For when they are restored, then it is healed: and you do not fear the need for repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached the deep part of the anus and extends due to excess in the body: then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If you feel a sac and there is a membrane of skin or flesh between it and the body, and it is close to perforation: then there is no treatment for that except according to the way of trust and hope.
This means that one of three methods is applied to it: either cauterize it, as we said; or cut it until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert lint and treat it from close by. And do not proceed much with cutting so that you do not cut the muscle containing the anus, and thus cause involuntary loss of feces for the patient. Then treat it as we have said.
Perhaps it will heal: or you may lengthen that membrane and clean it after cutting it close to the anus, as we said, either with a probe or with another sharp instrument. Then cleanse those filtered tissues which are in the section as far as you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with the section and at the upper opening where it will heal: and there will remain an open fistula on the inner part of the anus, which will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it occurs when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and the edge of the anus: then take a perforated probe, which is like an aleskef needle, that is, one prepared for examining membranes, in this form. And insert into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and wrap around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If it penetrates near the edge of the anus internally, then pull out the thread from that opening: insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and bring together both ends: tie them securely, and leave it there for one or two days: and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, tie it well until the tissues between the two ends of the thread fall away: then care for the wound until it heals and consolidates.
If, however, the opening of the fistula is not penetrable: then make it penetrable by whatever means are available to you, unless it is very deep. It is not within your power to make it penetrable at the risk of not cutting it properly.
Then proceed as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the Spinous Spatumilis probe for cutting a fistula, whose curvature is very sharp at one end and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what does not need to be cut, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
Concerning the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood flows due to their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids according to two methods. Either they are inside the anus, similar to charcoal blisters or thorn blisters: or they are like the seeds of a grape. And they can be small or large: and blood flows from them continuously, and there can be one of them, or many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are mostly few in moisture, from which clear water or a little blood flows continuously: and they are in color like the body.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to strain, and it should be expressed until the anus protrudes, and the soft parts become apparent to you. Therefore, suspend them with hooks: or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them at their roots.
但如果钩子因为它们的湿度和柔软性而无法固定在上面，那么用粗糙的布或双层羊毛垫来抓住它们，并用手指将它们拉出。 Then cut them open, and after the incision sprinkle certain hot powders upon them, in place of cautery. Or cauterize them as was described previously in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey evacuation, then administer an enema to the patient that contains a mild irritant, so that it cleans out what is inside the anus and quickly obeys evacuation when the patient expels it.
但如果它们是从肛门外部突出的，那么处理起来是比较轻而易的：你可以用你的指甲或者钩子来抓住它们，并将它们割除。 然后按照我们所说的进行治疗，直到他们康复。
那些避忌用铁刀进行切割的人，那么你应该按照这种方法为他们处理缝合。 取一根卷起的线，并将其放入针中。 然后将息肉向上拉出，并用针从另一侧将其根部刺入：然后在针的下部卷起线的两端，使其横向展开：并用力拉紧线以固定息肉。 然后打结线，并取出针。
对所有的息肉都这样做，只留下一个不要缝合的，以便血液可以从中流出。
然后在肛门上放置一块浸过玫瑰油或石蜡的布，并将其放在肛门上：并嘱咐病人保持静卧。 Then let it go until it falls.
Therefore, when the arrows fall out, treat them with ointments and other treatments until they are healed.
Concerning the Treatment of Fissures. For they often occur due to the drying of feces and the constriction of nature.
When they become old and medicine is ineffective on them, then it is necessary to scrape them with the point of a spatula or with your fingernail until they become soft, and the outer layer that prevents their healing is removed. Then treat them until they heal as necessary.
If they do not heal, then treat them with more vigorous scraping than the first, until they bleed heavily and become inflamed. Then treat them until they are healed.
Concerning the Treatment of Inverted and Non-Inverted Ulcers, and Dry Arrows and Ant Bite.
Chapter LXXXII.
Know that an Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and pain from them happens during walking.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what is around the knot, and to hold it with tweezers or a hook, and to remove it from its root.
Then treat it: and if you wish to cauterize it as was described in its chapter.
However, from the dry brains there is a small prominence, rough, sifted, rounded on the surface of the body. And it often happens in the hands of children.
And the treatment for it is to stretch the dry substance and cut it: or tie it with silk thread: or with hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned before with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now the inverted and non-inverted dry substances will be removed with an instrument that I shall describe.
However, the ant is also a small prominence, sifted, thick, on the surface of the body, going very deep: and when it encounters cold, it feels like an ant bite, and it occurs throughout the body: and it happens most often in the hands.
And the treatment is to take a tube from a goose feather, or a strong vulture's feather: and place that tube over the ant until it covers an area equal to the circumference of the tube. Then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the ant: and place it deep into the flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a tube of copper or iron, in this manner.
The upper part of the tube should be at a height pulling a silent, wrapped part, so that the grip on the finger is lightened and its rotation is facilitated.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization for dry substances.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Of the forms of Instruments which are used for Enemas in diseases of the Rectum, and for relieving the Bowels, and for Colic.
An enema is sometimes made of silver, or brass, or cast copper, or hammered copper.
And sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those for whom they are used.
Therefore, what is administered for the treatment of very young children should be small: and for those whose rectums are weak or painful, their enemas should also be such.
Large Enema.
The tube of the enema device, that is, its upper part where it is secured, should be large as follows: and there should be a distinction such that the upper part can be tied securely as you see, and the lower end which is inserted into the rectum should be blunt, that is, not open, soft, very fine, tapering to subtlety: and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side a single hole.
And the size of the holes should be according to the thickness of the tubes, slightly thicker, and there should be a bladder in which medicines are placed, made from an animal's bladder: or from sheepskin, shaped like a small asofrati, whose base is one palm wide.
And it should be perforated with many holes as it revolves, and the space between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made of raw silk, consisting of about ten threads or thereabouts, and attach to it a bag as described. When the bag is placed in it, tie it firmly at the head of the enema between two constrictions. Then administer an enema with it.
And this is the circular shape depicted here, along with the holes.
The quality of administering an enema with it is as follows: fill the bag or bladder with medicine that has been warmed according to the patient's tolerance level; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on his back and raise his legs upwards: and place a cushion, that is, a leather pad or cloth under him.
Then anoint the end of the enema with oil, or egg white, or fenugreek mucilage, or something similar. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the attendant should take the bag with both hands and squeeze it vigorously until everything in the enema is emptied into the intestine.
Then remove the enema, and have the patient raise his legs towards the wall.
If the medicine tends to come out, then he should hold it back as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is even more beneficial for his recovery.
If you administer an enema to him for illnesses involving the evacuation of the bowels, and if there is a rapid discharge: then give another enema, until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or ulcers in the anus, then use a very fine and mild enema, such as those used for children.
And this should be the form of a fine enema, such that the skin is tight.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already mentioned in the division on the treatment of wounds that it is appropriate for a book, and here I will describe their treatment with manual methods and medicines according to completeness.
I say that wounds differ according to the cause by which they are made and according to the place where the wound falls.
The causes of wounds are often like a stone thrown: or a cut from a sword, or a knife: or a blow with a spear, or a stick, or an arrow: and similar things from many objects.
Wounds that occur according to the parts of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the back: and similar ones from other limbs.
And I am describing the treatments of certain wounds in order to establish a reasoning and rule for other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the description of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say then. When there is a simple wound on the head and there is no fracture of the bone: consider whether it was caused by a thrown stone or something similar, and if it has only broken the skin: this is a significant wound, and you fear for the patient's outcome due to an impending warm abscess: then hurry and immediately perform cephalic phlebotomy: do not delay in doing so: extract blood from them according to their strength: if there is nothing preventing phlebotomy, especially if little blood comes out of the wound. And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded area.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded area. And let the patient be cautious about overeating, wine, and heavy foods.
But if something prevents phlebotomy, then the patient should reduce their intake of food, and avoid meat and wine.
And apply to the wound if it develops a warm abscess, a poultice infused in rose oil alone, or with wine that has astringent properties.
But if you are free from a warm abscess, then apply to the wound if it is fresh with its blood and has not been altered by the air, the powder that I will describe shortly: and if the air has already altered it, then apply certain ointments until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or comes from a sword cut or something similar: and its edges do not come together with powder, then stitch it closed as I will describe for stitching wounds of the abdomen.
If the wound is already exposed from the bone and hangs down, and there is no way to hold it back except with a small suspension: then cut it open. Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat foods that promote healing and nourishment, such as bread crumbs and cooked wheat until it becomes like a poultice: and similar items.
If you find putrefaction in the skin that does not adhere to the bone: then cut out all the putrefied tissue and remove it; then treat the wound.
If there is an artery or vein from which blood flows in these wounds: and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then probe around the artery. If you find it not cut, then cut it with Spatumili, or ligate it. If necessity requires and it is not appropriate to do what we have said, then cauterize it until the blood stops flowing.
If these wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy and light: so that you may powder this powder over them, for it consolidates the wounds before the air causes changes to them.
Method of Preparing Flesh-Colored Powder. Take one part frankincense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts quicklime that has not been extinguished: mix all together thoroughly and sift it. Apply this powder to the wound and bind it with good bandaging until it adheres well to the wound and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it from above with poultices and leave it alone, do not loosen it while it remains in place, so that it does not suppurate. For medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone can do this; when you do not have frankincense and dragon's blood at hand, they also perform the same operation on many large wounds, when it is appropriate to place them over the wound and bind it, and the wounds are fresh with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
If they have already been altered by some change in the air, especially when it is in the summer season, then this powder should not be used. Therefore, treat it as we said, so that you place over them certain unguents that are digestive: or place poultices made of barley flour, prepared with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then care for them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
But if it happens that there is a fracture with the wound in the bone, and it is small, then remove it with Gesti: and I will now describe the treatment for fractures of the head as what follows.
¶ On Wounds of the Neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
If, however, a nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut: then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy for it except to avoid treating it with substances that cause severe contraction, such as zinc and zegi, and similar ones. Since they harm the nerves and contract them.
And do not put anything cold on the wound at all: since the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is higher than other parts of the body: and let what is used for treatment be mild medicines, such as lime washed with sweet water infused several times with oil, or with rose oil, and tuthia, when also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then apply stitches: or bind its edges with small strips of material. Then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth, or a pocket forms in its lower part where pus accumulates, then puncture it in the lowest place within it.
If an artery has been cut in the wound and bleeding follows: then separate or tie off the artery, and ligate it: or cauterize it if the situation requires it.
If the windpipe has been severed, either partially or completely, and the life is still preserved: then bring together the edges of the skin with stitches over a tube for the throat, and do not touch the windpipe, but instead keep it even, and return it to its natural shape. Then secure it with appropriate bandaging, and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can from them; and what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound putrefies, separates, and its discharge is alleviated.
If the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder upon it which I have described. If it appears that there is a hole in the wound, and an abscess forms: then treat it as described in the chapter I have mentioned.
Concerning a wound on the spatula.
If there is a thrust of a spear or knife: and you see its depth, then examine it carefully. If wind (gas) exits from the wound when the patient breathes noisily from it, then you will know that the wound is mortal.
If it does not have any depth and is recent with his blood: then do not apply powder to it from the first hour, nor bandage it, so that the blood does not remain in its depth, revert to the heart, and kill the patient: but apply an attracting ointment to it, and dissolve it twice a day.
If you do not have ointment available, then place old cloth on the wound opening so that it absorbs what comes out of it from moisture: and make sure the patient sleeps with the wound, so that whatever accumulates in it can dissipate.
If, however, three days or more have passed since the wound occurred, and the patient does not experience spasms, nor a bad tremor of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see that their other conditions are good: then you will know that the wound is safe. Therefore cure him and with lint, and with the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
If, however, healing is delayed and it remains open, then you should know that a fistula has formed. Therefore treat her according to her chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and pieces are broken off: then examine the wound and hurry to extract those fragments if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them alone until the wound putrefies, for their extraction will be easier then.
The judgment on the treatment of other accidental wounds in other limbs is the same as what we have said.
Concerning wounds of the abdomen, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their treatment.
The disruption that occurs to the abdomen is major, medium, and minor.
From a major disruption, the intestine or multiple intestines may protrude at times.
Therefore, there is an insertion of them, and their stitching is more severe and difficult.
And even a minor disruption becomes difficult to treat due to a different method. Therefore, it follows that the reduction of them will be more difficult if you do not hurry to return them to their place immediately: for they swell, become open, and increase in size; hence the entry becomes difficult.
Therefore, it is better to perform a median dissection of the peritoneum: for with this method, it does not become difficult to reduce the intestine, as it does with these two other types.
Know that the suture of veins is according to four methods.
Two common sutures are used for the suture of the abdomen and for the suture of other wounds on the body: and two other specific sutures are used for other wounds. However, they are more specifically used with the suture of the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with explanation and clarification.
I say therefore, that when the wound is small, and something from the intestine protrudes from it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then this is due to one of two methods. Either because of the delicacy of the dissection, as we said: or because there is swelling in the intestine due to cold air.
When this is the case, then you must warm it by soaking a sponge or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or you can boil it with water containing pennyroyal, cyperus, spike, and wormwood, until the swelling subsides.
Sometimes it is done with wine that has an astringent quality: and this is better than water alone for resolving the swelling.
When you see that the swelling has already subsided, then moisten the intestine with water in which alum or meadowsweet has been boiled. For through that, the entrance of it is eased with a small instrument.
If, however, the return of it is obstructed after this treatment, then cut slightly at the point of interruption, using the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared than cutting: and there should be no forcing to cut after necessity and due to lack of proper instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and let the tip not be delicate like that of a spatula but rather slightly blunt: and it is similar to a cautery, as you can see.
When the wound enlarges and enters the intestine, it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form in its proper place if possible; for this is better.
When there is a wide disruption in the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary to have the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen: then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly, if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the abdomen: then direct your attention and consideration always towards this, that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And similarly, you should apply this to large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, apply it as you prepare it.
Then have a devout assistant present in your hands, who will hold the retractor with his whole hand: and bring together its lips. Then let him who follows reveal it from her little by little: and this is the method of a common stitch of one kind.
And take the needle, or several needles according to the size of the wound's width. Then leave from the edge of the wound a length equal to the width of the ring finger, that is, of the physician: and insert one needle beyond what you introduce into it with thread at both ends of the skin, and two ends of sifac, as if they are under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and now you have brought together the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of sifac: and thus four orders are made.
Then tie with double thread around the needle several times from both sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are properly brought together.
Then leave the thickness of a finger as well, and insert another needle into it: then tie it with thread as you did with the first needle. Do not stop doing this with as many needles as you need until you complete the closure of the entire wound.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between thick and thin: for very thin needles pierce the flesh too quickly, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin. Therefore, they should be medium in both thickness and thinness.
And it is not appropriate to fix needles in both extremities of the skin very closely: so that the flesh is not cut too quickly and the wound is not opened before its healing, and they do not stretch even with suturing, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not injure the patient during sleep: and place small pieces of cloth from all sides to hold the ends of the needles: and leave them until you know that the wound has already healed.
And this type of suture with needles is indeed more appropriate for small wounds. Since one or two needles, or about that many, are sufficient for sewing them up.
The second type of suture is common, used to join together four ends with one suture: two ends of the skin and two ends of the thread, wrapped around a needle of equal fineness and thickness.
Then when you pierce with the needle these four ends, withdraw the needle from the side where you began, so that the thread is laid back from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture is like a seam in cloth by which cloths are sewn together, and place between each suture an amount equal to the thickness of the little finger.
This type of suture is known by people.
And with this suture, I treated a wound that had occurred on a man's abdomen, who had been stabbed with a knife, and the length of the wound was about one palm: and about two palms of the middle intestine had come out, and there was a tear in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore replaced it after his intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound thus healed within about fifteen days; I treated it, and he recovered; and he lived for many years thereafter, engaging in his usual activities.
And the doctors had judged that he would not recover.
It was miraculous that I treated it without ointment. Since I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor any other medicinal supplies. I placed an old cloth on the wound twice a day and diligently washed it with honey water until it healed.
I will describe two types of stitches according to the account given.
And it is done by starting with an acute stitch: and inserting the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle penetrates the skin and enters along the length and width of the entire body: let go of the end as if on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from the inner part to the outer part at the opposite end.
When you make it penetrate, then make it penetrate in this same end on the opposite side from the outer part to the inner: and let go of the end as if on this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you do so on the opposite end, which is part of it, until it penetrates throughout.
Then begin also from this same side, and pull it out along with its extremity, which is on the other side of the face, and extract the tip of the needle that has penetrated the skin.
Then return it to that skin, and pull out the extremity of the face, which is on the other side, with this extremity: and extract it from the skin that is on its side, and do this once and again: and do it turn after turn until you have completely removed it according to that example.
And the goal of this suturing is to sew the skin tissues together as you would stitch pieces of leather: so that with one motion you bring together one side of the skin's edge: and in another motion let it go from the other side until you complete the task.
The second type of suture, which Gale named.
This description is given to perform it according to the likeness by which certain surgeons do it, so that they join all parts to a part matching its nature: and they apply one end of the face to the other end, and one end of the opposite side to the other end. And this is done as I tell you.
You must fix the needle in the extremity of the opposite side near you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part alone: and let go both ends of the face. Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner part through both ends of the face, that is, on both sides.
Then turn both [parts], so that they penetrate from the inner to the outer extremities, through the grooves on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common and easy stitch, and it is a stitch whose memory precedes its use.
This is therefore the word of Galen as well.
And some said. The stitching of the abdomen is corrected with two needles. This means that you insert one thread into each of them: and start with the insertion of the needle from what is near you, and make it penetrate to the other side, following the stitching of those who ensure the equalization of the tissues.
And know that when the tear is in the middle of the abdomen, then its stitching is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
However, the judgment of the treatment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds.
This means that when you attend to a fresh wound with its own blood before the air has altered it, and you reduce the intestine to its proper place and fit it appropriately, then apply powdered incarnate.
If the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ointments that are present to it until they produce pus, and let the threads fall out, and consolidate it as if through grooves. Then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it is healed.
If, however, you do not have medicines available to you, then place on it immediately a piece of old cloth from where the pus begins to discharge, and change it twice a day as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other medications in many cases when the wounds are simple.
If, however, you fear that the wound may communicate with principal limbs in case of injury, then it is necessary to soak a soft piece of wool in oil of moderate heat, or in rosin oil: and place it around the areas between the groin, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, pricking, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then administer an enema with astringent, black, and warm wine: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and formed a penetrating sore leading to its cavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal: and what comes from the small intestine is harder to heal.
However, the intestine called the Jejunum does not heal at all from a wound that occurs in it: and this is due to its multitude of veins and the size of them, as well as the fineness of its body and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
If, however, what comes out of the wound is slimy and you encounter it fresh: reduce it according to your method, by which you equally reduce the intestines.
If, however, time has passed and it has become green or black: then you must constrict it with a thread above the place that has turned black due to it, so that blood loss does not occur. For in the palm there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that you may relieve yourself of its attraction, and its extraction in the case of the palm, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
¶ Recall of the wound that occurred in the Intestine.
When there is a disruption in the Intestine and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: because I have seen someone who was wounded in his stomach with a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became old, and a fistula formed, and there was discharge and flatulence from it.
I therefore provided treatment until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I cease to carefully tend to him until he was healed and the affected area had consolidated.
After I saw the affected area already consolidated, I was concerned about the patient, fearing that something bad might happen in his stomach: and no such misfortune occurred to him. And he remained in better health, eating and drinking, and engaging in physical activities, and taking baths, and following his usual routines.
And some experienced practitioners have said that when a wound occurs in the Intestine and it is small, then it should be treated in this manner. And you should take ants with large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place one ant which has an open mouth on the two lips of the wound. When it thus seizes upon them and clamps its mouth shut, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not release.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with each ant after the previous one according to the length of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and treat the wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed and has been fed, and no harm shall come to the patient.
And now it is possible to suture the intestine even with a fine thread: one that has been cleaned from the intestine of an animal and attached to it after insertion.
And you should take the end of this thread from the intestine and expose it extensively. Then attach a fine rolled linen thread to its end. Then insert that thread into the needle, and suture the intestine with it. Then reduce it to the site of the injury.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is nothing but according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no skill except for delicate treatment, nor is its healing possible at all.
On the treatment of scrofula and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into a sore that does not heal, and continuously discharges pus without coming to a head: then it is universally called a fistula wherever in the body it may be, and we call it specifically Zuchemen.
And a fistula is indeed in truth a filtered hard and white node: with which there is no pain, it has the concavity of a bird's feather; and because of this some call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And at certain times it becomes moist, which discharges pus. And perhaps the moisture may split open at certain times. And this moisture is sometimes abundant and at other times scarce; it is sometimes thick and at other times thin.
And I have already mentioned in the division, when I spoke about wounds, that any sore which does not heal and in which no flesh grows back is due to one of nine causes.
One of these causes is either due to a lack of blood in the body or its poor quality. Or it is because between the sore and on its edges there is hard flesh that prevents new flesh from growing. Or it is because there is much dirt and impurity. Or it is because the sore itself is putrid, and the matter being discharged from it is of bad quality. Or it is because the treatment used is inappropriate for healing it. Or it is due to corruption falling in a region that is inherently pestilential, or by virtue of its properties, as happened in Caesaraugusta: where there is difficult digestion of illnesses and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed. Or it is because there is one bone or a number of bones within the sore.
And now I have shown all these causes and signs of them, and the treatments for them with medicines in the division: and it is necessary here to make you know the treatment of Fistula and Zukens, which is done through a way of operation with the hand.
Therefore, you should know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For among them are fistulas that extend to major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen; or to the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs: or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to a joint composed of multiple parts, such as the hand or foot: and among them are those that reach the vicinity of a principal limb and similar areas.
Therefore, any of these fistulas that occur in this manner are from illnesses difficult to heal, and they do not receive treatment, and dealing with them is laborious and involves ignorance.
If there is a fistula whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope and trust in its treatment, and wish to understand it, then take a probe made of air or iron, if the fistula runs straight, and examine it with it.
If there is a twist or curve in the fistula, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead. Because lead, with the gentleness of its body, floats and can bend around curves.
If the fistula has multiple openings, it is not possible for you to probe it with a probe. Therefore, use them to cleanse the opening from its openings.
For the moisture with which you cleanse it flows towards other openings and runs out from them.
Then inquire carefully to the extent that it is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is a cavity, nerve, or fistula; whether the fistula is long or short; whether it is one fistula with many openings. Stand over all of this with your utmost strength, questioning the patient and feeling for pain by compressing the area with your hand, and similar signs, causes, and accidental circumstances of the abscess.
When you therefore stand over all of these matters correctly, then proceed to treatment with confidence. Consider whether it is a fistula that is close and visible, or in a safe place far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places I mentioned to you. Then cut the fistula as was described in my narration, remove what is within it by filtration and through removal of corrupted flesh, which grows around its opening, and treat it until it heals.
If the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, then you must cut it deep as much as is possible for you. Then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer licorice wrapped in sharp medicines and insert it until it reaches the cavity of the fistula you have identified with iron. Do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that remains in the fistula's cavity from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with that, then cauterize it as we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is a tooth and it is confirmed to you that this is so: then investigate it, and cut it as I have told you. If nothing such as a vein, nerve, or principal limb prevents you, as we said.
If a tooth is exposed to you and there is something rotten and black in it: then scrape it until all the decay is removed. Then treat it with something that promotes flesh growth until it heals.
If it does not heal and continues to discharge pus as before, then you will know that you have not reached complete removal of the decay.
Examine it again carefully, and thoroughly clean and treat it with your utmost effort.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good. If not, then you will know that the decay is deep within the body where you could not reach it. Therefore, there is no point for you to further intervene other than to leave it to nature.
If the tooth is slightly decayed and it is possible for you to do so, extract it with fine forceps suitable for this purpose.
If there are many decayed teeth, then carefully extract all of them without sparing any with your effort.
If something from the humors opposes you and there is no danger or mistake in cutting them, then cut those humors and any flesh that is there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove bones at your current time, then place something over the wound that will cause it to putrefy: and leave it until what is around those bones from flesh and humors putrefies.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And make the incision you made during the operation to close. Rather, if you are afraid, place over it crushed sulfur with oil or colocynth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointment.
For when those humors putrefy and the bones separate from them, their removal is lightened, and they are more easily drawn out.
If there is one large bone, such as the bone of the thigh or hipbone, and what has become corrupted from it is a large part: then scrape it with a sharp instrument until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted within it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw through it and cut it completely until you reach the place where the corruption ends: then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you about zuken, which happened to a man in his leg: use it as an example and guidance for your own operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old who experienced pain in his leg due to something that had been stirred up inside him, that is, from within, until the matter reached his leg and formed a large abscess. And there was no external cause for it.
Thus, time was wasted with him due to the doctors' mistake until the abscess was opened, and much matter came out. And the treatment of him was delayed until his leg became ulcerated and many openings formed in it, which all discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore, a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, and none of them were skilled in the art of manual therapy until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matter flowing from those openings in great volume: moreover, the entire body of the man had already wasted away, and his color was yellow.
I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached a cavity.
Then I examined all the openings and found that they connected to each other from all parts of the leg.
I acted quickly and cut into one of those openings until I exposed part of the bone: and I found it corrupted; it was already corroded, blackened, and rotten, with holes penetrating all the way to the marrow.
I cut away what was exposed to me and prepared the corrupted bone.
And I removed everything that was corrupted in the bone, which I cut away. And I had already removed it.
Then I applied restorative treatments with consolidating medicines over a long period. And it has not been consolidated.
Then I attempted it again and examined above the second bone beyond the first examination: and I found continuous decay with the bone: and I cut what appeared to me even from that decay.
Then I attempted to restore it. And it has not been restored.
Therefore, I examined it again and did not stop cutting the bone bit by bit, and attempting to restore it: and it was not restored until I cut about one palm's width from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it healed quickly and became consolidated: and this repetition in its operation and section was not necessary, except due to the patient's weak condition, his limited tolerance, and my fear for him of death, since he suffered from fainting spells at every hour because of excessive evacuation.
He was therefore healed completely: and flesh hardened formed in the place of the bone, and a good condition was restored in his body, and his strength returned: and he resumed his usual activities: and walking caused him no harm at all.
If, however, a protruding bone in a part of the body is already fractured: then you should cut it, in this manner: take a bandage and tie it at the end of the protruding bone: and instruct someone to pull it upwards: and place another bandage made of coarser wool over the first ligament. Then bind it over the flesh that is on the bone: and extend its end so as to draw the flesh downward: and you cover the flesh over the place which you wish to cut, so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the bone below appropriately: for when you do this, it does not prevent cutting away the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw cut above the place of corruption slightly, so that there is no decay in the concavity of the bone: and it should not appear in its appearance to the senses, and compel another to take up the sawing instead.
If the bone is corrupted and not protruding, but its part continues with another part: and the corruption is in the middle of it or in one of its parts: then uncover the flesh from all parts completely. Then place wood below.
Then saw it from the first part where there is corruption until the saw cut continues from the other side: and let the saw cut be slightly away from the corruption along its length, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut open the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
If the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then there is no other remedy for it except abrasion.
If the corruption is in the joint of the hand or in the joint of the foot: then the task in this case is very difficult. However, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you. And you scrape it off, and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever ingenuity it can be made right for you: when the Vein or Nerve does not present an obstacle to you.
And you should know that there are many cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, fineness, size, smallness, hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare an appropriate instrument for each kind of operation for that specific procedure.
And you should know that these operations indicate to you the type of instrument you need when you have devoted much study to them. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of illnesses: then you will find for yourself what is appropriate from the instruments for every ailment.
And I will affirm for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should place as examples on which you will cut, and a test on which you will experiment.
The Form of Another Saw.
Shape of the razor for joints. Let the head of this razor be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped key: and let its points be in the shape of the points of an elischetfegi.
And it is not suitable except for when it is used to smooth the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or when there is a large and wide opening.
Shape of the larger razor.
Shape of the broad razor.
Shape of the razor with a concavity.
Shape of another fine razor.
Shape of another curved-end razor.
Shape of the small, fine, slender razor.
This is similar to a probe, and its end is like a saw: it is used in many places due to the nature of the bones.
Shape of the razor that is suitable for piercing through bone perforations.
Its end is triangular, with sharp points.
It is made from Indian material. And similarly, all the items that we have mentioned should be made from razors, knives, and saws.
Of the cutting off of limbs, and Sawing of bones.
Limbs putrefy either from external or internal causes.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medical care and it does not improve: and you see the putrefaction affecting a limb that is not causing any reaction: then you must cut off that limb up to where the corruption follows, so that the sick person may escape death or greater harm from the loss of the limb.
And the sign that this happens to a limb is that it turns black until it appears to be decomposing: as if fire had burned it or it had rotted after turning black: until that putrefaction spreads to the rest of the limb and creeps throughout the entire body.
Hasten with the cutting of it, and similarly if the cause of the putrefaction is from being struck by some venomous creatures: such as a sea scorpion, viper, rattlesnake, or similar.
If the putrefaction or strike is at the end of a finger, then cut off the finger and do not give the corruption time to spread to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens on the hand, then cut it off from the root of the wrist, and do not give the corruption time to spread until it reaches the forearm.
And if it invades the arm, then cut it off at the elbow joint.
If the corruption spreads and you see it around the elbow: then death is imminent for the sick person. And besides that, in treatment, there is a quantity of virtue.
And do the same for the foot, when corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one joint; and if it affects the instep of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill in it except to amputate and leave the sick person to death.
And the method of cutting a limb or sawing it is such that you should clamp the ligament below where you wish to cut: and clamp another ligament above the place. And let the attendant extend one ligament to the lower part: and let the attendant extend another ligament above to the upper part. And you should separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until all the flesh is exposed. Then it should be cut or sawed.
And it is necessary to place linen cloth around all parts, and the saw must not touch the healthy area: and if an additional injury occurs to the patient, and a hot abscess forms.
But if bleeding occurs internally while you are working, then cauterize the area quickly: or apply certain powders that stop the blood. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals.
And I tell you that it happened to a man in his foot, the same thing happening as I tell you.
Which is, because it happened that blackness occurred in his foot, with a burning similar to the combustion of fire: and that corruption first affected his toe, until it began to affect his entire foot.
So the man himself acted quickly after he saw the corruption affecting his member with its severity, which he felt from the pain and burning: and he cut it at the joint, and was healed.
And after a long time had passed, that same corruption happened to his index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I tried to recover the excess by placing medicines on his hand after cleansing his body: and the excess did not recede, and it began to spread to another finger: until the corruption started affecting his entire hand.
He called upon me to amputate his hand: and I did not want to do it, hoping that the excess would recede: and I also feared for his life if I were to cut his hand. For the man's strength was great in that situation.
So after losing hope in me, he returned to his own land: and later came back to me from there, because he acted quickly and amputated his entire hand: and he was healed.
And I did not bring this story except to be a help regarding that which falls under this kind of illness: and to serve as an indication by which it is understood, and according to which action is taken.
On the Treatment of the Anus and the Quality of Enemas with Medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy parts and continues for a period of time until it forms pus: then it bursts or is punctured, and what is inside it, which is pus, exits; and there remains an empty space like a container: and the skin that is above it becomes thin like fabric: and if it does not reach its ultimate stage of corruption nor spread to the mouth, nor to a nerve, nor to a ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not named Fistula. However, if the period extends until the corruption spreads to any of these parts, then it is called a Fistula or zuken.
And the treatment for it is to cut away that skin entirely as it has receded: and especially when it has become thin like fabric: and you can be confident that it will not adhere to the site due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and it does not reach that ultimate stage of corruption as a result: and if there is thickness in the skin made of flesh, then treat it with enemas: and be careful to consider the Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor: then administer an enema with Egyptian medicine, which consists of vinegar, oil, and zinziberi (ginger), taking equal parts, mix them in a container: and boil them over fire until the medicine turns red: and becomes as thick as honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and administer the enema with this to the Sinus: and plug its opening, and leave the medicine inside for a duration of two hours.
Then remove it after expressing it: do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water mixed with ashes, when you do not have this medicine at hand: take the ashes of vine branches or oak wood ashes and add them to the water. Then cleanse it and administer an enema with it until you are confident that the sinus is now cleansed.
If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey to which a little ground ziniar has been mixed. Or administer an enema with honey and wine mixed together, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine helps the sinus to adhere, especially when the wine has a surplus of astringency and dryness.
When you do this several times and are confident that the corruption in the sinus is now removed: then administer an enema with something that promotes flesh growth.
And you should take some dyafinicon from a plaster: dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine: or administer an enema with certain medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in the chapter on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not accommodate the enema tube: then enlarge it slightly with iron: or apply licinus wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it enlarges.
And similarly, if the opening is also too wide: then bring its lips together with a suture: and leave it open enough to allow an enema to enter without addition.
And similarly, if the opening from which the pus flows is raised towards the upper parts: then cut it at a lower place within it, so that the pus can flow down from there: for when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated there.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus somewhat lower as you wish: then try to prepare the area so that the pus can flow out of it easily, according to how it is prepared for you. Try to ensure that nothing from the pus remains in it at all: and take medicines for consolidation which are placed over the mark, suitable for what you wish. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire sinus. Then cut with forceps directly at the opening of the sinus, making a hole slightly larger than the opening of the sinus. Then spread a layer of mild ointments on another cloth, according to the size of the hole: and place it above it at a distance from the sinus opening, to ease the exit of pus from it: and do not remove the large cloth until after several days, once.
The cloth that is placed over the opening of the sinus is the one you remove at every hour, so that what accumulates on it from the pus can come out: and to know whether what flows out of it is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And with this, again examine the location of the sinus itself, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess in it or not.
When therefore your treatment proceeds thus, and you see the material that comes out over the opening of the sinus, then know that the sinus is already adhering or approaching adherence: then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you loosen the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
If, however, subtle pus comes out from the sinus after a long period of time, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is approaching, since there are people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them there are those who act contrary to this.
If, however, undigested pus comes out from the sinus after many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
If the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then increase the drying effect of the medicines, but let the physicians ensure that the medicines are moist in their substance and dry in their power: such as the ointment dyfinicon, when an excess is added to it from zegi.
And from the most recent treatment method, take ointment dyfinicon and dissolve it with rose oil, and sprinkle over it an equal amount of old wine in substance.
Then prepare it with this mixture and use it.
And now it acts similarly to this method when you do not have ointment dyfinicon at hand; use honey, which you boil until it thickens, and then use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: grind all of it, and powder it over honey while it is over the fire. Then place a bandage over the cloth, and secure it over the armpit: and boil linen with honey until thickened: and sprinkle powdered herbs over it, and place it on the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes aristolochia longa is administered there, and the roots of the celestial lily, which is a type of lily: and flour of herb, and centaury. Use them either singly or in combination, grind them, and sift them: and mix the powder with the honey I have described, and use it.
If the condition of the armpit persists and does not heal with this treatment: then you will know that there is corruption deep within it: either it has already affected the bones, or other hard parts of the body, or the ligaments: then treat it according to the method for Fistulas, as previously described.
Regarding the treatment of whitlow and worn nail, and the incision of an additional finger, and the section [of tissue].
A paronychia is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot, and it may also arise in other fingers.
Therefore, when the condition is prolonged and neglected in its treatment, and it becomes an abscess due to heat; or it decays and discharges pus until it eats away the root of the nail: and perhaps it may corrupt the entire nail, and perhaps corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foul odor: and the end of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns dark.
When you treat it according to what we have said about division and your treatment is not effective: then you must cut with a knife all the excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cauterization is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, but the additions of the empty nail are now pressing against the flesh inwardly and begin to sting it and injure it: then you should place a fine piece of lead under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut away the flesh with ease, and apply medicines that burn and corrode until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you must cut out that bone and remove it: for it will never heal while the corrupted bone remains within.
If you see the corrosion and decay advancing along the finger, then cut it at one of its joints, as has been previously described. Then treat it until it is healed.
If, however, a bruised nail or an injury to it occurs, and there is severe pain, then let the phlebotomist treat the patient first. Then dry the nail with an acute transverse section of Spatumil from top to bottom.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for if you do this, it will cause severe pain to the patient and will lead to the addition of new flesh in that place.
Then treat the area with something that alleviates pain.
However, an extra finger that sometimes grows on some people's hands may be entirely fleshy: and in some of them there may be bones, and there may be a nail in it: and some of them grow at the root joint, or their origin is in certain knots of the finger. The one that grows in certain knots of the finger does not move: and the one that grows near the joint of the finger may move.
For the one that is entirely fleshy, cutting it is easy. That is, cut it at its root with a broad Spatumil.
However, the treatment for the one whose origin is at the joint root is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
For the one that grows on the finger near the last knot, then you should cut its flesh first with a round incision down to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for it. Then treat it until it is healed.
However, the joining together of fingers, which often happens either from birth, that is, one is born with it, or from the healing of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar circumstances.
Therefore, you must cut that joining until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them licinia or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not join too quickly, and keep them separated: or place a thin sheet of lead between them until the area heals as needed.
And similarly, if the joining occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut that joining according to what is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
¶ On the Incision for a Defect.
Varicose veins are twisted, thick, and full of excessive melancholic humors that occur in many parts of the body: and most often they appear in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk a lot and work hard, and carry loads.
Therefore, you should administer body purging with black hellebore several times with a strong purge.
Then let the physician bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
However, the treatment of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they should be cut and the black blood drawn out. And another method is to raise the vein and draw it out entirely.
However, its cutting should be done in this manner. First soak the leg with a great deal of warm water to dissolve the thick, foul blood. Then press the sick leg from the upper part of the hip to the lower part of the knee with a strap. Then cut the vein in one, two, or three wide cuts at a place.
Then raise it, that is, draw the blood in your hand from the lower part of the leg up to the top. It is necessary for the phlebotomist to start with the sick person first. Then let the blood flow down until you see a sufficient quantity has come out, and until it reaches what the patient's strength can tolerate.
Afterwards tie it up: and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and if this harms the patient.
However, its raising should be done in this manner. Shave the sick person's leg if it has many hairs. Then immerse him in a bath: or soak his leg with warm water until it turns red and the veins swell: or have him exercise vigorously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
Then dry the skin along the length of the vein: either at its end near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to the eye: and at its appearance, you will see it reddish turning to a darker shade. When it comes out of the skin, you will see it white as if it were a cord.
Then insert the probe under it until it lifts and exits from the skin: lift it with a hooked instrument gently.
Then dry another section near that section, about three digits away. Then strip the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then lift it with probes as you did before, and suspend it with another hook as you did initially.
Then dry another section, or several sections, if you need to do so. Then lift it and cut it at the last section near the heel.
Then pull it out to the section above it.
And do this until you pull it out from the upper section, or the highest of all sections, until it comes out completely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you in being pulled out and lifted: then insert a needle with strong double thread, and tie it, and pull it out; or insert the probe under it: and move your hand around to every part until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to lift it properly, and harm will come to the patient because of it.
When you have therefore extracted it completely, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or just oil, and care for it until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted, having twists where it is coiled into parts and is not as we said straight: then you must cut along its entire length of curvature and at places where it is coiled.
Then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely: and beware at your cut near the vein that you do not cut it, or wound it: for it will be difficult for you to lift or extract it. Therefore, preserve your prudence.
The Method of Treating the Vein for Healing.
The Form of a Blind Hook.
It does not have the curvature of other hooks, nor does it have a sharp point so as not to wound the vein: and it is of ample flexibility but gentle: for if it were fine, its fineness would cut the vein; rather, it should have an excess of thickness, as we said.
On the Extraction of the Leg Vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands such as Al-Andalus, and in the land of Arabs, and in dry, warm lands with little vegetation, that is, where no grass or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction which occurs beneath the skin, just as snakes and worms like ascarids occur within bodies, and worms are generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this Vein's occurrence is that there is a violent inflammation in the leg. Then the area is let blood from or blistered. Then the Vein begins to emerge from that place of blistering, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore the end of it becomes apparent, then you must wrap over it a piece of lead, whose weight should be from one Babylonian drachma up to two drachmas, and tie it: and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
Whenever therefore something comes out of it to the outer parts, wrap it in lead and tie it. If it extends too much, then cut part of it and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it off at the root before it has come out completely. For if you cut it, it will contract and enter the flesh: and this causes an abscess to occur, along with putrefaction in the area, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it is necessary to handle it gently and extract it gradually until it comes out completely from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body: and this Vein emerges in some people to a length of five palms and ten. And now it has come to me, for a man came out from twenty palms away.
If, however, it happens to you during your time of treatment: then insert the probe into the opening, and pierce it with a long needle, along with the body, until everything that is inside it of matter is evacuated: and administer the cleansing of the place with medicines for several days. Then treat it as you would treat an abscess.
And this Vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself: and it has many openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Treat it as we said in the division, and along with what was mentioned before.
Regarding the treatment of worms generated under the skin, and it is called Ox Disease.
This disease is called Ox Disease in a certain land among us: because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending: and its presence is felt through the sensation as it travels from limb to limb, until it breaks out wherever it breaks out on the skin and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms, occur in the belly.
And it is feared because of its maliciousness. Because when it goes into the body, and rises to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens there, and exits, and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and remove it, then it is done only during its movement, and when it appears to the senses.
It is necessary, therefore, to bind what is above it and what is below it with a strong constricting bandage. Then dry the area above it, and remove it.
If it penetrates into the flesh, and you cannot find it: then apply a cautery with fire to the place until it dies.
And what is more feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind below it the eyebrow with a good bandage. Then dry the area above it, and remove it.
And it is necessary for the patient to use cleansing of his body with medicines that dissolve foul and bad humors.
And he should be cautious about foods that generate putrefaction.
§ On the treatment concerning the illness of Nakir.
This illness is called Nakir in our land: and it is pain that occurs in certain limbs: then it changes from one limb to another.
And indeed I have already seen it as I tell you. I was called to attend to a woman who is ill with stitches. And he uncovered his arm, and I saw a small swelling in the rope-like vein of the arm.
And after I had stayed for one hour, I saw a swelling move with heat, like a worm crawling, ascending to his shoulder faster than can be imagined: it was like living silver as it moved from place to place.
So the pain withdrew from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it raced through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that it moved throughout his entire body, as I had seen.
I was amazed at the speed with which it changed from one limb to another. And indeed I had not seen this illness in such a manner with my own eyes before this. Nevertheless, I have seen many who experience pain changing from one limb to another: and I have not witnessed it myself with my own eyes as I did in the case of this woman.
And I do not think it is anything other than because the woman was one of those who have dry, thin bodies with visible veins; hence, this windiness changing becomes apparent to the senses.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this method in those who are delicate, and in bodies with moist veins.
When therefore you wish to treat it, and the patient feels pain in it: then if it is apparent to your eye, as we said, then compress above it, and below it quickly: and cut above it, until that wind escapes: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with the shaking of the body, and with what expels winds, and soothes them with stinking pills, and pills made of serapin, and similar remedies.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows differ according to their types, and according to the places where they fall from the body.
Their diversity is as follows: there are those which have large and small points: and concave, and blunt. And there are those which have three angles. And there are those which have tongues. And there are those which have barbs.
Those, however, which are according to the members in which they fall, are in two ways. For either the members are from the main concave parts, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar organs. When therefore an arrow falls into any of these limbs, and the signs of death appear to you which I tell you about afterwards, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many cases. And when those bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply in the limb, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For the signs when an arrow falls into the head, penetrates the bone, and exits through the soft part above the brain are as follows: violent headache, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasm, confusion of thought, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood may come out of the nose or ears. And perhaps speech may be cut off, and the voice destroyed. And moisture similar to thick broth comes out from the wound site. And something like the watery part of flesh exits from it.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then refrain from treating it, and extract the arrow if it does not come out on its own.
The signs when an arrow falls into the heart are: it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard structure, not in an empty space. And perhaps the movement of the arrow is similar to the motion of the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound. And there follows this coldness of extremities, and cold sweat, and syncope. Know then that death certainly approaches.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the expulsion of frothy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck become abscessed, and the color of the sick person changes. And he exhales a great, deep breath: and seeks to draw in cold air.
If the arrow falls on the covering which is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs: and there is a great breath with severe pain and sighing: and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls on the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food will exit from the wound.
And if the arrow falls on the abdomen and is embedded there: something exits from the wound, either feces, or a twisted part of the intestine, or an already ruptured intestine. There is therefore no hope for his cure, nor for the removal of the arrow.
If the arrow falls on the bladder and urine exits: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is greater upon the sick person: then know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder blades, auxiliary area, spine, collarbone, hip, leg, and similar parts of the body are cured according to various conditions: when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve: and the arrow is not poisoned.
And I tell you that I saw these arrows used to signify something about your treatment.
Which is to say, an arrow fell into the lacrimal duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. So I removed it from the other side, underneath the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I removed an arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only find a small part of it, with which it adheres to its wood: and it was a large arrow from Turkish bows, made of soft iron, without notches.
Thus the Jew was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and this one had notches. So I made an incision above it between two cartilages: and it was already submerged in his throat. I carefully worked with it until I removed it: and the Christian was healed.
And I removed an arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow: I worked on it carefully and removed it: he was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow fell on his back, and the wound healed over it. And after seven years had passed, the arrow emerged from the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell on her abdomen, and the wound healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and none of her conditions changed, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell on his face: and the wound healed, and it remained without causing him much pain: and many things like these.
And I removed an arrow from a man among the king's leaders, which had fallen on the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right: and the entire arrow was concealed.
I was called to treat him after the arrow incident for three days. I found the wound from the arrow very tight.
I examined it with a thin probe but could not feel the arrow: however, he himself felt a puncture and pain under his right ear. I hoped that the puncture was from the tip of the arrow.
I applied a plaster with adhesive and digestive properties to the area, confident that it would cause an abscess to form and reveal to me a sign of the arrow so that I could cut around it: but nothing happened in the place indicating that the arrow had settled there.
I therefore applied a plaster to it for many days; and nothing untoward happened, and the wound healed in the meantime; but he remained ill from the extraction of it for so many days that on one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he told me about it.
And he told me about it. I therefore applied sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened; and when I probed it with a probe, I felt the tip of the arrow, which was embedded in the wood.
Then I added the sharp medicine to the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrow became visible to us; and I spent about four months with him in this process.
Then, after the wound had enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, but it did not yield to being removed: I did not cease to refine my methods and devise ways with various tools until one day I began to use forceps properly made, as their form will be shown at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed, physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured: nothing harmed him at all.
And I tell you about the nature of extracting certain arrows: so that you may consider it a rule and an example for what I have not mentioned.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended in the narrative; nor does the book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsman compares little with much: and what is present with what is absent: and finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descent of foreign things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore that arrows do not emerge from the limbs to which they are attached except in two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or by the opposite part.
And that which emerges from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding in fleshy tissue and is drawn out.
If it does not obey the exit from the moment it falls, then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes decomposed, and its attraction is diminished, and then it can be removed.
And similarly, if it is fixed in bone and does not obey you for removal, then leave it for several days as well: and try to remove it with attraction and movement every day until it comes out.
If it does not obey you for removal after several days, then you must drill around the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine drill until the area around the arrow enlarges. Then attract it and remove it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in a part of the body and is concealed from sight: then search for it with probes. But if you feel it, then remove it with instruments suitable for its extraction.
But if you are unable to reach it because of the constriction of the wound and because the arrow is deep inside: and there is no bone, nerve, or vein near it: then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
If there are parts by which it can be held, then free the flesh to which it is embedded from all sides with any means you can, and use instruments if necessary, even by breaking or twisting those parts, until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever part it is, then use twisting motions with your hands and pliers to all parts until you make it come out: and proceed carefully, using fine techniques so that the arrow does not break, making its removal difficult for you.
If you cannot act upon it within an hour, then leave it for several days until what is around it becomes rotten. Then proceed with it again; the bone will be lightened. However, if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we mentioned in the treatment section of its chapter: and be careful not to cut into a vein, nerve, or cord.
And apply all methods possible to remove the arrow: and do this with ease, calmness, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And when you pull out the arrow, it is necessary for the patient to be positioned according to the figure in which he was at the time of the arrow's impact. For it is more beneficial. If however it is not possible for you to do that, then apply what is possible from the figures.
An arrow that exits from the opposite side or has already moved outwards to some extent: or it causes a bulge at the tip of the arrow as felt through the skin near the surface, and you see it protruding: cut above it, and let the incision be in proportion to what the forceps can grasp.
Then pull it out: for it becomes easy to remove.
If however it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand according to its roundness until the arrow presses against the bone and enlarges itself: then pull it out.
And if not, leave it for several days: then try again until it comes out.
If the wood of the arrow is in it, then push it out with it.
If the wood falls out and you wish to apply pressure: then introduce a hollow instrument so that its concavity enters into the tail of the arrow; then push it out with it.
If the arrow is hollow, then push it out with an instrument inserted into it. For the arrow is lightened by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is: if it is possible for you to do so. Then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is near what you can touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be careful not to incise a vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then treat the wound if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let the ends be like the beak of a bird, which are made of iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are made in many sizes, large and small and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound and its constriction.
Shape of the Concave Forceps.
And the shape of the deaf forceps.
This is the tip of the forceps shaped like a radius, so that it may be eased into a concave arrow and used to push with it.
On Phlebotomy of Veins.
There are thirty veins that are usually phlebotomized in the body.
Of which, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins located behind the ears, called the two Grass Veins; and two arteries that appear in the two temples; and two veins situated at the tear ducts of both eyes, called the Gazing Veins; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose. And two Guiding Veins, which are located in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is Cephalic, and it comes from the side of the temple: and the common people call it the vein of the head. And Black. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein: and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilic, and it is located on the inner side: and it is also called Titillicator. And the common people call it the vein of the abdomen. And the Arm Rope vein, and it is located above the elbow: and that is where phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears above the thumb clearly.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger: and it has two branches.
And in the thigh and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is the vein that is under the curvature of the thumb on the lateral side. And the second is the Saphena: and its location is near the heel on the inner side. And the Nesse vein: and its location is near the heel on the outer side.
And in the other thigh there are three veins similar to those.
¶ On Phlebotomy of the Two Veins Behind the Ears.
However, phlebotomy of the two veins which are behind the ears is helpful for old catarrhs, and for migraine, and for sahafati, and for old sores on the head.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy is as I describe. And it is such that the head of the patient should be shaved: and the back of their head, where the two veins are located, should be rubbed with a rough cloth vigorously. Then the patient should tighten their neck with a strap until the two veins become visible. And the locations of these veins are behind the ears in two depressed areas on the head. Search for them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, mark it with a cautery.
Then take a small knife for phlebotomy, and it is called the Incisive. Then insert it under the vein in the skin until the phlebotomy knife reaches the flesh. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein along with the skin in an oblique incision. And the length of the incision should be the length of two joined fingers, or about that: and let as much blood come out as you wish.
Then press it with lint, and leave it until it heals.
And now the cutting of these veins and their cauterization have been described at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the two arteries that are in the temporal regions is for chronic migraine, and for headache on one side, and for persistent eye inflammation: and to discharge excessive sharp accumulations to the eyes.
And the method of performing phlebotomy on them is as I shall describe to you. The patient should press his neck firmly until two veins become clearly visible: and the pulse in them should be felt beneath your finger. Then mark the points with a cautery.
Then lift the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the lancet from below, and lift the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the other two veins: and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then loosen the patient's pressure, and place your finger on the vein for one hour. Afterwards apply cotton and powder to it, and bind it tightly with compression: and leave it until it heals.
And now I have mentioned their location, cutting, and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the frontal vein after cephalic phlebotomy is for chronic facial ailments: and for migraine: and for redness: and for foul ulcers.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is as I tell you. The patient should place a strap around his neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called Fossorium.
Place the prominent point at the head of the Fossorium on top of the vein, and strike it with a comb or something similar in manner: and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then loosen the puncture of the patient and apply pressure until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy needle. However, it should not be sharp at the end like other phlebotomy tools; rather, it should be broad at the end. And perform the phlebotomy acrosswise: since the opening is close; and perhaps the phlebotomy tool may break there when it is delicate.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two lacrimal glands of both eyes is for eye conditions such as itching and redness: and pain in the eye, and facial ailments.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that the patient should compress his neck with a strap. Then perform phlebotomy on her: and you should stand over her head.
And let the phlebotomy be performed slightly across the length with a small phlebotomy tool, somewhat broad, for there is little flesh in the area. For if the phlebotomy tool is delicate at the tip, it might break.
Then let as much blood flow as you consider necessary. And place a bandage over them, and bind them for one night, then release them.
Phlebotomy of the nasal veins is applicable for acute fever, severe headache, and facial ailments such as migraine, and redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that the patient should bind their neck. Then hold their nose with your left hand, and take a delicate, long phlebotomy tool, and place it in the middle of the nasal septum. Since the vein is not visible there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary to keep your hand with the phlebotomy tool for a moment: and let the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it is quickly restored.
The phlebotomy of Guideg's two veins is helpful for constricting breathlessness, preventing the onset of leprosy, and treating melancholic ailments, impetigo, and bad ulcers, as well as conditions caused by corrosive agents, such as herpes and eczema.
And the procedure for their phlebotomy is that the patient should hold under both veins in his neck with a bandage, and the practitioner should stand over the patient's head, while the patient sits on a seat.
Then cut open the vein to a length sufficient for phlebotomy for a short while. Then draw out a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for the condition. Then do the same with the other vein.
After that, loosen the bandage and apply moderate pressure to both veins with a dressing, so that the patient does not suffocate. And let the patient rest until morning. For the wound heals.
On the Phlebotomy of Algeberich's Veins. The phlebotomy of Algeberich's veins is helpful because it benefits conditions such as inflammation in the mouth, gum corruption, and bad ulcers: as well as cracks in the lips, and bad sores, even those that are on the nose and around it.
And the procedure for bleeding them is that you should have the patient sit before you and bind his neck with a bandage. Then turn up his lip and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the location of each is indicated by its darkness. And that is true, because around them are small veins, black. Therefore, cut both with an oblique incision.
But if you are in doubt and do not know which one to cut, then pay attention to the larger of the two veins, and make a clearer incision into it.
And do the same for the two veins that are on the upper lip; custom generally follows this practice, and cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Concerning bleeding the Vein under the Tongue after the Bleeding of the Head Veins. The bleeding of the two veins under the tongue is helpful for treating throat obstructions, inflammation of the palate, and oral ailments, which are also addressed by the bleeding of the head veins.
And the method of bleeding these veins is that the patient should sit between your hands in front of sunlight, and lift his tongue so you can see one vein on one side under the tongue and another vein on the other side; the color of each tends towards blackness.
Therefore, bleed both veins; and be careful not to cut too deeply when bleeding them. For under it are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood from those arteries may occur.
There are three veins which are bled in the elbow, and it is customary to bleed all human beings in these veins.
And the bleeding of them is done according to two methods. Either by pricking with a broad lancet made of boxwood or olive wood for fineness; or by cutting with a small surgical knife, which is called an Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these, there are broad and fine types according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of the boxwood lancet should be broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave, full, protruding, visible, thick veins, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this lancet has a smaller width and finer tip.
And it is suitable for bleeding fine veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.
The basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, is beneficial for bleeding. Since it extracts blood from illnesses that are beneath the throat and neck, which extend to the chest and abdomen: and it is fitting for the phlebotaomist with a phlebotomy needle to be cautious, and to be wary because there is an artery below it. If therefore he errs and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy needle, he will cut that artery, and it will result in a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary not to use the phlebotomy needle but rather to use scissors with an Alnasil.
If the Basilica does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to move away from it and switch to another one, or seek some branch of it: or in its place, perform phlebotomy on the Funis brachii. For it is clear, and cut it with the Anesil phlebotomy tool, as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same area, then before tightening the arm, touch the spot until you recognize the pulse location. Then mark the spot with a cautery, then tighten the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using the Alnesil phlebotomy tool, as we have said. And be careful that the blow does not fall in the space between the artery location.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, an inflation in the place you marked with a cautery, then that inflation is the swelling of the artery: avoid it.
If you see blood at the phlebotomy rising like a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then know that it is arterial blood. Then hurry and place your finger on it for a long space, then remove your finger. If the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then bind the arm and leave it alone: and let the patient be cautious about moving it: and may he remain in fear of it.
And do not move it for several days until it is healed.
But if the blood does not stop and overpowers you: and there is no medicine available to you at the moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to be necessary. For its extremities contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the rind of a fig and cut it: take half of it, and bind it over the site of the vein constriction with a bandage and powder until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat it with what was mentioned earlier from the place of powders that stop blood flow: and stopping the blood is not difficult in most cases, due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of binding from the arm.
Phlebotomy of the Blue Vein is helpful in drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of the branch of the Basilic vein and the branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to be above her, so that he is not afraid of her from the phlebotomy, for under her is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds a nerve, it results in numbness, and healing becomes difficult for it, and perhaps it is not healed completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. If, however, it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not apparent: then you should place your phlebotomy where you perform it, using a section with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
¶ Concerning the Cephalic Vein. Phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein is helpful because it draws blood from the head and benefits conditions affecting the eyes.
And it is proper for this vein specifically, if you wish to perform phlebotomy on it by puncturing with an olive lancet or a myrtle lancet: for it is safer than all veins, since there is no delicate artery nor nerve beneath it.
However, it is appropriate for you during phlebotomy to avoid the head of the tendon with the lancet slightly, and seek a softer spot: and it does no harm if it is not found with the first strike, as long as it is retried several times with the phlebotomy.
However, it may become inflamed in some people when not phlebotomed with the first strike, but such inflammation does no harm to them.
Of the usefulness of phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of phlebotomy and its consequences, which you must consider for their proper understanding.
First of all, you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health, its maintenance, and to guard against the onset of illnesses.
And to perform phlebotomy on one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Femoral, and the Basilic. And so that bloodletting may be performed at the beginning of spring after fasting, in summer, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And let bloodletting be performed on the first day, or on the third day, after three hours have passed since dawn.
Bloodletting that is administered for illnesses does not have a fixed time; but when circumstances and necessity call for it, it may be performed day or night, at any hour and at any time.
And it is not appropriate to perform bloodletting on children until they reach fourteen years of age. A pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth month until the seventh month. And elderly people who have already passed sixty years of age should not be bled.
When someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines before the procedure with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces in them: so that the veins near the bleeding site do not attract harmful putrid substances from the intestines to the principal parts of the body.
A patient who is too full, that is, feels nausea from overeating, nor one who is drunk should not be bled until those conditions have subsided. Nor should an ill person with dropsy be bled.
And one must be cautious about performing bloodletting again after an attack of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and anything that dissipates strength from the bodily or vital fluids.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if it is possible for him to do so.
Then let him enter the bath, if nothing prohibits it: or let him exercise in some way, so that the blood may become finer.
And place the phlebotomy of his chest on the third day, as we have said: and strive to ensure that his chest is purged of all animal evils on that day: such as constriction, anger, and fear: and of all bodily ailments, such as labor, pain, overexertion, and things similar.
And let there be present for his sitting things that are used in the customary enjoyment of people due to their fragrance, and smell, and joy, and similar things in the quantity possible.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion, which is higher than the cushion used for phlebotomy. Afterwards, he should extend his arm and rub it twice or three times with his hand. Then let him tie the vein with a strap and wrap it twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, for when the constriction is uneven, or too tight, it then prevents the flow of blood: or if it is too loose, it also hinders the flow of blood.
Then after the constriction, it is necessary for the person to be phlebotomized to move their hands together, until the veins swell and become clearly visible.
Then let the phlebotomist wipe the area to be phlebotomized with a little oil, properly and carefully.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand upon the vein at the spot where he wishes to perform phlebotomy, slightly pressing down so that the vein does not escape and it becomes visible. Since the veins are like a fleeing string at the time of phlebotomy; and they are full of windiness: and when you place the lancet upon them, they contract under the lancet, and deceive the phlebotomist, and do not open for the lancet: and if it does open them, it is narrow. Therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and diligent in all these matters.
Then he should put down the lancet. If therefore the vein opens on the first attempt, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that at another place nearby or above it with haste: if the area does not become inflamed.
If it becomes inflamed, or the patient grows weaker, then leave him for a day, or two days: and do not bind with a tourniquet. For it might attract heat to the inflammation. Nor should he enter a bath.
Then let him repeat the phlebotomy if he wishes.
If the opening is small, or the blood flows thinly: and you fear that the quantity of blood you wish will not come out: then repeat the incision at the same hole along its length, and add a little to the operation.
And do this with haste, before the place becomes gangrenous, for a gangrenous place is found in many people even after minor surgery.
If you see that it has already become gangrenous, then do nothing further on it, for nothing excuses this at your hands. And apply something of oil waste on it, for it lightens the flow of blood. And it is better in this case than the oil itself and other oils.
And similarly apply oil waste in all your bloodletting, where you open veins to stop the flow of blood. And this is done with turricated bandages and zigzag bandages when one of them is placed on the area.
For the blood becomes refined and dissolved when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the bloodletting site, which often happens, especially for someone who has been bled only that once or whose vein was opened slightly, then hurry and place a sponge soaked in warm salt water on the area; press it down for one hour, for it dissolves.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood has exited from the vein itself, either fully or from another vein.
If some black or green residue remains at the site after several days, it does no harm; and if you wish, apply something made of aloe or dissolved myrrh, or something from mint juice, that is, calamint or something similar.
And often enough abscesses and swellings occur at the site of phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
Place your hand on it, then if you find softness upon pressing on it, then that swelling is bad. Be careful not to apply anything we have mentioned on it. For perhaps blood may flow from the artery.
But apply a plaster to it with something astringent, so that the area hardens. Then treat it along with the rest of the care until it heals.
And it is necessary to draw blood from every person in accordance with the extent of their vitality. And what appears from the vibrant color above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it as thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp in quality, let it continue to flow until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting, that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and that it be lateral; and for one who is weak, the opposite should be done.
And it is necessary to draw the blood in stages, and for the opening to be narrow; and what is better in phlebotomy of the vein is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting along the length and width.
And for those who are prone to fainting during bloodletting, it is necessary that they eat a little bread infused in pomegranate syrup before bloodletting: or scallion wine, if it is warmed. And extract from the blood in three times or four.
And if they have a cold complexion, then let them take bread infused in murri syrup before bloodletting: or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause is excessive loss of blood, then it is necessary for them to drink water of meat and fragrant subtle syrup: and use aromatics with algalia, and apply it to their chest: and use other remedies which we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
Those who wish to let blood from their arm and release their blood a second time: it is necessary for one whose bloodletting is for significant evacuation, and whose strength is weak, to release the blood gradually according to their strength over consecutive days.
Those who wish to let blood from their arm and release their blood a second time, and whose body is strong: then they should do it seven or nine hours after their first bloodletting.
Those who wish to draw blood from their body toward the opposite side to which they are inclined: it is necessary for them to let blood on the second day or third day.
In whose body there is already much heated and agitated blood, causing a fever to occur: it is necessary that the blood should be let out from him at once, and in large quantity; and the incision must be enlarged until fainting occurs. After you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy, place your hand on his pulse near the course of the blood, so that death does not occur due to fainting. For this often happens when the bloodletter is ignorant and falls into negligence.
And when you wish to release the arm and let blood a second time, after the opening of the vein is already closed and the passage of blood becomes difficult, it should be pressed upon with force, and the bent area should be quickly extended. For that is a very bad condition; indeed, leave it alone until the second bloodletting.
Or remove with care the clot that has formed from the blood in the vein opening, and apply something dissolved salt in water to it. And apply something from alfaroch or sagzenea to it, and place a gentle compression on it until the blood flows out.
But if the vein is already inflamed, then leave it alone and do not cover it until the inflammation subsides.
If necessity compels a second bleeding and there is no excuse to avoid it, then either bleed him again at that same place if appropriate, or on another arm at a different vein.
The vein on the arm is bled at the place of the Fuscae and Basilicae veins, when they are not found or are hidden, since it is composed from them.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that the patient should insert his hand into warm water until it becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
Then bind it above with a bandage of moderate tightness in the middle. Then make the incision gradually acrosswise, neither too wide nor along the length, and let the opening be spacious, and perform the phlebotomy for a short while above the joint of the hand.
If the flow of blood is obstructed, then immerse your hand again in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve the desired amount.
But if it is during the summer days, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in warm water again. And the flow of blood into warm water is most pronounced during the winter season.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, since there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
However, the phlebotomy of the right hand's salatatella vein relieves ailments of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that you should bind the hand with a bandage or with your hand after it has been immersed in warm water until the vein swells and becomes clearly visible to the touch. Then make the incision acrosswise. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm it in any way.
And keep it safe, lest you have to use your hand as a phlebotomy tool. For under it the nerves of the fingers are exposed from the flesh.
Then place your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow in it. For if you do not place it again in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening and will be prevented from flowing.
Therefore, when you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein: so that it does not heal too quickly.
And similarly, you must do this with every tight branch.
The phlebotomy of that one should be assisted by the left hand, as it relates to diseases of the spleen: and similarly perform the phlebotomy of it, just as you did for the second one equally.
The assistance for phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for ailments in the lower part of the body, such as ovarian disorders, retention of menstruation, kidney diseases, old ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the method of phlebotomy for it is that the patient should put his foot into warm water: and perform friction on it until the veins protrude: and tie above the joint of the foot with a bandage. And the location of the vein is near the heel, visible towards the big toe: and it branches out into many branches on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, perform phlebotomy on the larger branch of it, or near the heel at its junction: for it is better and safer.
If you perform phlebotomy on the front of the foot, then be careful not to injure the nerves that are beneath it and above the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy where you perform it across from it, as if you want to cut it: and let the phlebotomy be done swiftly.
If, however, the flow of blood is obstructed, then immerse his foot in warm water: and allow the blood to run into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist misses the vein on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly higher up, for that location is safe, and you need not fear any harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we said, is near the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of phlebotomy for it is to relieve pain in the ankle when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient should enter the bath quickly: and bind his leg from the side of the ankle up to four finger-breadths above the heel with a thin, long strip; it does not show except for that.
When it is thus apparent, then perform phlebotomy according to whatever method is possible for you, or across from it: and it is better either to cut it with an incision or to sever it with a section. For it is in a safer place, and itself is very hidden in many people.
For it is in a safer place, and itself is very hidden in many people. If you do not find it, and it does not appear at all to the senses: then let the phlebotomist cut one of its branches, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the heel: and be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the amount you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and place leather over the site of the bloodletting, and secure the area. For it is healed very quickly.
¶ On Venesection, and the Quality of Its Use.
Ventose cups are made from horns, and from air (bellows), and from glass.
And venesection is indeed performed in two ways. One involves scarification and the extraction of blood, and the other is venesection without scarification.
And this venesection which is without scarification is performed in two ways. One way involves the use of fire. The other way is without the use of fire.
And the ventose cups that are applied with scarification and the extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body. One of these is the Ventosatio Alnocrati, which is at the back of the head. Another is Alkehel, located in the middle of the neck. There are also two ventose cups called Alhagdahim on both sides of the neck simultaneously. The ventose cup for the chin is under the lower jaw. There are ventose cups for the spatula bones, and there are ventose cups for Alachosos at the end of the spine. Additionally, there are ventose cups for the two biceps, in the middle of both arms. There are also ventose cups for the two thighs and for the two calf muscles.
And indeed, ventilation does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that its power does not fall out from them as it happens with bloodletting. Nor should ventilation, whether with fire or without fire, be administered in any diseases that arise from congestion until the entire body is emptied.
If necessity prompts ventilation due to illness or out of habit, we administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, whenever that may be.
This is because there are people who, when the blood multiplies within them to the point where it needs to be extracted through ventilation, find heaviness and pain in their head.
And there are those among them who find congestion and redness in their face, head, and neck. And there are those who feel itching on their face and forehead, as well as darkness and blurriness in their eyes.
And there are those who scratch the site of their ventilation. And there is one whose laughter becomes excessive. And there is one who finds the taste of blood in their mouth: or their tongue becomes swollen and they spit out blood. And there is one whose sleep becomes excessive. And there is one who sees blood, redness, and killings, as well as wounds and things similar to these in their sleep.
When we see something of those things and particularly if it is on the third day of the month, we order that ventilation be done after two or three hours have passed.
The purpose of neck ventilation is that it contributes to heaviness in the head and what is released goes to the eyes. However, it is necessary that this occur after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventilation is in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not permitted for one of cold complexion or who has a cold to use it. For it causes him great harm.
And for that reason, it is not appropriate for elders or those with cold ailments in their head to use it.
However, if one becomes habitual with it, forgetfulness is generated in them.
And for that reason, you should instruct the ventousator to remove the cup temporarily and place it lower down, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventilation or Alkehel is in place of dark phlebotomy and basilic phlebotomy, and for that reason it benefits asthma, constriction of breathing, fissure of the breathing instrument, coughing, and fullness.
And it is necessary that the Alkehel cup be placed temporarily higher up, because if it is placed lower down, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
However, bloodletting of the hand causes pains and accidents in the head, and eye diseases, and migraines, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is instead of bloodletting at the basilic vein.
And it is necessary that you instruct the bloodletter not to press the hand during incision: so as not to cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Bloodletting under the chin causes alcohol problems in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth: and it takes the place of bloodletting at the alieherich, which is located on both lips.
Bloodletting of the spatula areas causes alchafacham, which arises from tension and heat.
Bloodletting of the inner parts of the two temples provides assistance for the bloodletting of the three veins: Basilica, Fusa, and Cephalica: because it draws blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh: and these small veins draw from other thicker veins until the drawing reaches the three larger veins.
And it is necessary that you instruct the bloodletter not to proceed too far with the incision: because the area is bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa that is applied above the alchausos helps hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers in the lower region.
And it is necessary that you instruct the bloodletter to use a large ventosa and to make it of air: because the area requires strong suction, and perhaps the delicate ventosas might break: and it should be scarified with a deep incision.
Wind in the legs can be reduced by obvious diminution: for they attract blood from the entire body and cause pain in old kidneys, uterus, and bladder; they provoke menstruation and cause boils and ademenul; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of both saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they greatly weaken the body and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the treatment for alhorcobeni wind is similar to the treatment for wind in both legs.
The quality of positioning for winds is such that you should first place the wind in an empty area and suck with a moderate suction; do not prolong the position of the winds but put them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the site by an equal arrival: do not stop repeating this and continuing it until you see the area already red and inflamed, and the redness of blood becomes apparent: then scarify and repeat with a gradual suction. Then consider the condition of the bodies.
For those with tender flesh and few pores, it is necessary to scarify them only once so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the one performing the procedure to increase the scarification slightly and make it deeper; and to moderate the suction in ease, speed, and with a smooth motion.
If there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify twice. In the first instance, an avenue is opened for the thinning of the blood and its dilution; and in the second instance, for the precise extraction of thickened blood.
If the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made: so that the final result is achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or for a short time, one incision is sufficient for us. If we wish to extract much blood, we should make multiple incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make a deep incision: and the limit of equality in the incision is the depth of the skin.
¶ What it is that should be administered from oils near the position of the Wind-Pipes, and what to beware of when applying them.
In the case of one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the areas near the Wind-Pipes with oils that are penetrating, soothing, and resolving: if it is in the summer season, such as oil of wormwood, or violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil.
And if it is in the winter season, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or savory oil: and similar oils.
If the excess is thick and cold, then use bitter almond oil, or oil of balsam, or benzoin oil, or anise oil: and similar oils.
If the areas to be treated have large pores and soft flesh, then it is necessary to avoid using oil, and these areas should be washed with rose water, or cold water, or sun-dried water, or cucumber water, or purslane water: and similar liquids.
He whose blood is of much moisture should wash the veins with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumach: and such like.
He whose superfluities are gross should wash his veins with old wine, or with water of burnt lees, or decoction of mint, or chamomile: and such like.
And it is necessary to beware of venesection in the bath, or immediately after bathing; rather it should be administered one hour, or two hours, after coming out of the bath.
And it is not necessary for someone to sleep after venesection.
¶ What is needed to be regulated in a patient before venesection or bloodletting.
And after it is necessary to consider first: if the patient who has undergone venesection or bloodletting is choleric, and sharpness and inflammation overcome his blood: then he should take cooling substances, such as pomegranate syrup: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and celery seed, and rue: and such like.
And place light foods for him, such as young meats and mutton soups, and dishes seasoned with herbs: and such like.
And for one whose complexion is cold, he should drink syrup made of honey, or almonds, or celery seed from seeds: and he should consume moderately aged wine, which is between old and new: and it should be prescribed that he use a small amount of food. And place light foods for him, such as young meats, and rabbit meat: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and young pigeons should be given to him.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of bloodletting and venesection be more than food; and it is necessary to give in the drink in certain people at times a compound called Tyriaca Alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is, nutmeg, or alexipharmic before venesection: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal limbs may be strengthened, and the blood made thinner. And it should not be taken in warm drink.
¶ On Venesection Without Scarification. Venesections that are without scarification are those that are applied above the epigastric region, spleen, and gout-afflicted areas, as well as on the abdomen, navel, and places near the kidneys: for these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
And they are sought after only to promote the flow of blood from one part of the body to another: as we place venesection above the breasts in cases of nasal bleeding. And we use them to remove cold and unctuous wind from one part of the body to another: as we place venesection on the abdomen and navel. For it rarefies the part, warms it, and removes pain because it resolves that wind.
It is also applied to the kidneys when there is an obstruction or stone in them. For by the power of its attraction, it may open an obstruction or remove a stone from its place.
And similarly when it is placed over a boil, and when the spleen must be rubbed in cases of flatulence in both.
And these for flatulence are given empty with cutting only. And at times they are administered with fire.
And at times they are administered full of warm water in cases of pleurisy: and this is so that the cupping vessel be filled with hot water alone, or water in which herbs that are appropriate have been boiled.
¶ Form of the cupping vessel used with fire.
Let the width of its opening be that of two spread fingers, as we have formed it: and let its depth be half a palm: and let there be a small hole on its side in the middle part, the size of which allows a needle to enter: it should be made of brass or amber with thick, smooth, even edges so as not to injure the limb when placed upon it: and let there be a transverse rod made of brass or iron in the middle where a candle with fire is placed.
And now this cupping vessel is made large, larger than what we have described, and slightly smaller according to the condition and age of the person who uses it.
For the cupping vessels for children and those who are thin are different from those used for men and those with larger bodies.
The method of placing this cupping vessel with fire upon a limb is to light a wick made of flax with fire, or a small candle made of tallow: and place it in the middle of the transverse rod that is in the center of the cupping vessel: so that the flame burns around the lower part of the cupping vessel, so as not to burn the body of the sick person.
Then place it on the limb: and let the finger be on the hole that I mentioned, until we feel the windy quality: while we need it, remove the finger, and vapor will come out through that hole, and the ventose will be immediately released.
Then heat the lead with fire according to its method, and repeat it if you need it.
In the ventosa that is administered for pleurisy with water, there is no transverse rod nor hole: and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and then it is placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And the larger this ventosa is, so that it can hold more water, the better it is.
Paragraph on the Suspension of Bloodletting Instruments.
Bloodletting instruments are not used in many areas unless it is necessary to place them on limbs where ventosas cannot be used due to their thinness, such as the lip, gums, and similar areas. Or on a part of the body where the flesh has been removed, such as a finger, nose, and similar areas.
And the quality of using them is as follows: use bloodletting instruments that are from leeches found in fresh, clean sweet waters, free from decay.
Then let them be placed in sweet water for a day and night until they are hungry, and there is nothing left in their stomachs. Then the body should be evacuated first with phlebotomy, and with enemas. Then cleanse the affected limb until it turns red. Then apply them to it.
When they are full and fall, and suction is possible with a vacuum device, then it is most beneficial for recovery; if not, then wash the area with vinegar. Then clean it with much water, and rub it, and press it.
If the flow of blood is prolonged after the use of a blood-sucking instrument and it continues to ooze: then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the oozing stops.
If the blood continues to increase, then sprinkle powdered toasted barley or vinegar, or similar astringents on it: until the bleeding stops.
Or apply split and peeled beans to the area, and leave them until the beans adhere to the site, for the blood will then stop.
And if it is necessary to repeat the use of blood-sucking instruments, when possible, they should be changed.
If the blood-sucking instruments are prevented from adhering, then cleanse the area with fresh blood. Or pierce the area with a needle until some blood comes out. Then apply the blood-sucking instruments again, for when they sense some blood, they will adhere immediately.
When you want them to fall off, sprinkle something ground from aloes, salt, or ashes on them; and they will fall off immediately.
This chapter is also frequently necessary in the art of Medicine, and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Know this, my sons, because foolish doctors and the common people speak about this chapter without knowledge, and they have neither examined any book of the ancients nor read a single word from it.
And for this reason, it happens that this method is unknown in our land. And I have never encountered anything good in it at all, and I have not acquired from it what I have acquired unless because of the length of reading ancient books and studying to understand them, until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then it adhered through experience and long study throughout my life.
And now I have described to you from it in this chapter all that my knowledge contains: and beyond which my experience has passed, after I have abridged it for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, and abridged it with the end of abbreviation, and shown it with the end of declination: and formed many shapes in it from the forms of instruments used in it, as it is by addition of declination, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary to say in the prologue of this chapter, the main points of the discourse and chapters, for whose understanding the craftsman must first be led to a station above their truth: that is, so that you and those who are quick may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say then that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall happens to someone: it is necessary to hasten first to bleed them and relax them, or both at once: if nothing prohibits it, such as weakness of strength: or the one who has happened something from those things is either a child or an old decrepit person: or it is a time of very hot heat, or extremely cold.
Then let them be content with their food, cold herbs, and the meat of birds and goats: and prohibit wine, and fatty meats, and foods that fill the veins with blood and any food that does so. Until you are secure from a hot abscess and do not fear the discharge of matter to the limb: then may the sick person return to their original regimen with which his habit ran.
When therefore a broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary for the sick person to eat nourishing foods with much nutrition, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as dishes made from boiled wheat with water, rice, heads and feet of cows, eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. With this regimen, the healing of the fracture occurs faster and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are at the beginning of old age and infirm, cannot be possible to heal and consolidate according to their nature always, because of the drying up of their limbs: and they heal and unite those among them which are in the end of softness, just as the bones of small children do.
However, nature attaches something similar to glue around the broken bone on all sides, which has a thickness by which it adheres and binds it together until they adhere to each other and bind to each other until they reach the end of strength and firmness as they were at first, until nothing prevents them from performing their functions: and for this reason it is necessary to give the sick person food that contains weightiness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly all other limbs exist differently from each other: and I come with the recollection of every type of fracture presented in its own chapter distinct from another. And the types of bone fractures also differ among themselves.
Because it happens that the fracture is arched, and besides splinters occur in it. And sometimes the fracture occurs along the length of the bone: and its fractures are splinters, that is, fragments, and protrusions proceeding as they are in a reed when it is prepared with a knife for writing. And do not proceed: and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head: and it is a small crack fracture.
And for every type there is an appropriate skill or tool for its restoration, which will be recalled as needed and described in their respective places.
And from this it is known that a bone fracture is characterized by its curvature and prominence: and its appearance to the senses, and the sound it makes when you press it with your hand.
When there is no apparent curvature in the place, and no sound when you touch it with some force, and the patient does not feel severe pain: then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there is a slight displacement or small crack. Therefore, do not move it at all with your hand and compression, rather apply medicines to it whose recall comes, after the moment that suits the place; then bind it tightly with fine bandages.
And know that when a place bends and splits into two parts, besides the pain that occurs in it, all of its part is separated from its counterpart: then you must start at your hour to correct it, equalizing it before a hot abscess happens to it.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs in it, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides. Then equalize it according to whatever method is possible from gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration and equalization of it is easier than that of a bone in which pain occurs.
Then tie it, as you will recall.
If there are splinters in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both sides, if it is a hand or foot; or with your hand, if the limb is small; or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand.
And your position should be such that you place the limb on an equal surface according to its natural shape until the parts of the broken member are extended: then try to return all additions with any ingenuity and in whatever manner you can to their proper places. And beware according to your strength, so that no pain or injury happens to the patient through your operation; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its partner in the better forms.
And at that hour, you must try and touch it with your hand. If you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the measure of your ability.
And beware of excessive extension and strong compression, as many foolish people do. For they often cause the formation of a hot abscess or a contraction in the limb through their operation, as we have already seen happen many times due to their actions.
Then attach after equalizing, and performing the appropriate operation, and securing that limb, and ensuring rest and calm: and instruct the patient about it. And make him cautious not to move it during his waking hours and in the turning of his sleep, and at his agitation, and at his defecation, and all his movements with utmost caution. And let him be careful, lest the position of the member be such as will cause pain. Which means that when he feels pain or injury in the position of a member, then it is necessary to change its position to one in which he does not feel pain.
And be careful when placing it so that its position is equal and straight, so that a curvature does not occur in the member when it is being restored.
And the quality of the binding of the fractured member is as I describe.
Know that fractured members differ in their delicacy, and in their size, and in their form.
Those among them that are small, such as the arm, and the finger, and the shinbone, and similar parts, then it is necessary for the wrapping of the cloth to be soft and fine. Those among them that are large, such as the thigh and the leg, it is necessary for their wrapping to be wide and firm.
Because a wide bandage connects a large member and binds it equally from all sides, such that it does not cause any spot to become damaged.
Then after your evacuation, begin by applying an appropriate ointment for it on soft lint over the place of the fracture. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the place of the fracture with three or four layers, depending on what the member deserves: and press it gently with your hand while binding.
Then proceed with it to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and bind less tightly than you did when binding the fractured area. Then move away slightly from the site of the fracture with involution, and gradually soften the constriction until you can grasp something large from the healthy part.
Then take another piece of cloth and wrap it again over the fractured area with involutions. Then proceed with the wrapping to the lower part below the fracture. And let your procedure be in the constriction of the wrapping, and its softening, as we said regarding the first upper wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings some soft cotton or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture if there is a curvature; and if not, do not place anything in it.
Then wrap another piece of cloth over it. Then immediately place strips of wood evenly over these wrappings, if there is no swelling or warm abscess in the area.
If there is swelling or an abscess in the area, then place something on it that will support the abscess and reduce the swelling: and leave it for several days. Then bind the strips of wood securely over it.
And let the strips be made from the middle parts of reeds that are wide, smooth, and cleverly shaped; or they can be made from wood used to make sieves, which are made from pine, or geraid, which means palm branches, or calingi: and the size of all the strips should be according to this form and this same shape.
However, the strip that is placed directly over the traction should be slightly thicker and wider than the other strips: and the length of the strip should be according to the size and condition of the limb.
Then tie above the splint with another strip of cloth according to the same tightness as the first. Then bind from above with threads properly, as we said regarding the tightness: and it should be such that your bandaging is tighter over the site of the fracture; and the further it extends away from the fracture, the looser it should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who use twisted linen cords for their threads, it is a great mistake: for such bandaging falls outside the proper quality.
And very fine threads also do not suit: for you will not achieve with them the effect that you desire through bandaging.
And it should not be less than the width of a finger between one splint and another.
If the patient is injured by the edges of the splints after bandaging in healthy areas: then place soft cotton or carded wool beneath them until no further injury occurs.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and the skin is torn, I will address this with reference to the specifics in the second chapter.
And you should know that not every fractured limb needs to be bound with splints from the first day. This means that when a limb is large, you should not place splints on it until after five days, or seven, or more, depending on your safety from the risk of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures and dislocations.
Method of a common abbreviated plaster for restoring fractures, suitable for various complexions, especially for women and children: because it is such that neither heat nor cold prevails over it.
And it is such that you should take flour dust, which is the fine part of the flour that hangs on the walls of the mill due to the motion of the millstone: and mix it as it is, except that you should sieve it with egg white: and prepare the mixture not too thick, nor too thin. Then use it.
Method of another plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists. Take amber, laudanum, acacia, heliotrope, and mastic; and the juice of all these, each ounce X. Take also myrrh and aloes of both kinds, each ounce V, and alethiolum XX. All of these should be pounded, sieved, and mixed with alethiolic water: or with egg white if the patient's constitution is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, quickly restores broken bones, and suits many people.
Method of another plaster that is also suitable for fractures and twists. Take mastic, pitch, and white wax; of each ounce X. Take myrrh and aloes of both kinds, each ounce V, acacia ounce VI, Armenian bole XX. All of these should be thoroughly powdered, sieved, and mixed with water or egg white: and administer it.
Method of Plaster for Joints and Bones Displaced from Their Proper Places: And to Alleviate the Pain Occurring Therefrom, and to Treat a Fracture or Crack in the Bone. Take fresh wool and immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil: then apply it to the affected area.
And this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly alleviates pain.
Method of Plaster That Restores a Fractured Bone. Take the leaves of the deaf fig tree and the leaves of the wild poppy: then crush all of them and make a plaster from both.
Method of Applying a Plaster for the Reduction and Treatment of a Fractured Bone: And When You Wish to Resolve Remaining Abscesses. Take one part each of the root of licorice, chamomile, flowers of violets, and herb flour: crush all ingredients and mix them with wine, if the affected limb is not heated.
But if the limb is heated, then mix it with water of wet coriander or with water and use it.
Method of a Stronger Plaster for Resolving Hard Abscesses During the Restoration of a Member, Compared to the First One. Take one part each of the root of licorice, flax seeds, bourgaeantine (crimson soapwort), honey locust, mustard, flowers of violets, and chamomile: crush all ingredients and mix them with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. Follow it according to the warmth of the member and the stillness of its heat.
However, Hippocrates did not say in his book that anything else should be placed on a fractured limb during its restoration except for a preparation made of wax and oil; nothing more. He described it as being between thickness and subtlety.
Galen, however, thought that substances with drying heat should be applied to a fractured limb during its restoration, such as myrrh, aloes, and frankincense, and similar ones from those we have mentioned.
Method of preparing an emplaster that is beneficial for injury and pain. Take equal parts of mugwort, chickpeas, human hair cuttings, bird feather, pitch, and salt: mix them together, grind them, sift them, and prepare an emplaster from them.
The amount needed for the bandage to remain in place and then be removed is such that you should consider whether pain, itching, or movement of the fractured bone from its position does not occur. If none of these happen, do not remove it for many days. If he experiences severe itching, troublesome pain, or swelling in the affected area, then hurry and remove it immediately, and take off the emplaster from him. Take a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge moistened with warm water, and apply it to the area until the itching subsides and the pain is alleviated.
If he experiences severe itching, troublesome pain, or swelling in the affected area, then hurry and remove it immediately, and take off the emplaster from him. Take a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge moistened with warm water, and apply it to the area until the itching subsides and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then apply a layer of wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or scented oil, over it. Bind it for one night until you are sure there is no hot abscess, the swelling has subsided, and the pain has been alleviated.
Then apply it again to a fine ligature and a small poultice: and do not bind it with your first ligature or fine bandages until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling, and all other symptoms have completely disappeared, and if you need to apply a poultice and bandage, then apply it again as you did initially, evenly.
If nothing happens to the limb from what we have said, then do not remove it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is dismissed after twenty days, according to what appears to you from the removal of the limb, as we have said, until the bone adheres and the flesh coagulates over it: then add to the bandage more than your first entire binding: and also increase in the swelling of the patient's food, according to how it was previously mentioned.
If you see that the area of the fracture is drying out and becoming thinner than it should: then know that nutrition is prevented from reaching it. Spray it with warm water each time you remove the bandage, and do this for three days in total, and temporarily loosen the binding.
Through this procedure, nutrition flows to the limb, and it heals quickly.
What foolish healers do when a limb fracture does not restore properly at first and instead restores with curvature, is an error in their treatment and causes great fear: and if it were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it.
And I have not seen any trace of that among them at all, and it is better that it should not be done.
Concerning the treatment of accidents involving the head.
The types of fractures are diverse, and their shapes are many: and the causes of them are distinct.
For there is a fracture that occurs from being struck with a sword: and the blow removes the bone entirely down to where it reaches the siphac, which is beneath the bone, just as an ax does in wood: and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or the sword strikes some part of the bone and cuts its surface, but the cut does not penetrate to the very end of it: and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Absolute Deformation.
And it is an injury of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is a comminuted or crushed break: and the cause of it is being struck with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar circumstances.
And this fracture can also be penetrating, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it can be on the surface of the bone: and the injury of these two fractures can also be either small or large.
And there is a fracture that is hidden within the bone with subtlety of a hair: and it is a small crack, and because of this, this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And among them is a fracture that occurs from a fall or being struck by a stone, and similar incidents, which cause a layer of bone to enter the inner part, resulting in a concavity: just as it happens with tinsmiths when they are struck, causing a part of their body to be affected internally.
And indeed this happens most often in the heads of soft bones, such as the heads of infants.
And these various types of fractures and dislocations are treated separately, and I will provide permission to recall the entire treatment of each in its appropriate place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures through examination on them, and by investigating them with probes, and by removing the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hairline fracture is recognized by this: it is uncovered on the bone, and cleaned, and coated with pitch; for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the symptoms of the patient: if you see from the symptoms that they indicate severe danger, such as vomiting like cholera, cramps, loss of consciousness, hoarseness, fainting, acute fever, protrusion of the eyes, redness of them, and similar frightening symptoms in various conditions, there is no doubt that it cannot be cured: but if you see non-threatening symptoms and hope for recovery, then begin its treatment.
When a person comes to you wounded for the first time and this occurs during the winter days, then it is necessary that you strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day according to every condition.
And if it is during the summer days, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the skin near the bone becomes corrupted, and those symptoms we have mentioned occur.
If a fracture of the bone has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and it is accompanied by minute fragments and adhesion: then you must cut away the broken and adhered parts, as I tell you.
And you should shave the head of the wounded person: and uncover above the wound in whatever way is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the sick person.
If it happens to you when detecting the bone that there is a flow of blood or a hot abscess, then apply what is necessary against it. And you should fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest until the abscess subsides, and be secure from the flow of blood. Then begin with the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a sharp knife: and this is its form.
Then administer another knife slightly wider after the cutting knives: and this is its form.
Then administer another knife even wider than the second one.
And the second method is to have a set of different cutting knives: some wider than others, and some shorter than others: and they should be extremely sharp at their tips, and made of pure iron or steel: and use ease in striking above the knife so that it does not jolt the head and injure it.
If the bone is hard and strong: then it is necessary to drill around it before you administer the knives, with drills called non-profound drills: and they are not named thus unless because they do not penetrate beyond the flesh-covered part of the bone to what lies behind it: for this reason, the tip of the drill is rounded above its sharp head, similar to an edge margin, and a small circle prevents sinking into and penetrating the density of the bone.
And it is appropriate for you to take from these Trepanning Instruments a great number, each of which should be suitable in size to the thickness of the bone, until an Instrument is available for every part of the skull: the sharp end of which in length and breadth should correspond to the thickness of that particular part of the skull.
And this is the form of three types of Trepanning Instruments, or Trephines.
The quality of drilling around a fractured bone is as follows: place the Trepan on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then move the Trepan to another place and ensure that between all the holes there is a distance equal to the thickness of the bone, or something close to it.
Then cut with the chisels what is between each hole from the bone: and make it as fine as possible around the edges, as we have said, until you reach the roots of the bone, either by hand or with some other instrument you have prepared for this purpose: such as forceps and fine pincers.
And it is necessary that you be extremely careful that the Trepan or any chisel does not touch anything from the brain.
When you have thus drilled around the bone and separated it from the brain, if it was connected to it continuously, and after removing it, you must smooth and even the edges that remain in the skull with another instrument similar to a chisel. However, it is necessary that this instrument be finer and more delicate than other chisels.
If anything of small bones remains and causes trouble: then remove it with ease, using what you have among your instruments. Then treat the wound afterwards with lint and ointments as we have described.
And there is another method of operation that is easy and entirely free from fear, which Galen described and praised highly. This is his saying. You must begin by uncovering the part of the bone at the place where the fracture is more severe and obvious, until you have exposed that part and placed under it the tip of this lens-shaped incisor, which has this shape.
And the lens-shaped part does not cut anything harshly: and its sharp edge running along both sides, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part is attached to the bone with its sharp edge facing into the bone.
Then strike above the Incisorium from one side with a small hammer until you cut through all the bone easily, as it turns: and be confident about the flap, that nothing will happen to it which you fear entirely.
And if the surgeon were not the most foolish of men and more ignorant of it, and were not sleeping, then if anything attached to the bone from the flap remained in certain places, he would cut it away from it with the lens-shaped tip of his incisor and free it from it easily. It is freed from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the flap, and what is cut away from the bone is its surface, and there remain subtle roughness and irritation in it: then you must rasp that roughness and remove those irritations with fine razors of various sizes that you have prepared, so that you can apply the most suitable ones for each place according to what leads you in your work, and concerning the fractured bone and its shape. And you must act according to your reason, first shaving the roots of the teeth more widely with those razors. Then use one that is finer after it.
And you must act according to your reason, first shaving the roots of the teeth more widely with those razors. Then use one that is finer after it. And do not stop doing this continuously until you reach the point of using the finest and most subtle of them all.
In each of the remaining small cracks and fine fractures, you must provide care according to what leads to its correction.
And this is a matter that is not hidden from anyone who has any interest in this art, and it stands above what we have written and shown concerning major fractures.
But if the flap of skin that is raised is retained when you extract the tooth: then you must take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of linen, doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece: and apply it as gently as possible on top of it so that it does not press down too heavily.
Then apply a wide bandage over it: and do not bind it tightly except to the extent that it holds the wound: and leave it with this care for one day or two days, until you are sure there is no hot abscess. Then remove it and apply medicines that relieve dryness afterward: such as the roots of lilies, flour of herbs, powdered frankincense, aristolochia, and similar substances: and you should make a powder from these medicines, which should be sprinkled on the wound as if they were dry.
And universally administer there all medicine which is for the purpose of cleansing, and not biting. And be careful according to your ability, so that the wound in your care is clean: there should be no dirt from ointment nor filth in it.
And be careful according to your ability, so that the wound in your care is clean: there should be no dirt from ointment nor filth in it. Do not allow pus to collect there at all: for when pus collects on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and putrefies it, and thereafter a great evil befalls the patient: and it leads to siphace of the head, when the mouth becomes cleansed from it, especially when its care is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if the conditions we have mentioned occur in the patient, you should know that it is certainly dangerous.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is applied to him, and this medicine has the power to cause that blackness: then you should take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and use them to moisten a cloth. Then place it on the siphace: afterwards care for it with appropriate treatments until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of the Nose when it is broken.
Know that only the two upper parts of the nose are broken simultaneously, or one of them: because they are two bones: since the lower part of it is cartilaginous, it does not break, and it suffers only wear, and twisting, and deformation.
If one of the two parts is fractured, then you must insert your little finger into the nasal aperture and align that fracture with your index finger and thumb from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this with skill and ease. And be careful that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must align it with the edge of a rod that has a small thickness.
If the fracture is in both parts, then do the same as described and hurry with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day when the inflammation has subsided.
Then insert into the end of the nose a linen strip from a linen cloth if the fracture is in one part; or insert two linen strips if the fracture is in both parts: and let the thickness of the linen be such that it fills the nasal aperture.
And some of the ancient restorers said that the linen strips should be infused in butter and changed every day. That does not seem right to me; rather, it is necessary that the linen strip be infused in egg white mixed with powdered flour. Then leave the linen strip in place until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of the linen strip, after wrapping it in soft cloth: and this holds the nasal fracture more firmly and allows the patient to breathe without obstruction.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do it: and if you wish, do it with permission.
If it happens that the nose becomes inflamed again while you are treating an abscess, apply plasters to the nose made with pitch, or infused sumac in rose oil, or a little myrrh.
But if an abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to apply plasters to it made with sesamum flour, and a mixture of prepared frankincense powder with egg white. Then place a soft lint pad on it, and do not bandage the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are fractured by a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary to cut them open and remove them with instruments that are suitable for them. Then sew the wound, and treat it with something that promotes flesh growth, and consolidate it with plasters suitable for it, or ointments.
If it happens that there is a wound between the nostrils, then it is necessary to treat it with permissions: and administer a lead tube until it heals.
Of the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken, and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and it does not break into two pieces, but curves inward: then diagnosing it is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient: similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger: and gently push the swelling of the fracture from inside to the outside with one hand while you support the inner part of the bone appropriately with the other.
If the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then you must administer traction from both sides, along the straightness, until it is possible to align it.
But if movement or disruption has already occurred among the teeth: then bind those that you hope will remain with gold thread, silver thread, or silk. Then place pieces of wax over the fractured jaw. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and put a properly made large bandage over the cloth: or an equal piece of leather sole, as long as the jaw.
Then bind it securely according to the preparation of its bandage, and keep it in place until it is no longer necessary: and instruct the patient to remain calm and at rest: and give the patient soft absorbent foods to eat.
If you consider that something has already changed in its form by one of these methods: then hurry and remove it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and apply a poultice made of ground flour, with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the dressings: and place soft wool over the poultace.
While the poultice remains attached to it and the bone's position has not changed, leave it as is without removing it until it heals: or secure the fracture. Indeed, this fracture is often secured for three weeks.
If during this time a hot abscess occurs, then apply what we have mentioned multiple times for its reduction, until the abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider it carefully. If a fragment has already separated from the bone or from the surrounding tissue: then be careful about this, and remove those fragments of tissue with what is suitable for you to use among the instruments.
If the opening of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a phlebotomist's tool according to the extent needed.
Then when you have removed those fragments of tissue and nothing remains from them, or if the opening of the wound is large: and if not, apply a poultice suitable for it that promotes healing, until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of the Clavicle, when it is fractured.
The furca (shoulder blade) is often fractured from its anterior part towards the shoulder, and such a fracture occurs in one of three ways.
It may be fractured and separated into two parts, along with some movement; this type is easier to restore.
Or it may occur with movement in the bone, making restoration more difficult.
Or it may be a fracture accompanied by a wound.
And when the fracture is without a wound, the procedure is to have two assistants present: one to hold the unaffected shoulder for support, and the other to extend the neck towards the affected side.
Then shape the fracture with your fingers until it is in the correct form, ensuring there are no protrusions or concavities.
If you need more extension, place a ball made of cloth or wool under the armpit of the injured side, with its size according to your needs: then extend and elevate the shoulder blade, and compress the ball with your hand until the fracture is properly aligned as required.
If you cannot pull the extremity of the shoulder blade towards the outside because it reaches deep inside, then have the patient lie supine on their neck, and place a medium-sized cushion under their armpit. The assistant should press down on the shoulder until the end of the shoulder blade that is deep inside is elevated upwards. Then correct the fracture and align it with your fingers as required.
If you feel a splinter from a fork and it moves: then you must cut above it, and extract the splinter with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then use your skill in cutting it with one of the cutters you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the fork an instrument that protects the skin: and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon that does not have a concavity.
And its width should be according to what you need based on the size of the bone, and its suitability for that purpose. The length of it should also be as much as possible for you to operate effectively.
And it should have two ends, as you see: one end wide and the other narrow.
If the wound you opened when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide and you are concerned about a warm abscess: then bring together the two sides of the wound with stitches.
And if the wound is small, or you fear a warm abscess: then fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the size of the wound's opening.
If an abscess does occur, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on the wound.
However, when the bone is constricted without a wound and without a cut, you should place a plaster made from flour of the mill mixed with egg whites on it. And place a soft bandage upon it. Then place a sphere under its tilt lever, if you need it. Then take a himematem, that is, the wheel used by Saracens, which should be very long: and its width should be one palm, or about it. Then place a double poultice on the bandage and plaster. Then take a thin blade from a fine board, whose width is three fingers, and its length should be similar. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the blade in the place where the himematem falls over the fracture and the area around it. Then place the himematem over the fracture as it was wrapped, and wrap it around its neck, and under the healthy tilt lever, and under the injured tilt lever: and bring it back over all parts, and ensure that the bandaging holds the fracture tightly in a proper manner: and this is not hidden from you, and everything should be done so that the blade does not move off the broken bone. And for this reason, it is necessary to look after the patient every day. Whenever the bandage becomes loose and you see that the blade is moving: then correct it, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the patient's pillow on their back, and put a small cushion under their tilt lever near the pillow at night, so that when they turn, it provides support from their side. Therefore, raise the collarbone fracture by elevating the shoulder.
Or bind the arm to the neck: and do not loosen the bandage unless it happens that something occurs due to itching or an abscess, until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the plaster if you see that it needs it. And add to the bandage, and leave it as is until it restores and coagulates.
And indeed, a collarbone fracture is bound and strengthened for the most part in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some people in fewer days.
Concerning the restoration of a spoon-shaped fracture.
The spoon-shaped bone is rarely fractured, and it fractures in the broad part of it: and only its edges are fractured from it.
When it is fractured from that part, and it fractures in the middle, and it cannot be recognized except by touch: then according to the shape of the fracture, attempt its preparation. And reduce it to its natural shape in any way that is possible for you.
Then place on the area powdered bran with egg whites, and a soft bandage, and put a powder from doubled cloth over it. Then place on it a broad splint from a thin board according to the length of the entire spoon-shaped bone, or slightly larger than it.
If there is a concavity under the spoon in any part of the spatulas, then fill that concavity evenly with soft cotton wool until the spoon descends to the level of evenness.
Then bind it from above with linen strips of appropriate length, with suitable compression and firmness of the spoon, until it cannot be moved from its place.
And examine the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage becomes loose, tighten it, and if the spoon has moved from its place, replace it to level; and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the bandage: and you may be at ease. For these are from bones whose union is not feared, nor their separation.
If a fragment of bone protrudes and irritates the skin, then cut above it and remove it. And do as we have said for the treatment of a collarbone fracture due to inflammation with warm applications, if anything should happen from it.
Concerning the restoration of a Fracture of the Chest.
The chest is sometimes fractured in the middle, and this rarely occurs. However, the extremities of it are fractured and crushed more often due to accidents.
When its middle part is fractured and it inclines towards the lower parts, and there is severe pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is evident in the broken bone, and it does not escape his perception: The restoration of this condition is that the patient should lie supine on his back: and place a cushion between the spatulas.
Then press his shoulders, and bring together the ribs from both sides with your hands: and refine in equalizing it, according to every way possible for that and is suitable, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
Then place on top of him a plaster and linen strips, and place above a board from willow or hazel, or similar light materials, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then carefully secure it over the broken bone so that it does not move: and proceed with the bandaging according to the curvature around the back several times, and tighten it appropriately.
Then check the bandaging at every hour, and whenever it loosens, tighten it: and if his condition necessitates removing it due to itching, or corrosion that occurs in the area, or pain, or abscess: then hurry and remove it, and remove the plaster, and correct what has happened according to the method of treatment.
Then apply the plaster again if you see that it is necessary: and attach bandaging to it until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in the thick parts which follow the back, and from their extremities from the anterior part. And wear does not occur to them except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses during examination with fingers.
And the restoration of it is such that you should equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible manner until the figure is even as required. Then apply plasters and bind the fractured bone with a splint if it requires one.
And if the fracture of the ribs is displaced towards the interior: then it causes the patient severe pain and piercing sensation, like that which occurs to one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and it also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have devised many devices for this: and among them are those who say that you should give the patient foods that generate inflammation and gas, so that the belly becomes inflamed, expands, and pushes the fracture outward.
We, however, avoid it so that it does not become a cause for quickly forming a hot abscess, if one has not already occurred. If, however, it has already occurred, then he adds to the treatment.
And some of them said: apply cups to the affected area, then draw them strongly, and this reasoning is similar. However, it is feared that the suction cups will attract excess humors to the place due to the condition of weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary to cover the area with wool that has already been submerged in warm oil: and place little pieces between the ribs until it is full: so that the wrapping is even when you wrap it according to its roundness.
Then the patient should be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the patient is constricted by something violent that they cannot tolerate, and the cloth stings with a painful puncture, and we fear for the patient: then it is necessary to cut open the area and expose the fractured rib. Then place the instrument that preserves the surface, which was mentioned earlier: and cut the skin with ease, and proceed to do so.
Then bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches: and treat it with plasters until it heals.
If a hot abscess occurs meanwhile, then hurry and infuse little pieces in rose oil, and place it on the area: and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess.
In the meantime, let them lie on their side on which they sleep, until they heal.
¶ On the restoration of a fracture of the spine in the back and neck.
Fractures can occur in the neck vertebrae at times, and wear (attrition) rarely affects them as well: and similarly with the spine vertebrae of the back. When therefore it happens to someone, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then consider. For if you see his hands already softened, and numb, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them: and when you press them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and in most cases it is fatal.
If he can move them and feels the pressure of the fingers and the pricking: then know that the spinal bone is safe, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
If it happens that the vertebrae of the back are affected similarly, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then consider his feet. If you see that they have softened, and what has happened in the hands also occurs in them: then when he lies on his back, flatulence and evacuation occur without will: and when he is laid on his belly, evacuation occurs without will: and when he lies on his back again and wishes to urinate but cannot: then know that it is fatal. Do not therefore labor in treating him.
If however nothing of that happens to him, the condition is less serious.
And the treatment for what happens from that is to attempt to reduce the inflammation with warm applications: thus, place rubbed rose oil alone on the vertebra: or use eggs of roasted chicken.
Apply that several times a day until the warm poultice reduces the inflammation: then apply one of the binding, drying plasters to the area, and wrap it with a bandage: and instruct the patient to use rest and calm. Nor should he sleep upon the part with which he finds pain until it is healed.
If this happens during the abrasion of a sutured bone or something that has become detached from it, then it is necessary to cut above the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches. Then treat it with something flesh-forming, from ointments, until it is healed.
If the last bone of the tail is broken and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert the thumb into the anus and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, and stabilize it in this position.
Then place something on it and remove it: and treat the wound with the previous method of treatment until it is healed.
### On the Restoration of the Anus.
Chapter XI.
The bones of the anus are rarely broken. If they are broken, then their fracture is not complete but rather a comminution at the extremities: and they split along their length and incline inward: and the patient experiences pain in the area, and there is puncturing: and the leg that is fractured becomes numb.
And the restoration of it is such that you should extend your hand upon it, until you stand above the fracture to understand its shape.
If the fracture is only at the extremities, then align that fracture as best you can according to what is prepared for you from alignment, until it resembles its natural shape.
If there is a fracture along the length or it has already shifted inward: then have the patient lie on their belly until you prepare the restoration of that fracture. When you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it; then place a splint made of wood or leather over it, and secure it with bandages in such a way that there is no risk of the fracture shifting or the splint moving.
And ensure that the concave area is filled so that the bandaging follows its evenness; and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If a hot abscess occurs, then stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess subsides; place on it what is necessary for its settling, as previously mentioned, and then return to restoring it: and bandage it as needed.
If there is pain or comminution in the bone, then extract it.
On the Restoration of Fractures: Auxiliary Methods.
Auxiliary support is that which is between the elbow and the handle of the spatula.
If it is fractured, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of these methods is to take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, in the shape described below.
And two straps should be tied at both ends.
Then let it be suspended from a raised place: and let the patient sit upon the seat. Then let him throw his broken arm over the wood until it reaches its splint, to which the curved part of the wood is attached in the middle.
Then hang something heavy above it so that the attendant can pull it downward from below. Then let the physician equalize the fracture with his hands simultaneously until the bone returns to its proper position.
And another method is to have the patient lie supine on his neck: and suspend his arm from his neck with a ligament. Then instruct two attendants, one of whom should hold that which is above the fracture with his hands: and let the other hold below it, and let each of them pull on their respective sides.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with one ligament, and above it with another ligament: and let each of the two attendants pull on their respective parts.
If the fracture is near the end of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place one ligament below the splint, and another below the fracture toward the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary to place a ligament above that place, and above the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without labor, until the fracture is properly aligned and applied with good dressing: then bind it, if a hot abscess does not occur.
If a hot abscess occurs, then postpone the incision until the seventh day. And place on it a wool cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides; then apply compression. The method of compressing is to apply a plaster over the area.
Then place a bandage made of new cloth over the plaster. Then raise the arm with assistance and place the hand open on the shoulder.
And place a cloth and apply compression to the arm with assistance, so that the arm remains in place: if nothing prohibits you from doing this, and nothing changes regarding the fractured bone.
But if you fear that something may change regarding the fractured bone, then use a splint: and it should be such that you place on the fracture a splint that is wider and stronger than other splints. And place the width of a finger between each splint: and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture, with an additional three fingers on all sides.
Then apply compression over the splints as I described at the beginning of the chapter.
And it should be such that your compression is tighter over the location of the fracture. And the more the fracture extends, the less should be the compression.
If you see the placement of the splints and compression as we have described, immediately when you restore the limb, then proceed: and if you fear a hot abscess, then postpone the compression and splints until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then examine the bandage on all three days to ensure that itching does not occur at any point, nor swelling, nor is food prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness. Therefore, correct that according to what we have said.
If you are confident that nothing will happen because of it, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their hands on their stomach, and place a filled mattress evenly padded with wool under them for support.
And check at all times during the night or day to ensure that the shape of the broken limb does not change and that the bandage does not become loose. Therefore, correct all of that with your skill.
And provide food for the patient according to the order we have provided, so that at first the food should be light and easy to digest, until their appetite begins to strengthen; then it is necessary to gradually increase the substance of their food.
It is customary for the support and leg to be bound for forty days: then it should be loosened, and a bath should be administered, and it should be treated with ointments that heal it.
If the fracture is dirty and worn, then do not remove the bandage and splint from it until fifty days have passed, and for two months.
Concerning the restoration of a fractured Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two humeri.
One of them is small: and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is positioned below the small one at the lower part.
Perhaps the larger bone is fractured alone, or the smaller one: and perhaps both are fractured simultaneously.
When the smaller bone is fractured above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the bone is fractured below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are fractured simultaneously.
If the bone that is fractured is the smaller one above, then it is appropriate for the physician, in restoring it, to apply a small extension with ease until it is even.
If it is the larger bone that is fractured: then it is necessary to apply a much stronger binding.
And it is necessary to place the hand in a position that facilitates its restoration, and to extend its bandaging over the pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers towards the upper part: and let the lower joint be higher than all the fingers or others: and the patient sitting straight should have the pillow before them, or directly in front, at a height, so that the patient does not incur labor.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from the lower part, either with their hand or with a bandage. And another assistant extend it similarly from above.
Then the doctor should equalize the mouth until he brings it back to the best possible shape.
If there are efforts to move in a bone fracture, then try to return all the fragments to their proper place using your strength.
But if a detached fragment appears and pierces the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it: then cut above it, and remove it according to the method we mentioned in the preceding instructions.
But if there is a fracture with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter for that, so take the treatment from there.
If an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration process, then line a cloth made with cerotum from rose oil and use a white bandage that is neither too thick nor too thin. Apply the cloth on it tightly until the abscess subsides. Then remove the cerotum and apply a plaster prepared from flour powder mixed with egg whites. Then apply a splint, and let the splint placed over the fracture be somewhat wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones at once.
Then place your bandage more firmly and forcefully over the site of the fracture, and extend it somewhat more above or below the fracture with the bandaging. Or place a softer bandage slightly less tightly, according to what was mentioned earlier at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that wrap around the fracture be soft, moist: and not hard, rough. And let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, medium between fine and coarse, as we have described.
And examine the limb and ligament after several days. If something occurs that requires correction, such as itching in the limb: then it is necessary to wash the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and leave the limb unbound until it calms down, then reapply the binding.
If the binding has already been loosened, and the bone has moved away, and similar conditions: then correct it with your skill, and examine again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, then it is necessary to loosen it slightly and leave it for several days until the nourishment can reach it, then bind it again.
But if none of the issues we mentioned occur to the patient, then it is not necessary to remove the binding until after twenty days or thereabouts.
Then suspend the sick person's hand to their neck. And let their neck be straight, and guard it with your skill from agitated movements. And have him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and it may be restored in eighteen days. All of that is according to the arrangements of temperaments, and the arrangements of virtue.
§ On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand.
Know that fractures of the metacarpal bones and the joints of the fingers rarely occur. And it does not happen to them unless there is repeated wear and tear.
When a fracture or wear of the foot occurs, then it is necessary for the patient to sit squarely, and for there to be a seat prepared beside him at an equal distance. Then place his hand upon it, extended.
Then the assistant should extend the fractured bones, and the physician should adjust them until they are properly joined together.
Then it is necessary to apply plaster and linen, unless a hot abscess occurs. Then place a splint on top according to the size of the area: and now wrap it in linen cloth.
但如果骨折靠近脚掌的下部，大约在脚底的位置，那么要做一个类似球形的包裹物，用布料制成：然后指示病人将受伤的脚掌紧压在其上，之后用长布条包扎固定。
而且要用皮革制成夹板，皮革要柔软，以便与脚掌的肌肤贴合：然后根据需要将其绑紧。
但如果骨折位于外侧，那么需要：在上方放置一根夹板，在下方脚掌处再放一根夹板：手应保持开放且伸直。 Then apply compression, as the hand is turned: and extend between the fingers with a ligament.
If it happens that one of the joints of the fingers is fractured, then if it is the thumb, it should be set as necessary. Then bind it to the sole: and if there is swelling, place a small, straight splint on it, so that the fracture can be raised and not moved.
If the fracture is in other fingers, such as the middle, index, or ring finger, then it should be set and bound to the adjacent healthy finger. Alternatively, all of them can be bound together according to their alignment, which is better. Or place a small splint on it, as we said for the thumb.
And consider during your restoration and after the disposal of the abscess that it has caused: and oppose with what is necessary when something happens from it, according to how its narrative continues.
Regarding the restoration of a fractured hip.
The hip bone is often fractured and its condition becomes apparent because it turns towards the inner and posterior part.
And the restoration is done by binding one ligature above the fracture and another below the fracture. And the patient should lie face down.
Then the attendant should stretch all the ligatures to the patient's affected side according to equality: and this is done when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If there is a fracture near the root of the hip bone, then the ligament should be attached to the part of the pubis, so that the extension falls upward: and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if there is a fracture near the knee, then the ligament should be attached near the knee, so that the extension goes downward.
Then the doctor should align the bone with both hands until he restores it to its natural shape: and the bone should be joined properly.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. If an abscess occurs in it: then leave it for several days until the abscess softens and becomes warm, then return to your treatment.
The bandaging of it should be as follows. You should wrap a hard bandage, that is, linen cloth, over the fracture: and fold it twice or three times: and leave some excess. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the base of the toes.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee to below, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of two parts. Then wrap the remaining excess bandage around the leg and hip.
Then place metal plates on the hip at the location of the fracture, and place one of them above the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be equalized.
Then begin with a strong constriction from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four applications. And the farther you extend with the bandage from the site of the fracture, the less severe and softer should your constriction be.
Then proceed to the two ends of the bandage that you have placed between the thigh and the leg. Therefore, tie three splints with each of them that are above. Then proceed with the two ends of the bandage to the lower parts until you reach the ankle. And with each of them, tie the ends of the splints from the other side: so that the bandage does not move from its place.
Then leave the bandage on it as long as necessary, in such a way that corrosion, abscess, swelling, and similar conditions do not occur to the limb. If anything should happen from that. Hurry with the removal of it, and correct what has happened from that entirely, as we have said many times.
But if there is a fragment of bone that protrudes and causes pain: then it is necessary to even it out, if it is possible for you. And if not, place something over it and remove it: and treat with that which has preceded the care, until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is compressed, besides which stakes are added to it, as we said regarding assistance and the arm.
However, when restoring such a fracture, it does not result in the patient having a limp. And if it is restored alone, besides applying the other leg to it, then it is necessary that he whose fracture this is will always limp.
And you should know that the hip is compressed for fifty days, or a few more, or a few less: all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions.
Concerning the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap rarely occurs, but wear and tear affects it very often.
But if a fracture does occur to the kneecap, then it is either a crack or a hole in its parts. And this can occur with an injury and without an injury. And it is treated entirely with awareness of the sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what has been disrupted from its parts is made equal with the fingers, until it comes together and is joined as much as possible by equality, ease, and fabrication.
Then apply a plaster made from sesame flour or mill flour with egg white: and place a round stake on it if necessary: and compress it appropriately with bandages suitable for that.
Then consider all the conditions we have described in other fractures: just as you would treat a hot abscess and similar conditions; so should you oppose every occurrence with what is appropriate to it until healing takes place.
§ On the Restoration of a Fractured Leg.
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and is called the shinbone (Cruris), and the other is slender and is called the Fibula.
Both of these bones can be affected by fractures similar to those that affect the two bones of the arm: and for this reason, their restoration is done in a manner similar to that of the arm, and the procedure is the same.
If both bones break at the same time, the leg can be positioned in any direction due to the loss of structural integrity.
And if the finer bone is fractured, the leg turns toward the front side.
And if the thicker bone is fractured, you will find it below: and this is one of those that are not hidden from your observation.
Then administer the extension, equalization, and binding of the bones in the same manner.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a severe one, accompanied by much bruising, the extension should be smaller and gentler due to your careful management.
And in the treatment of the leg, there is something similar to the treatment of the arm: it is when you equalize the bones and complete all your work, then take two strips from pine wood, which are used in making window frames and should be about the width of a palm: choose those that have a moderate thickness and are not too thin: and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee to below.
Then wrap each piece of cloth with two folds along its length. And place one part of the leg from one side, and the other part from the opposite side: and they should extend from the knee to below the foot.
Then bind two bandages at three places from both extremities and the middle. For when compression is prohibited, the leg turns to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now a cradle made of wood according to the length of the leg should be provided, and place the leg in it so that it preserves it from movement.
And most importantly, you should do this in a fracture when there is a wound proper with it.
Then examine the leg every day and be careful to guard it with utmost diligence from abscess, swelling, or other such conditions. If anything from those conditions occurs, then oppose it with what is necessary until it is healed, if God wills it.
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
A complete fracture of the heel does not commonly occur.
Fractures do occur in the bones of the foot sometimes, and fractures also occasionally occur in the toes: but they rarely happen to them except as wear and tear in many circumstances.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones elevate themselves out of place, then the patient should place his foot on prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand, and place your foot on that which protrudes from those bones; afterward press it or step on it: and even it out until it returns to its proper places.
Then apply a plaster and a bandage on top; and place a small board under the arch of the foot, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it with the foot in a suitable compression after you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials it requires.
When three or four days have passed, then remove the bandage. For you will find the bones aligned, whether they were fractured or dislocated. The procedure for them is as you see.
If any of the fingers are fractured, then restore them and align them as I have described to you for the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on your finger along its length, and let it be slightly wider than the finger; then place under the foot the board I described to you, and bind it with suitable compression.
If what is fractured among the bones is two, or three, or more, then place a splint of appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth on each finger; and bind the board below the foot: and let it rest on one end of the board outside the arch of the foot, so that it holds securely.
And it is fitting for you not to forget to consider all that I have said about other fractures due to the accidents we have mentioned: and apply each remedy according to what is necessary.
Of the fracture of a woman's vulva, and of the pubic bone, and of a man's rod.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, then have her sit in a squared position. Then tilt her to one side of her back for a little while, and support her from behind.
Then the midwife should fill her vulva with a poultice until it is full, and it should form a sphere in the vulva.
Then shake the woman, and gradually raise her back. For that poultice will come out until it forms a sphere in front of the vulva entrance, and the fractured part returns to its place.
Then place a poultice on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the poultice with ease, then allow her to urinate; and replace it as you originally inserted it: then return her to her original poultice.
Let her do this for seven days or thereabouts, for the fractured part indeed takes time to heal.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and secure a reed tube over its opening, then insert the entire bladder into her vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the vulva, for the fracture will then return to its proper position.
Then fill it with a poultice and have her stand for several days, as we have described, until she is healed.
And when the bone of the pubis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and equalization that which we have narrated about the bone of the coccyx.
And the truth is not concealed in these fractures that are nearby and slightly affected, especially for one who has some interest or use.
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many circumstances the right way in the restoration and healing of it: therefore, understand.
And when the shaft of the man's penis is broken, take the throat of a goose and insert the shaft into it. Then place a wrap made of cloth over it and bind it up. Leave it for three days or so, and it will heal, if God wills it.
Concerning the restoration of fractures when they are accompanied by a wound.
It is appropriate for one who has sustained a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if it is severe, such as the hip bone or similar areas, to proceed quickly and perform phlebotomy on them immediately: if the conditions for phlebotomy are favorable, as we have mentioned.
If the wound is bleeding, then you must hurry to cut it and sprinkle powdered zegi on it: if you do not have something else at hand.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not postpone it unless an abscess occurs.
If a hot abscess occurs, then postpone its restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess bursts. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you would cause it to suffer bad consequences.
If a broken bone is prominent above the skin: then it is necessary to try to reduce and align it with your hands gently and with slight traction.
If it is not prepared for traction and alignment with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight finger widths, and its width according to the size of the wound. And for that reason, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the size required for it in the treatment of any type of fracture.
And let it be round: and let it have a small thickness, so that it does not double up under pressure on it during the operation: and let it have sharp ends with edges at its extremities. And let the upper part of it be thick from the middle down to the lower parts.
And this is its form.
In this operation, the curved sharp end of it should be placed on the prominent end of the bone: and move it with it once, until the bone returns to some alignment.
Try therefore to align the ends of the fracture together.
If the ends of it are finely broken and do not admit a tool by proper reception, then it is necessary to cut that end of the bone until the tool has access to it.
But if you are not able to reduce them as we have described, then cut it along with one of the incisions that we mentioned: or saw it with a saw in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then scrape what remains on the bone from roughness and small coatings.
When the bone is reduced and the patient experiences severe pain after its reduction, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Therefore, do it. For you provide great relief to the patient when your restoration of the bone is complete.
Then dip a cloth in sharp, black vinegar. And especially if it is in summer. And do not apply cerates or anything that contains oil to the wound, so as not to cause putrefaction and decay.
Then administer a splint at the hour when your restoration of the bone is complete. And leave the wound exposed: cut openings with scissors in the bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be careful at all times not to bind the wound tightly with a fracture. For often foolish physicians have done this: and it has happened that they caused either death or corruption or gangrene, that is, putrefaction, to come upon their patients. And let your dressing be soft, gentle, different from the dressings of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or the wound is large, and you fear some of the harmful accidents that we have mentioned may occur, and you feel pain in a suspended area: then you should not place a splint over it. And make bandages from hard cloth in place of splints, and bind them tightly with these.
However, after one day or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove the cloth that you placed over it with wine. Then apply licorice, and ointments that we customarily use to treat wounds: such as the tetrapharmakon ointment, and similar ones.
It is appropriate for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is healed and has consolidated.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that the pus can run from it to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass for the wound and it does not heal, nor is the pus expelled from it: then you should know that there are small fractures of the bone inside. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound with probes. However, of those parts that are separated by alsatagi, remove them and extract them. And those of them that are not separated and sting the limb and cause pain, try to cut them and remove them in every way possible for you.
If it happens that the wound becomes zuchen, or ekilet, that is, estiomenum, or some other form of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to apply to each one of them what is appropriate for its treatment, as was previously described in its chapter.
And from the point where my speech must stand, and to which you should give your full attention when a bone is broken and protrudes above the limb, such as the hip bone or the shoulder bone, and similar large bones: do not attempt to pull it out, for often death results from that; rather, leave it alone until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall out on its own after twenty days or thirty.
Then care for the wound if you deem it necessary: and if not, leave it be.
Regarding the treatment of Nodation in a foot fracture.
This Nodation often occurs during the healing process of a foot fracture. Especially those near the joints: and it disfigures the shape of the limb. And it may prevent the limb from performing its natural function.
Therefore, if there is recent bleeding, administer medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, stacte, acacia, and similar substances.
Thus, take some of these or all of them and mix them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar. Then apply them to the bleeding on cotton wool and secure them tightly over it.
And leave the dressing in place without removing it for many days. Then remove it and apply another dressing, until the bleeding stops.
Or bind it over a properly placed lead plate. For lead has the property of removing anything that is feared from the limbs.
But if the clot has already turned to a hardened mass and is firmly attached, and urgent necessity requires its removal: then apply a bandage above it, and cut away any protruding excess. Or scrape it with some scrapers until it is removed, and take care of it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment when the limb is restored but remains thin, not as it should be by nature.
When a bone fracture is restored but the limb remains thin and weak, this happens for many reasons. One reason is the excessive cutting and binding of the ligaments not as it should be, or due to excess constriction of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb. Another reason is an abundance of unnecessary embrocations at the wrong time, or a lack of blood in the patient's body and their general weakness.
And the treatment for that is to feed the sick person and make his body soft until the blood multiplies within him. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness to him.
Then apply pitch to the limb: so that the pitch attracts abundant nourishment to it. And let him have an embrocation with warm water until the nourishment circulates and returns to its natural form.
Regarding the treatment of broken bones when they heal crookedly.
When it happens that a limb, already healed after its injury, becomes crooked, and the broken bone protrudes or forms a knot: and this disfigures the shape of the limb, although the limb is not prevented from performing its natural function: then you should not heed the advice of those who suggest that the limb be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish physicians and healers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed very disgraceful, leading to death or great fear, as it may be fatal.
However, if the limping and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to embrocate with warm water in which softening herbs have been decocted, such as the leaves of mallows, and its root, and melilotus, and similar herbs. And prepare an ointment with a softening plaster, such as properly prepared mastic resin ointment.
Take the mucilage of the root of flax, and mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil; and apply it as a plaster.
Take soft figs and pound them with dove's fat, and similar substances that are called medicine reducing consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is loosened with constant, old-fashioned, and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And administer movement of the limb to all parts at all times.
But if the curvature has already preceded and become hard, and turned into stone, and necessity has arisen to treat it with iron: then it is necessary to cut above it, and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and cut away what is excessive from the knot or bone with fine cutting instruments: and facilitate this with care and diligence.
Regarding the discussion on Dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joint from its proper place. Therefore, it is prohibited from its movement and disfigures the shape of the member. And it causes pain and severe injuries to occur to the patient.
When therefore a dislocation occurs to someone, it is necessary to hurry to restore it: do not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the area will become infected, and perhaps along with it, the reduction of the dislocation will be hindered.
Therefore, it should not be moved nor extended during the hour of its abscess. For it often causes spasms and painful injuries.
But when that happens, then it is necessary to hurry with the bloodletting of the patient. Then let it be left alone until the abscess subsides.
Then the limb should be treated with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced gently.
And the entire limb should be treated along with the part that will be mentioned in its place.
I have already organized the chapters on dislocations, even as they precede fractures, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
¶ On the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated to a great extent.
And the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. Either they are slightly moved from their places and then relaxed for a short while. Or they are dislocated completely, until they relax towards the chest area, until saliva flows from the patient and they cannot hold it back, and their tongue gets entangled with speech.
When, however, the displacement is slight, then it returns to its proper position by itself with little effort.
If it is a complete displacement: then it must be that the reduction is administered quickly, and there should be no delay. The assistant should hold the patient's head, and the physician should insert his thumb of one hand into the root of the jaw at the side of the mouth, if the displacement is on one side. Or he should insert two thumbs simultaneously if the displacement is on both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hands should be outside, with which he will stabilize.
And instruct the patient to open his jaws and move them in all directions for chewing. And the physician should stabilize the jaw and move it until it returns to its proper place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are displaced simultaneously: then administer steam with warm water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy. Do not delay the reduction of both, as we have said.
When they return and are stabilized, and the patient's mouth closes without softening: then place bandages covered with wax made of beeswax and rose oil over them.
Then bind it gently with soft bands.
And let the patient sleep on his back: and place his head between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left: nor should he attempt, or be forced, to chew anything: instead, give him a light broth until the pain subsides and the jaw heals: then he may eat what he wants, but do so gently.
Do not work on the operation of his mouth during eating and drinking, and kissing, until the jaw is stabilized and healed.
If the reduction of both jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places, then often fevers and continuous sweating occur; and perhaps the patient's belly is loosened, and he vomits pure bile.
When you see that happening, then know it is a loss, and often the one to whom it happens dies within ten days.
Concerning the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the shoulder.
The collarbone does not dislocate from the inner side due to its connection with the chest. And it can dislocate outward at times, and this is apparent to the senses.
And its restoration is such that the patient should lie on their back and extend their arms. Then compress the area with your strong hand, for it will return to its place.
Then apply a plaster and bandages, and bind it tightly.
However, the parts that follow the elbow and are connected to it do not dislocate, except rarely. When it dislocates on some day, then it is necessary to reduce and align it as we have said, and as you have prepared.
Then place the plaster, and the powders, and the bandage over it. And instruct the patient to adhere to calmness and rest until healed.
And with this same treatment, the shoulder joint is reduced when it has become dislocated from its place.
Concerning the reduction of a dislocated shoulder.
Know that the shoulder does not become dislocated except in three ways.
One of which is that it becomes dislocated towards the front to the lower part. The second is that it becomes dislocated toward the side of the chest. And perhaps it may become dislocated toward the upper part of the shoulder: and this happens rarely.
And it does not become dislocated towards the back, due to the scapula. And it does not become dislocated toward the front, due to the nerves.
And it dislocates and exits towards the front to the lower part most often, especially in those whose muscles are thin. Because it exits quickly and enters back quickly in them.
In those whose muscles are thick, it is the opposite; that is, because it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens that a blow or fall occurs, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and it is thought because of this that it has already become dislocated.
Therefore, you should test it until you stand on its certainty, and then proceed with its treatment.
A dislocation is recognized when it is directed downwards towards the joint: and you must distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you will find a clear difference between them, and you will discover a concavity in the head of the shoulder, and below the joint, upon touching the head of the shoulder, it seems as if it were an egg: and the injured person cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent, or if the patient is a young child.
And the reduction is such that the assistant should lift the patient's arm upwards. Then place your thumbs under the joint, and lift the articulation with strength upwards to its proper place: and the assistant should lift the arm and extend it upwards. Then place it downwards, for it returns quickly.
But if it does not return as we have said, and there have been many days since the dislocation first occurred: then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water, and apply a poultice that softens and soothes, such as when the roots of flax, fenugreek, and melilot are decocted in water, and applied.
Then the patient lies on his back; and under his armpit place a sphere and wool, which should be equal in softness and firmness.
Then the doctor should place his heel on the sphere, and with force raise the patient's shoulder, and draw the patient’s hand towards the lower part.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand at the side and insert his arm under the patient’s armpit: then raise the patient’s armpit upwards until the patient hangs suspended in the air. And another attendant should draw the patient’s hand towards the lower part of his abdomen. But if the patient is light: then it is necessary to suspend something else with him to weigh him down: for the dislocation immediately returns.
And it is also reduced according to another method: and this involves fixing a long piece of wood on the ground, whose head is round in shape: like a mortar sleeve: which should not be too thick or thin. Then place the patient under the condition that soft cloths are placed on top of the wood: and the patient should stand along the length of the wood.
Then extend the patient’s hand downwards from one side, and stretch the patient’s body with force from the other side: for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce it by all that we have said, then use this treatment: Take a piece of wood whose length is the measure of two arms, and its width the measure of four fingers, and its thickness the measure of two fingers; let its head be round, so as to ease its entry into the depth of the cavity, in this form.
Then wrap soft cloth over the round head of the wood so that it does not injure the affected area.
Then place it under the affected cavity so that the hand or arm can be extended over the wood to the lower part: and secure the wood above with the assistance of the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of the ladder by its width, and extend the hand to the lower part, and let the rest of the body hang suspended from the other side. For the joint will immediately begin to move.
When the entry is thus completed in any possible manner, then you must place under the affected cavity a sphere of equal size made of wool. Then apply a plaster prepared from flour dust mixed with frankincense and egg white, covering the entire shoulder as it wraps around.
Then bind under the affected cavity with a suitable bandage: and wrap the bandage over the plaster above: and attach his hand to his neck, and let it hang without moving for seven days.
And it is necessary to give the patient little food until the limb is strengthened: for this will be quicker in healing.
Then it should be placed again after seven days, or five, and exercise it with motion. If it thus becomes firm and does not soften, then it is now healed.
If the joint is dislocated multiple times, due to humidity that affects it or for some other reason: then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three holes, as was described earlier in the chapter about cauteries.
If all of this is done, and the ligament is released after seven days, and the joint does not stabilize, and the plaster and bandage are reapplied several times, but it does not firm up, and falls, and cannot be raised to higher positions: then you should know that the nerves which go to the head of the humerus have already been cut, stretched, or softened; and you should know that the joint will never set in its proper place.
For a dislocation that occurs toward the chest and breast, or to be reduced to the rear, it is done with impact and extension using hands, until it returns, and then bandaging and further care are administered until it heals.
If after healing there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use a bath multiple times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
On the Treatment of Elbow Dislocation.
Know that the elbow joint dislocates with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty as well: it can indeed dislocate in all directions, but especially toward the front or the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: since it falls under sight, and under touch, according to whatever figure it may be dislocated. And when you join a dislocated elbow with a healthy one, it is clearly revealed to you. For the joint is displaced, and it cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch the shoulder with it.
And you must hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs.
For if a hot abscess occurs, the reduction becomes difficult: and it may not heal at all, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations and causes more severe pain to them: and often death follows with it.
And when its restoration is possible, it should be extended with both hands: and the arm should be straightened, with the physician's hands above and below the elbow, and he should push the joint with his thumbs simultaneously or with the base of his palm until it returns to its proper place.
Or if the dislocation is towards the front: then it returns as he bends his hand with his own hand until he strikes the dislocated elbow with the base of his palm.
If the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a strong, very forceful extension: and have two ministers extend the arm: and let two ministers hold it as well, so that it does not move during the extension.
Then the arm should be turned to every side after a doubled piece of cloth or a wide bandage has been wrapped over the hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with oil: so that it may be one of those things that help the smoothness of the joint with ease. Then urge the joint with a strong impulse until it returns.
And after it has been reduced, a plaster should be applied to it, in which there is astringency and drying with egg white: and it should be bandaged appropriately. And suspend the arm from the neck of the patient: and let it rest for several days.
Then release it. If the joint is stabilized in its place, then release the bandage from it, and let it rest.
And if you see that the joint is not properly bandaged, then apply the plaster again, and the bandage, and let it rest for several days until it is secured. Then release it.
If, however, the patient experiences pain after the reduction of the joint, and it is disposed for movement: then administer moistening in bathing, and gentle friction, and compression, until it is soothed, or apply over the joint something soothing, that is, the fat of a ram's thigh. Then bind it, and let it rest for that day and night. Then remove it, and introduce the affected part into a bath. Therefore, when he sweats, then rub the joint with moderate friction. Then apply one, two, and three times again on it with the aid of each other upon entering the bath, until it is alleviated.
And if you wish, place cow dung over it, moistened and warmed with butter, and bind it over it.
Do this several times. For it is alleviated and returns to its proper condition.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation by Almahasis.
Almahasis, the joint of the hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of that dislocation is easy. On the contrary, for the remaining joints it is not so. However, it is necessary that there be speed in reducing the dislocation at the hour when it occurs, before the area becomes swollen; or a hot abscess happens in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation is as follows: place the injured hand of Almahasis on a table, and have an assistant extend his hand. The physician should place his palm over the prominence of the joint and push it until it returns to its proper position.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm has already receded toward the palm side of the hand: then have the patient place the back of his hand on the table during extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is moving towards the back of the hand, then position the hand such that the inner part of the hand is placed on the table, so that the physician's hand falls directly onto the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good: and if not, then bind it with a poultice to reduce the abscess: and leave it alone, do not repeat that.
For if it does not tolerate and you are unable to reduce it after the days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its curvature: and it does no harm to the patient except that the hand becomes soft and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut or worn.
Therefore, it does not have feeling and should be treated with cautery near the site of injury. And perhaps it does not matter much.
When therefore Almahassem does not return, then apply the plaster that we have described. Then bind it and leave it for five days: afterwards loosen it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
If it is deprived of its movement and something heavy affects it: then soothe it with warm water and friction several times, until it is soothed.
On the Treatment of Dislocated Fingers.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction, or from the back or palm of the hand: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it towards the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend him and stretch him until he is straight on that day.
When therefore it is night, bind him according to the narration itself: and do not stop releasing him during the day: and exercise him with movement: and bind him at night.
Do this for several days until it is tightened.
And do the same if it is dislocated towards the belly of the hand: and bind it to its part, and perform your operation on it until it heals.
And do the same when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Regarding the treatment of a spinal dislocation of the back.
When someone suffers a complete dislocation of the spinal column or neck, or when many vertebrae are removed from their positions: then there is no treatment for it, because death hastens for the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's evacuation occurs without their will, and they cannot hold it: and often certain parts of his body become weak, either both legs or both arms, or one of them: or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For it is often removed, as it often happens that they are moved to four parts.
That which is removed to the rear is called Kyphosis.
The treatment for it is to consider whether the Kyphosis occurred during childhood: then there is no cure for it, and there is no healing from it at all.
In those cases that occur by accident, or from impact, or similar causes, the ancients have already described methods of treatment at length in their discourse. Of which much does not return with benefit.
I have already abbreviated from that text, for which little excuse can be made from much of its proximity to my intent: and with my explanation in which I presented it, and formed its instrument differently from how they demonstrated it and explained it.
I say therefore, that in hunchback deformity which occurs from the front part, there is no cure, nor recovery from it.
And similarly in that which occurs on both sides as well.
And they are not cured except for those which occur on the back proper, as I describe: and it is done such that the patient lies face up on a level platform near a wall: and place damp straw beneath him so that his chest is not injured.
Then place a straight piece of wood fixed in a hole in the ground at the foot's end, near its head: and another piece of wood near its feet at the other end of the foot: and let the assistant hold the wood, which is not firmly fixed in the hole. And another assistant holds the other one.
Then wrap a soft but firm bandage over the patient's head, and under his chin: and extend one end of the bandage to the wood that is near his head: and secure it there.
Then wrap another bandage over his shoulders, and above his knees, and at the joints. Then gather all the ligaments and tie them to another piece of wood that is by his feet.
Then let all the assistants stretch the ligaments to the wooden parts, and do not remove the two pieces of wood from their places where they are fixed; however, they should not be too tightly secured, as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms with strength on the spinal column until it returns to its proper position; or he may place a board upon it. Then let him attach his feet to the board until it returns to its proper position.
但如果通过这种治疗没有恢复，那么取一块长约三臂的木板。 并在我们所说的靠近病人的墙面上，找到一个可以让木板末端进入的位置并固定。 然后将木板的中部放在脊柱上。 医生应将他的脚放在木板的另一端。 然后紧紧固定，直到脊柱被拉回并恢复到其正常位置。
然后如果你想使用旋转工具，用手操作它：你应该在病人头部的脚部末端放置两根长度为一臂的木棍，并在其头部另一侧的脚部末端也放置两根木棍。
并且每根木棍之间的距离为一掌长：现在在每个木棍上都应有一个孔，供旋转工具通过，并且所有木棍都应该牢固地固定在地上，以免有任何移动。
And let a round stick be inserted: and it is a pivot on which the bandage is rolled up between two holes in two sticks.
And at its end there is a hole in which the stick is secured, whose length is a palm including what is rolled up: and similarly with two other sticks.
Then tie the bandages that you have tied on the patient's chest to the spindle which is near his head: and tie the bandages that you have tied on his legs to the spindle which is near his feet.
Then let a servant stand by each spindle, who will turn it with ease, as it revolves: and the physician shall adjust the splint as we have said.
This is the form of the spindle, which follows.
Then after the splint returns and the position is adjusted, it is necessary to apply a drying plaster with egg white. Then linen strips. Then place a wooden strip above the plaster, whose width is three fingers wide, or thereabouts. And its length should be the amount that covers the area of the deformity, and extend beyond the healthy side of the splint.
Then bind it with the bandage that we mentioned. And let the patient use a light diet until he is healed.
If any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, along with the application of the board we mentioned for a long period. And now a sheet of lead is applied there.
And sometimes there is a protrusion at the last vertebra of the spine; and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that is the bone which now protrudes. Therefore, it is not appropriate to administer this medicine based on mere assumption; perhaps it might cause death.
Regarding the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and the shoulder do not occur unless there is a dislocation: nor does what happens to other joints due to slight displacement and concavity occur in them.
And the joint of the ankle can be dislocated in four directions. This means that it is dislocated forward and backward.
And it is dislocated most often towards the inner side; and less frequently towards the front and the back.
The treatment for a dislocation towards the inner side is as follows: when you join the healthy leg with the injured one, it is longer; and his knee protrudes more than that of a healthy person, and the injured cannot bend their foot at the thigh: there is also an area following the groin that becomes abscessed and requires warm treatment, because the head of the femur has already reached there.
And the signs of one who has a dislocation towards the outer side are contrary to these symptoms.
And the sign of one who has a dislocation towards the front is that they extend their healthy leg fully but cannot bend it without pain in the knee: and if they attempt to walk, they cannot step forward with it: and their urine is retained, and an abscess forms in the groin, and when walking there is pressure on the heel.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation towards the posterior has happened is that he cannot extend his knee, nor can he bend it before bending his groin: and his leg is also shorter than the other: and the groin is soft, and the head of the thigh bone at the place of the ilium.
However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is such that you should consider then whether it is an old dislocation, which has already become chronic with the patient. Then, if you administer the reduction of it, and it remains in its dislocated state: then there is no treatment for it at all. Therefore, one should not make a complete assumption about it.
In the case of one whose dislocation is recent, and it is from one of the four types of dislocations: then hurry to do this, so that you rotate the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and will not require further treatment.
但如果这种方法没有使它复位，那么你应该准备一个强壮的助手，让他从下部拉伸他的腿：或者用手，或者用绑在大腿上的绷带：另一个助手应该从上方抓住他的手，以便将手插入他的腋下。 然后用柔软的绷带紧缠在股骨的根部，并握住另一个绷带的末端。
并且拉伸可以从腹股沟的前部到肩胛骨的部分，或者从后部到背部的部分。
并且所有的拉伸应该同时进行，直到病人整个身体从地上抬起并悬空。
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four kinds.
If the dislocation returns as I have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for every kind what I say about its proper treatment.
In the proper reduction when the dislocation is towards the interior, it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on his healthy side. Then place the ligament over the root of the hip, in the area between the head of the femur and the region beneath the groin. Then extend the ligament from above the groin to the upper part of the body, towards the armpit area.
Then let another strong minister hold his arms, and press on the swollen part of the affected hip, and extend it outward with a powerful pull. Now it has returned to its proper place.
And this method is easier than the other methods of treatment for reducing this limb.
If, however, the patient resists you and does not comply with this method of treatment at all for entry: then it is necessary to bind both feet of the affected side simultaneously with a strong but gentle ligament over both heels and both knees: and the length of each should be four finger breadths compared to its counterpart: and the affected leg should be extended two finger breadths more than the other.
Then suspend the patient above the head of a beam in the house: and its height from the ground should be the length of two arms.
Then instruct a strong young man to brace the hip joint: and have another hold the patient; and another strong youth should push, bracing the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In its proper rendition, when the dislocation is towards the outer side, the patient should lie upon a platform, as we have described for one with kyphosis. And the ligament should be pulled above his leg, properly on the affected side, and above his chest.
Then place two pieces of wood, one near his feet, and the other near his head. Then place an additional piece of wood in the middle of the sole of the foot, securely fixed: on which wrap moist cloths, so that it does not injure the patient: and let the wood be between his thighs, so that it is not drawn towards the lower parts during extension.
Then let all the assistants stretch to their respective sides, and the physician adjust the reduction with his hand.
If it thus yields to the maneuver, it will be good.
And if it does not yield, place it on the table and press it evenly, as we said for kyphosis. However, the patient should lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then the affected leg should be quickly extended: and this follows the same description on a platform: and the physician should place the palm of his right hand on the patient's groin. Then compress it with one hand, and while compressing it in this way, extend it towards the lower part toward the knee.
And if the displacement is to the rear: then it should not be extended toward the lower part, nor should the patient lie with his body raised off the ground; rather, he must be placed on a hard surface, as is necessary even if his thigh is dislocated outward, according to what we said about him lying on two thighs: and it is above his face, with the ligaments extended, as we mentioned recently.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board even over the place to which the joint has moved, as reduction is completed as required.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: it is when you extend both legs of the patient: and when you see them equal, and the patient tightens his leg and extends it without hesitation: then know that the limb has returned as required. Then join the two thighs, apply a plaster, and bind it with an uncut cloth, such as a bandage: in such a way that the thigh does not move to any part: and the patient should remain quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in condition, then know that the displacement is now fixed: therefore release the patient to walk.
And if you see any softening: then return, and apply plasters to it, and bind it according to your initial binding method: and leave it for three more days.
Then loosen it and have him delay walking for several days on each side until it is well strengthened.
Of Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee dislocates in three ways. It dislocates outward, inward, and downward, namely backward.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is to make the patient sit straight, so that he can now extend his leg if possible over it, and press your back against his face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee adhere with your palms, and place them straight between your fingers above his knee. Then apply with your palm both sides of his knee with force. And another assistant should extend his foot until the knee returns to its proper place.
And the sign of restoration is that the leg adheres to the hip gently, not laboriously.
Then apply plasters to it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four. Then loosen it.
And let the patient not use walking for several days until he is healed.
But if he refuses to have it reduced, then administer a strong extension with ligaments, of which the preceding narrative has given an account in the treatment of fractures, until it returns.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Heel.
The heel sometimes is removed by a slight displacement and sometimes is dislocated according to its alignment. And its dislocation occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, protruding towards the side to which it is dislocated.
However, the treatment of its displacement is easy to reduce: it should be extended with ease by hand, and equalized until it returns.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to its alignment, you must have the patient sit straight: and let a strong attendant hold him firmly from the back part of his spine, in the middle.
Then hold his foot with your right hand from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand two times.
Then extend with your left hand, and push the ball of the foot with your right hand towards the leg without strain.
Do this twice, as we have recounted.
Then press the chest of the foot against the leg in the third position, and you pull out the nail.
If it returns to one position or in two positions according to this method, and you see the foot evened out, it is good; and if not, then repeat the procedure on it: for it returns.
But if the reduction of it is prohibited to you as we have narrated: then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a lever firmly on the ground, so that it falls between his thighs: and you now wrap a cloth around him, so that it does not injure the patient.
Then let the attendant grasp his thigh: afterwards, the attendant extends the other foot, either with his hands or with a bandage that ties above the ankle. Then let all the attendants stretch against the extension of their counterpart: and the lever should be standing between the two thighs of the patient, holding him so that his body is not drawn down during the extension.
Then the physician should reset the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy leg below. For the dislocation returns with speed.
When the dislocation returns and its proper reduction is made clear to you: then apply a plaster and bandage, and bind it firmly with straps, and secure the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary to be cautious or wary of the nerves which are above the posterior heel, so that the bandage is not too tight over them and injures them.
Then let him rest for two days, or three. If the ligament becomes relaxed, bind it tightly; then remove it on the third or fourth day: and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. But if the patient attempts to walk before that period, there is no security that the dislocation will not recur above it, and it will be ruined, and will not receive any cure after that.
If a hot abscess should occur for him: then it is necessary to administer, in its treatment, that which was previously described by us in another place concerning the cure, and apply poultices until it is removed.
Concerning the dislocation of the toes and its treatment.
It is necessary to realign what is dislocated from them with a little extension without labor: and indeed, this is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in certain joints of the toe: then it is necessary for the patient to sit with his foot on an even surface on the ground or on a board: and he should stand as if he were walking.
Then stand and place your foot on what protrudes from those joints. Then step on it with your foot with force until it returns, and you see that it is now aligned, and no protrusion appears in the place.
Then place a board under the bottom of his foot that can hold the entire foot, which has two ends. Then bind it with a binding appropriate for three days. Then loosen it and keep him from walking for many days until it is healed and secured from the reduction.
Concerning the types of dislocation with wound or fracture.
When something of this kind occurs and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often follows. Therefore, one should not undertake the treatment of such conditions unless they are wise from long practice, compassionate, pious, cautious, not bold, nor presumptuous: and that they use in the beginning medicines which calm abscesses only with warmth: and leave the patient to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from destruction with the gentleness of illness, and in what appears to be some sign of hope. Attempt the reduction of it immediately at the beginning, before a warm abscess occurs.
If the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that calms the abscess: and treat the wound with ointments that are desiccative as is appropriate for it.
If the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and protrusions occur on the bone, then attempt to remove them, and treat it as we have said for simple illnesses from what precedes in those places.
And be cautious according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the path of fear: as my teaching has preceded for you.
For it is better for you before your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more safe for your body among them in your time.
