After I have completed this book for you, my Sons, which is the last in the science of medicine with its completion, and I have reached the end in it through its explanations and clarifications, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is part of the practice, namely surgery, by hand.
Since the practice of surgery has been neglected in our region and time, entirely deprived such that perhaps the knowledge of it perished and its traces were cut off; and there remained from it only brief descriptions in ancient books, which hands have altered: errors and hesitations befell them until their intentions were closed and their vision diminished. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the order of this Treatise according to the way of positioning, explanation, and abbreviation: and to bring forth forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work, as they are produced by adding explanations and preparing what is necessary.
The reason why a good practitioner of it with their hands is not found in this time of ours is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained before that in the science of anatomy as narrated by Galen, until they know the aids to members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and their numbers, and their emergence, and pulsating veins, and quiet veins, and places of exit for them.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that knowing the name of something is much, but knowing how to work with it is little, especially in the art of hands.
We have already said this at the beginning of this book.
Since those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy do not escape falling into error by which people are killed: just as I saw many of those who claim to be formed in this science and boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a foolish doctor cut into a scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in her neck: therefore, the woman bled until she died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to extract a stone from a man who had become advanced in age, and the stone was large.
He therefore proceeded to do so and extracted it along with part of the bladder.
Therefore, the man died on the third day.
And I had indeed been called to extract it: and upon seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I saw that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from one of our country's dukes for his medical services: and it happened to a black eunuch in his service that he suffered a fracture near the heel: and the doctor, with his ignorance, hurried and bound the fracture above the wound with bandages and tight bindings, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he dismissed him according to his own wishes.
After that, he left him for several days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage: and he stood like this until his leg became ulcerated, and his foot as well, and he ended up in a state of ruin.
I was therefore called to him: and I hurried to loosen the ligature: and peace followed, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the corruption was already established in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, the corruption ceased to spread in the member until it was destroyed.
And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess: and it ulcerated for days until the evil of it increased with his lord.
Which means that when there is a pure cancer caused by black bile, then it is not necessary to approach it with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate having the entire part removed.
And for that reason, my children, it is necessary for you to know that the practice with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation which is associated with healing; and an operation which involves danger in many circumstances. And I have already noted throughout this book wherever there comes an operation involving fear and danger.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious about that and avoid it: so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and disgrace it.
Therefore, take the measure with care and protection, and treat your patients with ease and firmness, and use a better way leading by God's grace to health and commendable succession: and leave behind severe illnesses difficult to heal: and remove from yourselves that which causes fear, so that hesitation does not enter into your faith and benefit. For it remains more for your glory, and is higher in this world, and finally for your rewards.
For Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat illness badly; do not be called bad doctors.
Chapter One.
About incision and puncture, bloodletting and ventosity, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures: and all arranged in chapters with forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
About restoration, dislocation, and treatment of sprains, and similar procedures: arranged in chapters from head to foot, and with forms of instruments.
Glory to God Alone.
The Book of Surgery by Albucasis.
Part I.
About the Benefit and Harm of Cauterization: and which constitutions it is suitable for, and at what time: and whether with iron or gold.
Chapter I.
But before I recall the procedure with him, it is necessary for me to say what are his aids and disadvantages, and in which temperament they are exhibited.
I say then, that the discourse on the quality of the aid of cauterization and its disadvantage is a lengthy and subtle discourse, a science and a hidden secret.
Moreover, many wise people have spoken about it, and they have disagreed on the matter. For my part, a little of their discourses is sufficient for me, fearing to prolong [the discussion].
I say then, that cauterization benefits universally all temperaments, both those with material and without material, except for two temperaments, which are the hot temperament without material and the dry temperament without material.
However, in the hot and dry temperament with material, they disagreed.
Some have said that cauterization is beneficial in it.
And others said the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable for a disease caused by heat and dryness: for the nature of fire is heat; it is inappropriate to treat with heat and dryness when the condition arises from heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite states that cauterization provides relief in every disease caused by heat and dryness that occurs in human bodies: for when you compare the body of a person and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the human body to be cold.
And I say through his speech: because from experience it has already revealed this to me on several occasions.
However, it is not appropriate for someone to come upon this unless they have already been tested and trained in the final chapter of the Cauterization Exercise, and have knowledge of the diversity of human constitutions, and the disposition of illnesses within them, and their causes, and their accidents, and the duration of time involved.
However, there is no need for fear from the remaining constitutions: especially in cold and humid illnesses. Now all the doctors have agreed on them: and they do not disagree about helping with Cauterization in these cases.
And know, my children, that from the secret of treatment with Cauterization using fire, and its goodness when combined with burning medicine is clear: for fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the member being cauterized: and it does not harm another connected member, except with slight injury.
The action of burning medicine, however, reaches what is distant from the limbs: and it may cause illness that is difficult to cure in a member, and perhaps even lead to death.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm unless it is excessive.
Now it has become clear to us through experience, due to the length of service and study with the art, and standing upon the truth of things: and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it should be done to cauterize, and they place a better time for the true one.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times: therefore, because the harm caused by the time is submerged in the healing that is drawn with the cauterization.
And especially if the cauterization is for pains caused by necessary, severe, and urgent conditions that do not tolerate delay: therefore, because it is feared that from them a greater harm may occur than the minor damage incurred due to waiting for the right time.
And let it not enter your minds, children, that which is not considered except by the masses and foolish doctors, namely that to the illness which is cured by cauterization there is never a relapse: and they place this as a consequence, but the matter is not as they think: because cauterization is nothing other than in place of medicine that alters the constitution and dries up the humidities which are the cause of why pains occur.
However, cauterization is unnecessary when it surpasses medicine in the speed of recovery and the power of its operation and the strength of its authority: and it is possible for illness to return at some hour of time according to the patient's constitution, and the location of his illness, and its power: and what is prepared in his body through the aggregation of excesses within him: and what reaches him in acquisition from food, and similar causes, unless the illness occurs in which cauterization is administered. An illness that is subtle in a member with few excesses and humidities, such as the cauterization of a tooth due to pain and similar cases, it is possible for that pain not to return.
But that is done in a few [steps].
However, the talk of the common people again, that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is correct speech; not as they themselves intend in it: for they believe that there is no treatment which compares with medicine, nor with anything else after the setting aside of cautery.
The matter is actually the opposite of what they say, and the intent that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only this: when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those treatments do not help; then at the end we administer cautery, which does prove effective. Thus it falls out that cautery is the last of medicine, but not according to the understanding intended by the common people and many foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality and superiority of gold's substance: and they said that the place where cautery is applied does not produce pus. Yet this is not true absolutely: for I have now tested it and found that it does not hold true in certain bodies without other factors.
And cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said.
However, when you heat gold for cautery in fire, it does not become clear to you how much heat is sufficient because of the redness of gold: and when it quickly reaches a certain coolness, if you add more heat to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into confusion with that: and because of this, cautery with iron is quicker and more convenient for us, being straightforward in its application.
And I indeed have already arranged this chapter on Cauterization according to the chapters: and I have arranged them from head to foot, so that whoever seeks it may find what they want from it. ¶ On the method of cauterizing the head at the coronal suture.
Chapter II.
Here cauterization is applied to the domain of humidity and coldness above the brain: there are two causes of soda formation, and an abundance of fluid flow from the head to the parts around the eyes and ears, and an abundance of dreaming, and pain in the teeth, and throat pain: and generally all illnesses that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, soda formation, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar conditions.
The method of cauterization is that you instruct the patient to first evacuate with dissolving and cleansing medicine for three nights or four, depending on the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor.
Then have him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he places his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with a cautery. Then heat the olive-shaped cauterization tool: this is its form. Then place it on the marked spot with a cautery, and as your hand is gradually drawn down, you turn it.
Then quickly move your hand, and look at the place.
If you see that the quantity of the head of Alkaiel or the quantity of Zevherbi is now exposed from the bone, then raise your hand.
And if not, continue using your hand with the iron itself, or use another one if it has cooled down: until the bones appear, which I told you about.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and apply it to the wound, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place on the wound a dressing soaked in butter, and leave it on the spot until the burned tissue falls off. Then treat it with the Tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, it discharges pus; therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone: and hold the cautery until something thick from the bone is burned.
Then scrape off what is burned from the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that with the cautery one must proceed until the very end, so that it impresses a mark on the bone like a mold, such that the bone falls off, which happens as if shaped like a kirate: or an instrument that women place in small lettered designs: and they believe that vapors from the head are expelled from this place, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it is healed and firm.
However, these two types of cautery do not seem to be necessary except for some people out of fear.
And to let it be, in my opinion is better for his safety.
For the head becomes weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, as we have testified with other limbs; especially when the patient's head is weak by nature. And indeed, the first type of cautery seems to be safer and better to me, and I use it: therefore, work with it for the sake of health.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the head when there is pain throughout the entire head.
Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head and it persists in the patient, they use hot compresses, decoctions, purgatives for the head, oils, and emplastries.
And especially if it has already been treated with one type of cautery that we have mentioned and none of those treatments help: then consider the situation.
For if the patient's head is of strong natural constitution and is not weak, but feels intense cold, then cauterize with a different type of cautery beneath it slightly.
Then cauterize it over the entire circumference of the head with a cautery, but do not penetrate the skin, and expose a quantity of bone as we have described.
And cauterize it with one type of cautery at the back of the head, in a place called the vasa, which is where the fontanelle is located: and raise your instrument in this area, but do not expose the bone.
For this causes him great pain, and a pain different from that of the other anterior parts of the head.
And I will call this Cautery in its place: and it is necessary that there be a cauterization for the horns of the head, and its occiput more subtly with a cauterization, which cauterizes the middle of the head.
And this is its form.
关于用烧灼疗法和铁进行偏头痛烧灼的方法。
Chapter IV.
当头部某部分发生疼痛和炎症，或者疼痛蔓延至眼睛，并且使用清洁药物治疗头部后仍未改善整体状况时：那么烧灼疗法在此处有两种方式：一种是使用锐利的燃烧药物进行烧灼；另一种是用铁进行烧灼。 使用锐利的燃烧药物进行烧灼的方法是，取一根芦苇，剥去其外皮，并从两侧削尖其末端。
然后，在出血期用宽扁的放血刀切开疼痛部位，直到皮下出现一个可以插入芦苇的地方。
因此，将其插入皮下，直到看不见为止：然后用适当包扎的绷带固定其上，并保持十五小时，之后解开它，取出芦苇，在接下来的两天或三天内不要更换绷带：之后在患处放置浸入牛脂中的蜡块，直到伤口产生脓液：最后使用药膏治疗，直至痊愈。
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, on burning medicines.
But cauterization of it with iron is done in this manner.
A cautery tool, which has the following form.
And it is called a Nail because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, which has some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
Then place it on the location and keep your hand steady: and you should rotate the iron gradually with speed: and the amount that is burned should be according to the thickness of the skin, as its middle part.
And raise your hand so that the artery below is not burned, and thus avoid an excessive flow of blood.
Then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days: then apply a cloth with butter: afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed. And if you wish, cauterize this headache with the second cutting edge of the cautery tool.
And be careful not to cut an artery in this headache, not an old one particularly.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in an old headache.
Chapter V.
When treating a headache, follow what we have said about previous treatments and the division of diseases, and if the treatment does not suffice: and you see from the illness that what we said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire is insufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cautery tool until it whitens. After marking on the location of pain with a line whose length is half a finger's width, or nearly so, place your hand and cut until you reach the artery, and proceed until you reach the bone. However, you must be careful not to burn the side or the nerve that moves the lower jaw, which is moved during chewing, so that spasm does not occur.
And be careful about the preservation and protection of the blood flow from the artery that has been cut.
For there is fear in cutting it, especially for one who does not know what they are doing, and who is neither skilled nor experienced: and they abandon the procedure because of this.
And I will provide guidance on managing the blood flow from an artery cut according to its manner and in its place in this book.
If you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the patient's condition and you notice that the patient's body can tolerate a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have described, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of an artery using a cautery with two knives.
For this cautery is better and more beneficial. Concerning the method of applying cautery for pain in the Ears.
Chapter VI. When pain occurs in the Ear due to cold and is treated with dissolving agents and other treatments as we described in the division, but the pain does not subside, then apply cautery with fire: and it is called a Punctum, whose form is as follows.
Then apply the Punctum around the entire ear after igniting it, as it revolves: or around each ear if pain is present in both simultaneously.
And move away from the root of the ear with the cautery slightly, after marking the places with wax: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on each ear, or so.
Then treat the places until they heal.
§ On the Method of Cauterizing in Torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture which is treated with cautery is not caused by anything other than types that occur due to phlegm, as we said in the divisions of diseases. And avoid cautery for the type that occurs due to dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of torture with herbs, purgatives, and gargles, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient three times: once near the root of the ear, and the second slightly below its usual position, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part.
Since softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of the cautery is such that you should cauterize with the cautery directly at the upper extremity of the ear near the horn of the head slightly: and another at the temple: its length should be according to the length of a thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of knife, whose form has been described beforehand; however, it should not be much less subtle than that, as you see: and it must be somewhat thicker than a knife. Then treat the areas that came before until they are healed.
§ On the method of cauterizing in ancient apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When apoplexy becomes chronic and your treatment does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on each horn of his head, one in the middle of the head, as we said, and one at the back of the head, as was described before: and the method of cauterizing should be as previously described.
It is also cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach: and this is more of a last resort.
Then treat it as was described previously.
§ On the method of cauterizing in cases of forgetfulness.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary to give the patient large doses of hysrae (a type of medicine) and pills that purify the brain first and foremost.
Then shave the patient's head entirely, and apply a plaster made from mustard, as described in the chapter on plasters, to the back of his head: do this several times. This is indeed the method of cauterizing: and perform it according to the same order that I described there. If it is cured by that, it is good.
If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back part of his head, which should extend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and place between each caustic the thickness of a finger.
Then apply the cautery as described previously.
If you wish to add more and the patient can tolerate it: then make a cautery in the middle for him.
If you wish to add more: then cauterize him above the two horns.
Then treat him until he is healed: let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form that was described.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in paralysis and for softening.
Chapter 10.
You must proceed with the cleansing of the head using hares' fat, as we have said.
Then shave the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head, and a cautery above each horn of the head, and a cautery above the back part of it, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If you need more softening in a severe illness and the patient can tolerate it: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and make the last one until much of the skin is burned away, and raise your hand.
Then treat it until it is healed: and thus apply the olive caustic.
On the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
Chapter XI.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm. Therefore, you should cleanse his brain first with hysop and with the remaining treatments that we mentioned in the division: when the patient is severe or can tolerate medication intake.
If, however, it is a child who cannot tolerate medication, then a gargle and brain-cleansing chewing substances are administered before that for many days with the improvement of food quality.
Then shave his head, and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the method described; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on every horn of his head.
If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I described for one who has paralysis and relaxation of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and back: and let the olive cautery be applied according to the method previously mentioned. If, however, the patient is a child, then apply a fine cautery according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing in melancholia.
Chapter XII.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that we described for one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess tendency towards it, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse his brain, as was mentioned in the division: then shave the patient’s head, and afterwards make a properly made bandage of linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient, sitting squarely, should be held from all sides.
Then apply the ointment. And it is more appropriate to use ancient sheep's butter.
And warm it over a moderately heated fire, to a temperature that can be tolerated by the finger when it is inserted into it.
Then empty it onto the middle of the patient's head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do this for the patient once every week, along with the rest of their good regimen, until they are healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures with the cautery: keep your hand near it, and let there be a smell from it.
For this type of cauterization moistens the brain with a certain quality.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter or chicken fat on it.
Regarding the method of cauterizing with water descending to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the signs of water in the eye become apparent to you, as I mentioned in the division, then begin and have the patient drink something that will cleanse his head.
And keep him away from all moistures, and make him sit in a bath for several days of fasting.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him above both temples with two cauteries, if the beginning of water descent occurs in both eyes at once: or from one side, if the beginning of water occurs in one eye: and cut off all veins and arteries that are under the skin with a cauterium: and let the cauteries be long in width across the temples: and beware of blood flow.
If you see something coming from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them, and caution against blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries extended to the end.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in ancient tears.
Chapter XIV.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and persistent: and they are above veins and arteries that are on the outer surface of the head, it is verified that this is from excess cold, phlegmatic fluids: then cauterize with the same cauteries as I described for the beginning of water descending, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above both temples, and two cauteries on the neck under two bones.
And if you need to add more, then cauterize him on the entire side of the eye carefully, above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Of the method of cauterizing for nasal polyps.
Chapter XV.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the medication does not suit: then hurry, and give to the sick person three nights in drink: then shave his head, and cauterize him with a medium cautery, using an olive-based cautery.
Then cauterize him with a cautery of the nail using two cauteries, above both eyebrows slightly under the hair.
And be careful to avoid the artery, so as not to strike it.
And this is the form of the cautery of the nail.
Of the method of cauterizing for the softening of the eyelid.
Chapter XVI.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize him above both eyebrows slightly with two cauteries on all parts: and they should be distant from both temples: and the length of the entire cautery should be according to the lengths of the eyebrows: and do not place your hand last with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third eyelid is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery according to this method of the lunar cautery.
Of the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn and irritate the eye. Chapter XVII.
The cautery is used in two ways: either with fire, or with a burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, however, instruct the patient beforehand to remove his hair, if he is one of those who shave it, until it has grown out and become even. 但如果它在他的起源处刺痛他：那么用布条绑住他的眼睛，使它们不要移动，直到伤口愈合。
当它们愈合并变得平整时，把病人的头部放在你的臂弯里：然后用烙铁在他的眼皮上标记，标记形状像我的叶子：标记的起点应该靠近毛发。
Then place a pad soaked in egg white or in slippery elm mucilage over the eye.
Then apply the cautery, which has this form.
Then cauterize gradually in many applications over the figure you have marked, until the surface of the skin, which is shaped like a myrtle leaf and appears distinctly, is burned.
And the sign of your work being successful is: if you see the eyelid already contracting and the hair raising up around the puncture of the eye.
Raise then your hand: and let him be for three days.
Then place a pad with butter on it until the eschar is removed.
Then treat him with an ointment until he is healed.
If any of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft, then apply the cautery to that place again as you did initially.
If the hairs are on the lower lid, then cauterize it until the hairs rise to their natural place, and become even so that they do not irritate the eye.
Regarding the method of cauterizing with a burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter XVIII.
It is to instruct the patient to let the hairs grow out until they become even.
Make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from lime that has not absorbed moisture an ounce each or about that amount; then pound them together finely, and make it quickly so that it does not cool.
Then take from it and place it on a sheet of paper as the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it above the eyelid of one eye or two.
And place under the eye a cloth soaked in egg white; and let the head of the sick person rest in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine, and press it slightly.
And you should move it each time the patient feels a biting sensation from the medicine: for he will find its bite like that of fire.
While therefore he continues to feel this biting sensation, then let go of the medicine, and move it with your finger.
When the biting sensation subsides, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And observe if you see the eyelid rise as it does when contracting with heat or with incision; that is good: and if not, then apply more of the medicine to a place where it has not been applied previously, and does not darken, until your work evens out, and the eye contracts.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter on it until the burnt skin is removed.
Then treat it with a diaphoretic ointment or another suitable one until it is healed.
And you must be careful above all things during the operation that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after several days and something from the lashes causes irritation in the eye, then apply the medicine again to that place which is softened by the eyelid, just as you did at first.
Then treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of the myrtle.
And know that the eyes of people differ in size and smallness.
Therefore, let your consideration be based on this: the way of righteousness is not hidden from one who has a passion for this art.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in a lacrimal fistula.
Chapter XIX.
When you treat a fistula, and the treatment does not succeed as we said in the divisions of diseases: then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and have an assistant hold the patient's head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or jolt.
Then apply Colchicum infused in egg white or mucilage of psyllium to his eye. Then use a cautery heated with fire, which has this form.
It should be concave, like the shape of an eagle's feather from one end, where the cautery is made. And if you wish it to penetrate to the other end, and if you want it to be held up in this way, do so.
This is indeed better for your work.
Then apply a cauterizing agent to it, which should be heated very strongly.
And hold your hand near the cauterizing agent for a moment between your eye and the side of the nose to ensure that your hand does not slip or disturb the patient: then place the cauterizing agent on the fatty tissue of the eye area and burn it.
If you reach the beginning of the cauterization near the opening, it will be well.
And if not, then apply the cauterizing agent once, or twice if necessary: and leave it for three days.
Then apply cotton with butter, and treat it with a healing ointment until it heals. If forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply a sharp corroding medicine until the opening is revealed: and scrape it as described in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula, which some earlier practitioners have described.
Examine the location of the fistula and locate it: then place a fine cannula, known as camahan subtile, in the fissure, which has this shape.
And pour into it a quantity equal to one drachma of melted lead, and hold your hand with the tube securely, and do not move the patient at all so that the melted lead does not run or reach his eye.
And you should place on the sick person's eye cotton infused in egg white, or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed as we have said with cauterization and treatment, it is good.
And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nostril opening and redirect the fistula to follow the course of the nose, according to where it will come to its own proper place.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in splits of the lips.
Chapter XX.
Fissures often occur on the lip, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures, as we have said in the division of diseases, and if treatment does not suffice, then prepare a small knife-shaped cautery with fire, in this form.
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then treat it with pitch until it heals.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in a fistula of the mouth.
Chapter XXI.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it forms pus and bursts; afterward it becomes old and the pus runs, forming a fistula; then when you treat it and regular treatment is not sufficient, you should heat a cautery according to its size, so that it fits into the fistula.
Then insert the heated iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches the depth and end of it: do this once or twice.
Then treat it after that, according to what we have said about treatment until it is cured.
If the pus is therefore removed and healing occurs, it will be good.
And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted part as it comes to its end.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the Gums and Softening the Teeth.
Chapter XXII.
When the gum softens due to moisture and the teeth become loose, and treatment with medicines is not effective: then place the patient's head in your lap.
Then take a cautery instrument, the form of which will be described later. Place the tube over the tooth and insert the heated cautery quickly into it. Hold your hand for a short while until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And raise your hand: then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour: then spit it out.
For the loose tooth becomes firm, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
Chapter XXIII.
When the pain of a tooth is due to coldness, or there is coldness within the tooth, or it is caused by a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cauterization should be applied in two ways: either with butter cauterization, or with fire cauterization.
The cauterization with butter is done as follows: take cow's butter and heat it in an iron spoon or basin.
Then take a cloth and wrap it around the handle of the heated spoon.
Then dip the cloth in the boiled butter and place it quickly on the painful tooth, holding it until it cools. Repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip a piece of wool or cloth in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth, then hold an ignited iron above it until the heat reaches the deepest part of the tooth cavity.
The cauterization with fire is done by using a tube of brass or iron. And there should be some thickness in the tube so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the diseased tooth.
Then heat the cauterization tool, which will be in the shape of a tube, and place it on the tooth. Hold your hand there until the cauterization tool cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed either on that same day or the following day.
And it is necessary in applying that cautery that the patient fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour; then he spits it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Apply the cautery with whichever end you wish, as is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
Regarding the method of applying cautery in strophulus.
Chapter XXIIII.
When strophuli are caused by phlegm and cold moist humors, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, and you wish to digest them quickly: then use a concave cautery, whose form is as follows.
Having two open ends, so that smoke can emerge from the cautery at the other end: and place it lit upon the swelling once, and a second time if you need it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess.
Then leave it for three days, and place a cloth infused in butter on it, until what the fire burned off is removed.
Then treat it with tooth ointment until it heals to the shape of the cannula.
Regarding the method of applying cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of breath.
Chapter XXV.
When the moistures overcome the channel of the lungs, and especially when this is accompanied by cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it at night near the root of the throat in a depressed area: and be careful not to proceed with the cautery to the throat, nor on the skin, unless necessary.
Then cauterize it with another cautery near the joint of the neck at the end of the last vertebra: and let the cautery be needle-like according to the method that has been described.
Then treat it with the method that has been described until it is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterizing for diseases of the Lungs, and Cough.
Chapter XXVI.
When the cough and disease of the lungs are due to cold humidities, and the patient does not have fever nor consumption, and the illness is not chronic: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, soft, empty areas.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be tube-shaped according to the form that was described previously.
And if you wish for your cautery to be done by puncturing with a cautery called Punctum, whose form was described previously in the piercing of ear pain: and let there be points from thirty points up to nearly another set.
Then treat it with the method that has been described until it is healed. And now let it have a cautery with three branches: in this form.
Therefore, use it for cauterization when you do with it one application to make three cauterizations.
Regarding the method of cauterization in Titillico, in shoulder dislocation.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to humidity and does not return to its proper position at the time of its return from the dislocation until it becomes accustomed to the act of returning, then it is dislocated by a slight movement as we have already testified about it. Then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Then the patient should be laid supine on their back, or on their healthy side.
Then raise the skin that is on the inner side of the elbow with your left hand fingers: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
Then have a cautery with two branches heated by fire. Its form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will be with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three branches, thus the figure of the cauterization then has six points: and the branches are according to the fineness of the stretched skin.
And this is the form of the cautery having three branches.
And sometimes one is added to this method, which is why there are eight cauteries.
Then place crushed leeks with salt on the cauterized area.
Then ensure the patient remains calm so that the affected limb is not moved for some time until it becomes stronger.
And if the dislocation is upward, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a nail cauterization or by puncturing with multiple cauteries.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed: and the patient is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the stomach.
Chapter XXVIII.
When cold and excessive moisture occur in the stomach, and they continue to affect its condition, causing an increase in phlegm and persistent methods of treatment that are ineffective: then the patient must lie on their back, stretch out their legs, and extend their arms.
Then cauterize with three cauteries: one of them should be as large as the width of one digit under the chest cavity, another using a nail cauterization, and two more below on both sides of the first cauterization, until the shape formed by the cauteries is triangular.
And space them apart so that they do not connect when they form pus. And the depth of the cauterization should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauteries should be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach, it should be done in this form: and the cauterization made for this should be one according to a circular shape as follows.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking for him who is afraid of this cautery: and it is, as you mark on the stomach a spot according to the size that you wish with wax: then cauterize it with the pointed cautery: then cure it with the treatment which preceded until it is healed.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing for cold conditions.
Chapter XXIX.
When pain occurs in the epigastrium due to coldness and humidity, or from thick wind, until the superfluous elements exit naturally from its usual course and the patient is cured as we have said and it does not improve: then the patient should lie on his back with his neck raised, and mark three cauterization spots with wax below the hypochondria where a man's elbow reaches: and there should be a space between each spot equal to the thickness of a finger: and let each cautery be straight along the length of the body: and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And let the amount to be cauterized be of a thickness equal to half the thickness of the skin without addition: and let the patient stand on his feet.
但如果患者不能站立，那么让他躺下，伸直双腿，并举起双臂。 This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these spots with a needle cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too far with the cauterization so that the thickness of the entire skin is burned, leading to the burning of the whole body and reaching the intestines: for the skin there is thin, therefore be aware of this.
Concerning the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
Chapter 30.
When an exit appears, and you wish to know whether the abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its covering: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient experiences a constant pain without acute suffering; but if it is in the covering of the liver, there is both severe pain and sharp acuteness. And you will see that it has exhausted the efforts of his physicians to treat it.
Therefore, the patient should lie supine with his neck raised.
Then shape the area of the abscess with a hot iron; then apply the cautery, which resembles a rod, while it is heated.
And this is its form.
And cauterize with it once, until the entire skin is burned and reaches the soft tissue, until all the pus has been expelled; then treat it as you would an abscess that has burst, until it heals.
And one should not use this type of cautery unless their study and practice in the art of medicine are extensive, and through their hands have frequently encountered such ailments with experience; then they may venture to perform such an operation.
However, for me, it is better to leave it as it is.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
Chapter 31.
The ancients said that a cautery should be applied to cold pleurisy with the roots of birthwort in this manner.
And take from the roots of dry great Aristolochia one longer root which is found there, and let it be as thick as a finger.
Then immerse it in oil: and set it alight on fire.
Then cauterize with one cautery on what is between the fork and the neck, and with two small cauteries slightly inclined under the chin, on the part which is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also on what is between the fifth and sixth rib slightly inclined towards the back: and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach.
And with three cauteries from the back: one on what is between two scapulas: and with two cauteries from the sides of the chest, below the one that is between the two scapulas.
And you should not press the cautery with your hand, but let it be applied to the skin so that it can be smelled. And some ancient ones have already said that there are people who use a cautery made of iron like a rod: they ignite it and insert it inside until it reaches the area between the ribs, where it is used near an abscess until pus comes out: as we mentioned in the case of an abscess on the Epatis.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear that either the patient will die immediately, or it will result in a place where a fistula forms, which cannot be healed.
§ On the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen Head XXXII.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we have said in the treatment among the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then cautery is applied to it in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of these methods is to make three cauterizations, or four by marking along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauteries of Epates, whose figure precedes.
And there should be between each cauterization a space equal to the thickness of a finger, or slightly more.
And the method of the cautery, which we mentioned for the cautery of Epates, should be done evenly.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie supine on their back.
And another method of cautery is as follows: take a cautery with two prongs, which we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and lift the skin that is directly above the spleen, where the left elbow of the patient reaches: and when you lift the skin, do so according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the two burning prongs until you penetrate the skin from the other side: then remove the cautery: thus four cauteries are made. And if you wish to cauterize using a cautery with three prongs.
Then treat the area after you let it emit pus for many days: for this is more effective than other methods mentioned earlier in the treatment.
On the method of cauterizing in Dropsy.
Chapter XXXIII.
Cautery is not used in dropsy except when properly indicated.
When you treat patients with dropsy using the methods of treatment that we have described in the division, and if the treatment does not improve their condition, then it is necessary to cauterize them with four cauteries around the navel, one on top of the stomach, another above the pubis, one over the spleen, two behind between the spine, one directly on the chest, and one directly on the stomach. The depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cauterized area open so that it can release pus over time.
And do not abandon the patient from treatment after cauterization; it is necessary to maintain two intentions for them: and with God's help, their healing will hasten.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be like a nail, as previously described. The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the back should be like an olive, as previously described.
On the method of cauterizing the Feet and Legs. Chapter XXXIV.
When they become inflamed and filled with yellowish water in dropsy, you should cauterize on the back of the foot at a point between the third and fourth toes. Raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it. Then raise your hand again: and do not repeat this process at all.
For lemon juice will flow, and let it be used as a cautery in this manner.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be made with the sharp edge of a knife: and let it be made along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another below that, around the middle of the thigh: and above every hip joint, two cauteries: and leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time: so that some water may ooze from it: then treat it with what we have said previously.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in the treatment of the abdomen. Chapter XXXV.
When there is a resolution of the abdomen due to cold and moisture, until the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened: and it is treated according to methods of treatment, but it does not heal: and you see the patient enduring a cautery of great power, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach, as previously described for stomach cauterization with a circular cautery, and four fine cauteries around the navel, and with a fine clavicle-shaped cautery: and a large cautery above the alcalis, or with two such cauteries.
And if you see excessive moistures and the patient enduring this, then cauterize him with a cautery above the pubis, and a cautery over the entire ileum: and perhaps you will add two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one.
For the treatment is progressing, whose aid does not err.
Regarding the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids or one that is caused by thick, cold humors or corrupted moistures and cannot be cured with the methods we described: then cauterize three times above the lower vertebra of the spine near the gluteal region in a triangular pattern, and cauterize below the navel at about two finger breadths.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and that the food does not digest, and you see his face becoming inflamed: then cauterize him above the stomach with a large cautery, as previously mentioned; and cauterize above the liver, and another one above the spleen with a needle-like cautery; leave the cautery open for some time; then treat him until he is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the wound after the removal of hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you remove a hemorrhoid, then ignite the cautery which resembles a rod.
Then insert the ignited cautery into the removed hemorrhoid; and move your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows: do this once or twice. If there are many hemorrhoids, then cauterize each one with the cautery as we have described.
Then treat them with ointments as appropriate until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery above the anal region, it is more severe in treatment.
Concerning the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not submit to the cutting and procedure that we have described in its place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with cauterization.
When therefore a fistula occurs and persists, pus runs from it, and corrupted humors accumulate.
It is therefore appropriate to examine it with a fine probe.
Then determine the depth of the fistula using a probe.
Then heat the cautery, which is shaped like a rod.
Then insert the heated cautery into the fistula, and determine how far it goes inside. And apply the cautery repeatedly to it until all the corrupted tissues are burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to the necessity of the case.
And be careful not to burn the nerve, if it is there, or any large veins. Or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious around all these areas.
And do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is in a fleshy part and you consider that it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the area until it heals.
If the area seals up and matter is expelled from it, and it remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it has healed completely.
And if no material is removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted opening deep within it, or something like those mentioned above will come to mind in its place.
Paragraph on the Method of Cauterizing the Kidneys.
Chapter XXXIX.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or from thick wind, and it diminishes because of that for the sick person, then you should cauterize above the almethena above the kidneys, using cautery over the entire kidney with a nail-shaped cautery, whose preceding details have been mentioned previously.
And perhaps we should cauterize it a second time at the almeidatus.
Therefore, three lines will appear.
Therefore, they will be more effective for healing.
Paragraph on the Method of Cauterizing the Bladder.
Chapter XL. When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to coldness and moisture, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it at the lower part of the pubis above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, using one cautery from the right side and another from the left: and the length of each lateral cautery should be according to the width of the joint of the thumb: and cauterize it with an inferior dorsal cautery, or with two cauteries if you need them: and let these be according to the previously mentioned nail-shaped cautery.
Paragraph on the Method of Cauterizing the Uterus. Chapter XLII.
When cold and dampness occur in the womb and prevent impregnation, corrupting her menstrual flow and delaying its provocation, causing pain upon their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we mentioned regarding the cauterization of the bladder, and once on the sacrum below the back, or twice: and the cautery should be shaped like a key.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
Chapter XLII.
When the mucous humidities flow to the ankle region and become the cause of its displacement from its proper place: and the sign of this is that one leg is longer than the other when compared: and the location of the dislocation is found to be empty.
Therefore, you should cauterize the affected area above the ankle pit with a cautery similar to a circle: after marking with pitch around the perimeter of the pit, as it revolves: and let the pitch fall in the center of the circle.
And the cautery should have the form that was mentioned earlier in the cauterization of the stomach.
If you do not have this cautery available to you, then cauterize it three times with a large olive leaf cautery: and the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin throughout.
Then treat it until it heals.
Concerning the method of cauterizing for sciatica. Chapter XLIII.
When pain occurs in the pit of the stomach, and the cause is cold and moisture: and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, but if this treatment does not help and the condition persists: then you must relieve the patient of thick humors with fetid pills, or artificial pills, and similar remedies.
Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization is in two ways: either with caustic medicines or with fire.
Cauterization with fire is done in many ways.
One of which is to cauterize above the pit of the stomach with three triangular cauteries, in this manner.
And make them either good or bad in depth.
And the space between each cauterization should be the width of a finger. Let the cautery be olive-shaped.
At times, the cautery is applied in the middle above the pit of the stomach.
Therefore, there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form was described earlier in the cauterization of dislocated stomachs: let it be a circle encompassing the entire navel area.
And burn the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is attached to the navel area itself and does not extend up to the hip and thigh.
If it extends to the hip and thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the hip, at the place where the patient points out the location of pain, and let your cautery on the splint be about four digits towards the wooded part: and let the cautery be knife-shaped. And the depth of the cauterization should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends to near the toes, then cauterize it there where he points, with a puncture cautery, three, four, or more times if necessary.
And if he indicates that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize it there with one knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not proceed with the cautery to such an extent as to burn a nerve or a major artery, and thereby cause harm or contraction for the patient.
And I have indeed seen one and another of those who cauterized above the splint and proceeded too far in the cauterization, resulting in inflammation of the leg until a tumor extended to the foot, which became perforated and completely corrupted: then peritonitis occurred, followed by death.
If the pain is in both parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
And certain wise ones have said that in the cauterization of an abscess, this is the method for the cautery.
Make a cautery like one made of iron, whose diameter is half the width of a palm: and let it be at its opening as thick as the core of a finger, or slightly less: and inside that cautery should be a third cautery.
And let the space between each pair of forceps be the width of one thumb joint: and let the forceps be open on both sides: and let their height be about one or two thumb joints: and fit them with a handle made of appropriately shaped iron attached to the forceps.
And this is its form.
Then heat it in the fire until it turns red and sparks: then place it on a tray while the patient lies on their healthy side.
Cauterize him with three round cauteries at once.
Then leave him for three days.
After that, apply plasters with butter: and leave the wound open for many days.
Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, we have used this type of cautery only rarely because of the fear caused by its appearance: and also because few are willing to endure it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries for those who can endure it and find the right place for its use.
However, when using cautery with burning medicines, you should make two forceps with a perforated ring, into which the pin of the hinge descends from brass or iron, as long as the wall: their height should be about two thumb joints, or nearly so.
And let the space between each of them be the width of a finger, and let them be open both below and above: and let them fit together according to this form.
Then place it on the box of pitch, with the patient lying on their healthy side.
And press your hand strongly on the box of pitch.
Then pour warm water, heated briefly with fire, between the two circles; keep it for a certain period of time: and let the patient tolerate its biting and burning, as he will find it feels like fire, until the biting subsides.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the warm water from the pitch entirely with sweet water; then leave it for three days.
And place butter on it until the blackness of burning is removed: and leave it for several days, and pus will flow from it.
For this is the final step in the treatment.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a statue in it that contains water, as you did with the pitch equally.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written it in the chapter on the preparation of medicines.
Take one part of alkali and one part of unslaked lime: grind both, and put them in a new pot whose lower part has a small hole, according to the quantity that can be ingested by the finger: place another earthenware pot underneath the first pot: then pour over the alkali and lime some sweet water so that it covers both with your finger: after which press them well with your hand: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the lower earthenware pot.
Then collect all that water and pour it over another piece of lime: and boil it until it is renewed.
For then it will be very strong and sharp, which is used in many medical operations and in cauterizing other limbs.
For it accomplishes the work of fire itself.
And among the medicines used to cauterize the thighs are turpentine, cardamom paste, and lime with soap, such that both are thoroughly mixed.
And Galenus recounted in his writings the treatment of an ancient man for pain in the thigh and sciatic vein: and he highly praised its effectiveness.
And he said that it did not require any other treatment, and that he was healed in one attempt. He also mentioned that perhaps the patient entered a bath carried by others and emerged from it already cured. And it should be taken from green muslin: and if the green is not available, take the dry recent one. Grind it much with some fat and apply it to the thigh, where there is pain, or leg, or in the hip: and bind it, and leave it for three hours, or until the patient feels a soothing sensation of burning.
Then introduce him into the bath.
Since his body becomes moist, introduce him into the tub.
For the pain withdraws, and he is healed.
And know that one must not use cauterization with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that goat droppings, when used to cauterize the sciatic vein, are beneficial; and the cauterization is performed in this manner.
Take wool, soak it in old oil, and place it on a deep spot between the big toe and the metatarsal bone, closer to the metatarsal bone.
Then take dry goat droppings and burn them in fire until they become charcoal.
Then place the charcoal on the wool and leave it until it extinguishes.
Then repeat it.
Do not cease doing this until the sensation reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called Vaccinum cauterization.
¶ On the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Chapter XLIIII.
Pain in the back sometimes occurs due to many causes, whether from an accident, a blow, excessive evacuation, or similar factors, resulting from the infusion of cold and moist matter. However, cauterization is applicable only in this single case, which results from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the patient with stinking pills and similar treatments, three lines should be made across the part where the pain is on the back's width. Mark five cauteries or more in each line according to what comes from the patient's tolerance and strength: and let the cauterization be done with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a needle-shaped cautery, in this manner.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for the initial stage of Scoliosis.
Chapter XLV.
This illness often occurs in very young children.
And the sign of its onset in children is that it occurs with constriction during breathing when raising and moving: and you will find at the last vertebrae of the back and those around it that they have begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see this and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular in this manner.
And place the cautery evenly over all parts of the vertebrae: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebrae with a needle-shaped cautery in two lines or three: and let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the area until it heals, as we have said.
And be careful not to administer the cautery in a hump caused by nerve spasm.
Regarding the method of cauterization for gout and joint pains. Chapter XLVI.
When the pains of joints are caused by cold humidities that spread to any part of the body, then when such pains occur in the feet, it is the custom among physicians to call this condition gout properly.
Therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated with methods of treatment and the pains do not subside, then cauterization removes them.
And it is such that you should cauterize the area after evacuation around the joint of the feet with multiple cauteries: and let the cauterization be olive-based.
This is its form.
And if you need to puncture the top of the foot, then do so with a puncturing cautery.
If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it above each knee with three or four cauteries from all sides, using this same Caelius's cautery. If you find it necessary to use this cautery more extensively, then proceed with the cauterization. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but let it be about as thick as the thickness of the skin.
If the pains ascend to the knees and the back, then administer what we have mentioned about cauterization in its respective chapter.
If the pains are in the hands only, then puncture around the finger joints, as two lines would encircle them.
If pain remains in the fingers, then prick them, over every knot prick it, and over the web of the hand.
If pains rise after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not remove the sick person from good treatment, from taking medicine.
For if good treatment is done, and phlegm is removed, he will be healed with the help of God along with this cauterization.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in ruptures.
Chapter XLVII.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or colon descends to the testicle, and it is just beginning: then you should instruct the patient to fast on that day.
And let him use mild laxatives so that the feces may leave his stomach.
Then have him sit between your hands on his back: and instruct him to hold his breath until it comes out, or the colon or intestine becomes apparent.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark it with a cautery below the rupture above the pubic bone, with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply the cautery with fire, which has this form, until it becomes white and sparks fly.
Then reduce the intestine or colon to its concavity.
Then let the assistant place his hand on the area so that the intestine does not come out: and you have now opened between the legs of the patient, and placed a cushion under him, and another servant is above his legs, and another holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on that mark, with your hand holding the cautery upright.
And hold it until you reach the mouth with it: or try again with it another way, if you did not succeed reaching the mouth on the first attempt.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine during your cautery time, so that you do not burn it, and thus cause great harm or even death to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cautery, your procedure is ineffective.
And it is necessary for the cautery of children to be fine, according to their size.
Then treat with the remaining ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to provide nourishment for the duration of his treatment, which should ease his stomach: so that the intestine does not come out during strain and evacuation.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, administer a properly made bandage and let him wear it for another forty days.
For when this regimen is used, healing occurs completely.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the abdomen and are beginning, and you wish that they not increase, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let what is burnt from then on be as thick as its third.
Then treat it as I have said, and it will not increase.
And some of the early ones have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, in this form.
After marking it with wax and placing a line that runs widthwise on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a nail-shaped cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better. Regarding the method of cauterizing for pain due to an accident or impact.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in certain limbs due to an accident or impact, and the pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medicines: then it is necessary to cauterize with a puncture cautery.
And the cautery for every limb should be according to its size, and its condition, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
If therefore it is healed by the first cauterization, it is well.
If not: then apply the cauterization again.
Since it is customary for these pains to shift from one member to the adjacent one.
Therefore, it is necessary to follow them with cauterization until the patient is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in Leprosy.
Chapter XLIX.
Lepers are sometimes greatly helped by cauterization.
And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: when you wish to cauterize it, take care to consider it carefully.
If the leprosy is new and you have treated it as we mentioned in the division, and it neither descends nor remains stationary: and you fear for the patient that corruption will spread over his entire constitution: then cauterize him on top of five areas of the head: one in the middle of the head, a second below it towards the forehead near the end of the hairline, and two on each of the two temples, and one at the back above the nape of the neck.
And leave your hand with the cautery for a short while, until it leaves a small impression and causes the outer layer to peel away: so that the expulsion of thick vapors from it may be alleviated, and cauterize the spleen as well, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears clearly: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries that we mentioned for the head, and one cautery at the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each jaw, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large cautery near the coccyx at the base of the tailbone and one above it, in the middle of the sacrum: and two on each hip bone: that is, one on each hip bone, and two on each knee, and two on each shoulder, and two on each elbow, and cauterize him over every joint, from the joints of his fingers and toes: and cauterize over every heel of his feet, and the palms of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves that are above the heel, so as not to burn them. And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery over the pubic bone, and another over the navel, and another over the epigastrium.
And know that the more you add cautery, it is more beneficial and more effective.
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from cautery as healthy people do: because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary for the cauteries to be in size and shape according to the limbs and joints: as has been determined from the types of tools.
Chapter 50.
When a limb is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the member or its shape.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin for a little while.
Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterization is performed to treat numbness that affects the hand or foot at the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
But let no one venture upon that who is not wise in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of the nerves moving the body.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in Albaras.
Chapter LI.
When Albaras is old and does not benefit from any medical ingenuity: then cauterize upon it with a deep cautery for a short while, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white part is removed and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of the herb, lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and pigeon blood, and swallow blood: let there be an equal part of each. Mix all these together and apply them to a cloth, which should adhere to the affected area until it heals.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
Chapter LII.
When cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop its progression: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it spreads.
The wise, however, have said that it should be cauterized with the ultimate cautery in the middle.
I do not agree with that, for I fear it will cause ulceration: and I have seen this happen several times. It is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said: or with multiple cauteries. ¶ On the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
Chapter LIII.
When someone has an abscess that is delayed in maturing, either due to excess moisture causing it or because of the patient's age, such as being old and having little blood, or due to the timing, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess, then cauterize around it with small cauteries by making many punctures.
Then let it go.
For it will hasten in maturing.
但如果你想用烧灼器来穿孔它，那么点燃烧灼器，其形状如下。
And place it in the middle of Adubelati until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be at a distance from where the patient lies, so that the flow may be eased by the pure [substance].
Then treat it until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in corrosive disease. Chapter LIIII.
A corrosive is nothing but a corruption in a limb that moves and corrodes it: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then use many heated irons, both small and large, as appropriate for the location where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the entire root of the corruption is destroyed, and nothing of it remains inside. Then leave it for three days, and apply ground sulfur with oil to the cauterized areas until all the scabs are removed, and all corruption is eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If you see that after three days healthy flesh begins to grow, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply the cautery to what remains of the corrupted areas.
And a corrosive is sometimes treated with sharp medicine.
For it indeed rises in the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is more rapid in healing: and I have already mentioned its use with acute medicine in the division; therefore, accept it there when you need it.
§ On the Method of Cauterizing in Keloids and Warts. Chapter LIV.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a coarse, filtered substance that injures the foot. And cautery in these cases is according to two methods: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
When it comes to cautery with fire, make the cautery concave like an eagle's talon: let it be made of iron according to the size that can contain the wart from all sides: and let it have fine edges.
Then place the heated cautery on the wart. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart: and leave it for three days until it begins to release pus. Then apply a plaster to it with wild herbs crushed with salt: and leave the plaster on it overnight. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
If they do not respond and often occur on the surface of the body, particularly on the hands and feet: then administer cautery with hot water to them: and take a tube made of copper, or iron, or an eagle's talon: and place it on the wart or growth.
Then pour a small amount into the tube from warm water: hold your hand and rotate it slightly with pressure from your hand, so that the edge of the tube impresses itself on the root of the nail, and the warm water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait briefly over the warm water bath for one hour.
Then release it, for the nail is extracted with its roots.
Do this one after another until you have dealt with all of them that are in the body.
Then care for them after they are extracted, using what generates flesh from ointments.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in Tremor.
Chapter LVII.
When tremor occurs in someone due to cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or other causes: then it is necessary to cauterize it four or five times, above the vertebrae of the back, and between each vertebra with a cautery, and on the chest with a cautery, and above the stomach with a cautery.
For tremor ceases with olive cautery, and the recovery from cold illness is hastened. Regarding the method of cauterizing according to Albathir.
Chapter LVIII.
Sometimes ugly eruptions, that is, pimples, which are caused by corrupted thick matter, are expelled from the body.
Therefore, when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize all boils on the head with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, whose tip has been set alight with fire.
Or with the root of long aristolochia.
Or with a lentil-shaped cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner: and they do not increase; and the excess that causes them is ruptured, and they heal from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Regarding the method of cauterizing when blood flows from an artery in a wound.
Chapter LVIII. Often it happens that blood flows from an artery that is cut near a wound, which occurs externally, or near the incision of an abscess, or cauterization of a limb, and similar cases: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When this happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger over it: and press it tightly until blood is trapped under your finger and nothing comes out from it. Then put small olive leaf cauteries and several larger ones into the fire: and blow on them until they become burning hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large, depending on the wound and the location where the artery is disrupted, and place the cautery on it immediately after you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood stops.
If you drive it out by raising your finger from the opening of the artery, and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, one which is prepared in the fire. Do not therefore stop doing it with one after another until the blood is severed.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, so that no other harm befalls the patient. And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to sever it, especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods.
Or with a cautery, as we have said.
Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract, and the blood is severed.
For when it is extracted, the ends of it contract, and the blood is severed. Or let it be tied with a strong thread.
Or apply medicines with the property of severing blood and bind it with a suitable bandage.
He who administers the severing of it with a ligature, and binding with a cloth, or the placement of burning substances and similar treatments, does not truly help, except rarely.
But if it happens to someone and there is no doctor present, nor any medicine: then begin by placing the index finger on the opening of the vein itself, as we have described, and bind it very tightly until the blood is blocked above the wound, and over the artery.
And the finger shall not be removed; pour over it with very cold water continuously until the blood congeals, and swells, and is cut off. And meanwhile he should consider what it needs from cautery or medicine.
¶ End of the First Part.
Book of Surgery by Albucasis, Part II. ¶ On Incision, Piercing, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and Similar Cases.
In the First Chapter we have already discussed any illness in which it is appropriate to use cauterization and burning medicine, its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations. And I placed there chapters from the head down to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path: so that what is sought may be made clear to the seeker. And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, O sons, what is in this chapter from the fear mentioned in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary to have a more cautious approach, since in the operations described in this chapter, there is often an excessive outflow of blood, with which life stands at risk during the opening of a vein, or incision above an abscess, or opening an exit, or treating a wound, or removing an arrow, or cutting near a stone, and similar procedures: from all of these fear and trembling arise, and death often ensues.
And I warn you, do not let hesitation fall upon you, for at times methods of men with methods of illnesses fall upon you in this art.
For among them is one who becomes angry because of his illness, and death is light to him due to the vehemence he finds from his illness and the length of its malevolence.
And when the illness is from fear, which signifies death.
And among them is one who gives his trumpet call and enriches you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is perilous. Therefore, you should not agree with him who comes to you from among them, whose method is such.
And let your caution be stronger than your desire and your greed.
And do not presume on anything from that unless after certain knowledge, which verifies for you that to which a commendable succession leads.
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your patients regarding that to which healing would appropriately lead.
For in that is your assistance for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, children, with His understanding, and may He not take from you direction and inspiration, for it is in His hand.
And indeed, I have organized this Chapter by dividing it into sections, as it proceeded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck to the feet: so that you may be relieved in seeking what you wish from it and what you need.
Concerning the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this illness often occurs in children at birth: or when the midwife presses the child's head too harshly.
And it also happens at times for hidden reasons that are not known.
And I myself have not seen this illness in anyone other than in children: and death hastened towards all of them. Therefore, it seemed to me to abandon the treatment of it.
And I myself saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his head enlarged every day until he could not sit on his own, due to the size of his head: and as the moisture increased, he died.
And this moisture accumulates either between the skin and the bone: or beneath the bone above the skull.
And if the treatment is needed when the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the swelling is small, then you should make a single incision in the middle of the head with a width: and the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, so that the fluid can run out.
And this is the form of the scalpel.
If the moisture is more increased and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions according to this form.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see the seams of the head open from all sides: and water is depressed when you press it with your hand toward the interior, and this is not hidden from you: then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, remove all humidity.
Then bind it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with lint and ointments.
And do not allow the head to be bound with uneven pressure.
And feed the patient with all dry food having little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method for the incision, which involves considering where the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid are apparent.
Because sometimes there is more in the occiput, or at the top of the head, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, proceed with the incision where you see the abscess and the collection of fluid; and cut it as much as possible.
And be careful not to cut an artery, and let there not be a flow of blood that causes the patient to die from that flow when evacuating the moisture.
¶ On Incising Arteries That Are Behind the Ears.
Chapter II.
When someone suffers from catarrh affecting the eyes or chest, and it persists without improvement through medical treatment, then as a last resort, incising these two arteries is more advisable.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, the patient should shave his head.
Then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible.
Then the patient should compress his neck with any cloth he has.
Then observe where the vein pulsates.
And the locations of both are in the depressed areas behind the ears; they are rarely hidden, except in some individuals.
Then mark with wax on both sides and cut each one with a sharp knife on either side, the incision reaching to the bone: and let this be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the knife under the artery and cut it upwards with an upward incision.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which leaps to the interior with frequent jumps.
但如果动脉不明显，那么你需要从耳朵量起，测量三个手指宽度的距离。
Then mark with pitch, and cut until the mouth.
And what must be let out of the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you will let more or less from it. Do all of this according to the amount that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
Then examine the wound.
Then if there is something left to do near the mouth of the wound, cut it so that a hot abscess does not occur; then dress the wound with lint made from linen cloth.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
¶ On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a person suffers from chronic headaches or acute catarrh due to acrid humors and heat in the temples, or severe chronic conditions similar to these: and they are treated with methods of medical care but it does not benefit them: then we have found that in such ailments, the extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have described.
And the method of operation in extracting them is to shave the hair that is on the temples and then locate the visible artery in the temple.
Indeed, it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few people or extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the patient should bandage their head with any cloth they have; then rub the area with a rough cloth.
Put a vapor bath with warm water until it becomes clearly apparent to you. Then take the spatula that I formed a little while ago. Then carefully scrape off the skin with it until you reach the artery.
Then throw the hook into it and pull it up, until you have pulled it out of the skin and made it emerge from the layers beneath it on all sides.
If the artery is fine: then wrap it with the tip of the hook.
Then cut from it a portion according to the amount by which its ends are stretched out and drawn together, so that there is no loss of blood.
For if it is not cut and separated, the blood does not rise thoroughly. Then draw out six ounces of blood, up to three times.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to ligature it in two places with double strong silk thread or with alhohod cords so that it does not decay before the wound heals, and there is no loss of blood.
Then cut away the excess tissue between the two ligatures.
Do this at that hour, or after another hour. And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the opening, using a knife-cautery: until its ends are cut and it will hold in place for the same work.
And it is better to work, unless the patient has a fever, or if the constitution is heated.
Since cautery is one of those things that helps to finish off humidities.
Therefore, it is a better remedy.
And after the arteries have been extracted, it is necessary for the place to be filled with old cooked material: and poultices properly prepared should be placed over it.
And after the treatment, it should be cured with drying medicines that promote flesh growth and with pitch until it is healed.
If during the operation a flow of blood occurs from an artery, then hurry to cut it with cautery, or fill the place with cotton wool; and press your hand until the blood is stopped.
If none of those things are present for you, then place your finger on the place until the blood clots.
And apply the place with water of extreme cold until the sharpness subsides and it is constricted as necessary.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives: let the sharpness of both knives be similar to that of an awl.
However, they have much less sharpness than the two knives.
Because if they are as sharp as two knives, both require cooling: and they do not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, since there is a certain thickness to them, the heat of fire adheres to them, and the flesh is cut off quickly. Thus, this work is better than any other work, lighter, and easier.
And let the space between two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with sealing wax: and place both very hot until they reach the mouth, and cut into the vein at two places: so that it stretches what is between its extremities.
For they do not become completely consolidated with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Regarding the treatment of constant sharp tear duct passages from the eyes.
Chapter IV.
When tears are constant and their passage is from veins that are above the exterior of the skull: and medicine does not help much with treatments for them, and you see the patient's face already reddened, and they feel a creeping sensation in their forehead, as if ants were crawling there: and their eyes are emaciated, moist, to the point that their hairs have been corroded by corrosion: and their eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients used this operation for their treatment, and they called it treatment with a sword.
And you should instruct the patient to shave the hair that is on their forehead.
Then make three incisions on the forehead equidistant along its length: and let the length of each cut be about two fingers wide, with one in the middle of the forehead according to the length of the nose, the second slightly off-center from the movement of the jaw muscles, and the third on the other side: and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand away from the connection of the two mandibles, and let the total length of all incisions be the width of three joined fingers: and have a piece of sponge prepared or several dried cloths with which you can dry the blood.
Then insert a probe with two sharp ends, the form of which is as follows.
From the incision on the side of the temple to the second incision: and remove with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, as if doing so over the mouth. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then remove this probe and insert into the first incision again another instrument called a sharp spatula, which is blunt on one side and not sharp on the other.
And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached with the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and push it until it reaches the median fissure: and remove with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until it reaches what appears under the skin.
Then do this in the median fissure until you reach another fissure.
And after an amount of blood flows out, press the areas from clotted blood fragments. Then place a piece of old pottery over every fissure, and put poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar on them.
And ensure that a warm abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, remove the bandage, and administer much infused liquid with warm water.
Then apply the ointment called basilicon and other remedies used for wounds until it heals.
On the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs originating from the interior of the head and affecting the eyes.
Chapter 5.
When acute, sharp, and persistent catarrhs occur to someone, and you see their eyes becoming narrowed, small, and already appearing weakened: with the eyelids ulcerated, hair falling from them, and a sharp pain deep in the head accompanied by sneezing: then consider these symptoms, for such substances and catarrhs do not arise except from many veins.
And the better treatment for them is as follows.
And it involves instructing the patient to shave their forehead.
Then make an incision in the forehead, either one down the middle or slightly across it, and start with the incision from the left temporal area to the right temporal area: and let the incision go up to the bone: keep your hand away from the temples, which move during chewing, until the bone is exposed: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two edges of the incision with an old pot shard or linen threads.
Then stitch it closed from above with bandages: and soak the bandages in wine and oil so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you remove it and see that the hot abscess is beginning to subside: then it is necessary to rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that causes flesh to grow: just as if you take two parts from wheat flour and four parts from colophony: and prepare from them a plaster, and apply it at the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Concerning the Treatment of What Falls Upon the Ear. Chapter 6. Anything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone, or something like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it comes from a plant, such as peas and beans; or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and things similar to them; or it is some kind of animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or something like a stone among those things that do not add to it and do not grow in the ear, expose the Ear alone: if you see the stone, then distill something from violet oil or sesame oil into the Ear.
Then administer the removal of it, and make the person sneeze with something induced, and plug the nose at the onset of a sneeze, after which you place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upward.
Indeed, it often exits with this treatment.
If however it does not exit, then administer its removal with forceps, that is, fine pincettes: the form of which is as follows.
If it therefore exits with the forceps, it is good.
And if not, then administer its removal with a fine blunt hook of few folds. If it does not come out through that [method], then make a tube of copper, and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear much, and remove what is around the tube with a soft cloth softened with oil, so that there is no way for wind except through the tube: then draw it out with your breath strongly. For it often comes out as we have described.
If it does not come out this way: then take a small amount of birdlime or viscum, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, and place it on the end of the probe after you have wrapped something suitable around it: then insert it into the hole of the ear easily after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If it does not come out with all the methods we have described, then hurry to cut it open before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting should be such that the phlebotomist first draws blood from the head: and let him draw blood from the patient according to the measure of his strength.
Then have the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near its fatty part in a depressed area: and let the cut be in a crescent shape until you reach the cartilage: then remove what is possible for you with your instruments.
Then treat the incision quickly and with care from your hour onward until it heals.
If something falling into the ear is one of those grains that grow and swell: then administer its removal.
If it does not yield to you for removal, then take a thin, fine spatula in this shape.
And use it to remove that type of grain from the ear, and do not attempt this when you think the grain has become moistened by the vapor of the ear until you have broken it into many pieces: then extract them with hooks or with a fine forceps, or by suction, as we have said, for its extraction is thereby made easier.
In the case of water that enters the ear, the patient must use sneezing with a prepared solution first: and then he should fill his ear with some boiled salt water. And he should lie on the side where the water is in the ear.
If it comes out through that, it is good.
And if it does not: then take many stones, as long as a finger, thin and soft, and warm them with fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of them into the ear canal: and jump on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear.
Do not stop doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water will come out such that you should take one from parchment or reed, and insert one end into the ear: and light the other end with fire until it burns extensively.
Then insert another reed and do this many times until all the water comes out: and remove it with a tube as was mentioned regarding the stone.
In extracting an animal entering it, if it is of small body, like a flea and the like, treat it as I said in the division.
But if it is of large body, which appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks: and this matter is easier than all those held in the ear.
In extracting a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we said in the division and in the chapter on distillation, and your treatment does not benefit: then you must look at the ear in the sun.
If therefore something appears there from worms, then extract it with forceps or with fine hooks.
If however nothing appears there, then take a tube, which has this form, narrow below, wide above: and insert the fine end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate: then suck with it forcefully.
Do this multiple times until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey you and come out, then scrape around the tube with a curette, as I said about stone.
If they do not come out as I said: then administer distillations which the ancients have already used for killing worms: and you will find this in the chapter on distillation.
And let your application be with this instrument, through which you pour oil and medicines into the ear, whose form is depicted here.
As you see, make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole, and wide at the top.
Let it therefore be such that the part pushing what is in the concavity of the tube be made properly of air.
And if you wish, take a rod and wrap its tip with soft cloth properly; then pour oil, juice, or whatever of these medicines into the tube, and place it in the ear. Then insert the rod with the cloth above it, and press it gently with your hand until the oil is pushed into the concavity of the hearing organ, and the patient feels it internally. And what is poured into the ear should be warmed slightly over fire; beware that nothing very cold distills into it, for medicine does not tolerate such conditions.
¶ On the Treatment of Ear Wax Blockage.
Chapter VII.
Sometimes infants emerge from their mothers' wombs with their ears not perforated.
And it also happens to some people that ear wax blockage occurs in the ear canal due to a wound or flesh grown there.
And this blockage sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, where it cannot be seen; and at other times it affects the outer part of the ear canal slightly, and can be seen.
That which occurs deep within the ear and cannot be seen is difficult to treat in most cases.
And when the blockage can be seen, you should place the affected ear in sunlight and look into it. If you see a visible blockage, open it with a fine probe whose shape is as follows: its tip should have a small width and one part should be sharp, while the rest of the probe should be smooth on both sides so that it does not harm the ear.
If there is an overgrowth of flesh in the passage of the ear, hold it with a fine hook and cut it with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
If the overgrowth is deep within the ear, then take a fine and flexible probe and heat it slightly with fire; then insert it into the passage of the ear.
If you detect an overgrowth along with what the patient experiences as a heaviness of hearing, attempt to open it with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then apply liquid cerate according to the size of the hole, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound.
Or take cerate and mix it with rose water, and sprinkle finely ground sugar over it, then use it.
If you see that the ear is already becoming abscessed, then it is necessary to extract the cerate and allow it with new cerate, which you wrap in a preparation made with rose oil, until the abscess softens; then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear; and use the remaining treatment that stops the flow of blood, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Concerning the treatment of eyelid tumors (Altheli).
Chapter VIII. These eyelid tumors that occur on the eyelids are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, you should hold them with forceps: or with a hook, and cut them from their roots with scissors.
Then place ground wheat on the wound sites.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And cauterizing them is better after the incision.
For they often return when something remains of their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned up, and they do not return.
Concerning the treatment of styes in the eyelids.
Chapter IX.
It often happens in the eyelids that something occurs which resembles a sty in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called a grandine. It is an aggregation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The procedure for treating them is to first determine if it is a grandine that appears on the eyelid and moves to all parts, and if its resolution is easy.
Therefore, find a fissure in it along its width.
Then scrape it from all sides with ease until it comes out.
Then hook it with a hook and remove it.
If, however, it does not prepare itself for removal unless you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it causes some harm to the patient.
If the crack is large, then join it with a suture and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it.
For an ointment restores it and makes it heal.
And if a foreign object has shifted towards the inner ear towards the inner surface, then turn the eyelid inside out, and retrieve the object with a hook; besides which, you may need to make an incision and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is stretched due to an incision, it does no harm.
Then wash the eye after the removal of the foreign object with salt water, and treat the area with something that promotes healing until the patient is healed.
Concerning the treatment of chalazion of the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a fatty substance that forms in the eyelids, and it most often occurs in children. It burdens their eyes, causing them to have catarrhs in the mornings, so much so that they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes. As a result, you see them lying with their faces down always, and sleeping with it on their eyelids, which are moist under the eyebrows due to inflammation. The swelling of Axirnath is visible, and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel the Axirnath between them.
And the method of treatment is for the patient to place their head in your lap.
Then take a piece of linen and prepare on it myrtle gum, and make from the myrtle gum a circle according to the size that Axirnath contains on all sides.
Then place it on her and press with your fingers on all sides so that the Axirnath aggregates in the center of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a probe incising fissures across the width, and let there not be a fissure larger than that which occurs in phlebotomy at a depth.
Or you must cut the skin entirely until you reach the Axirnath, for in many conditions the Axirnath proceeds from a fissure in the shape of a piece of white fat.
So remove it with the cloth that you have soaked between your fingers to the exterior: and you turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses: and be careful not to add anything in the fissure so as not to reach with a probe to the eye, and injure it.
But if the Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you should gently add a little to the fissure until the Axirnath comes out.
Then remove it as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and secure them with poultices.
And there are people who rub salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure, so that it liquifies what remains of that moisture.
Then treat it until it is healed.
If however an abscess hot to the touch should occur in a certain area, then treat it with calming plasters until it is healed.
Regarding the methods of Ataxmir for the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft around the eye, resulting in it being irritated as it should not be.
Chapter XI.
When additional hairs grow on the eyelids outside of their natural course and become entangled: then they harm the eye and cause various ailments to occur, such as continuous tears, softening of the eyelids, and opacity, until it becomes a cause for the destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir treats the eye according to four methods. Or by cauterization with fire.
Or with sharp medicine, as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
Or Ataxmir is treated by incision and suturing.
Or with the use of tubes, as I will explain.
It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap.
Then turn the eyelid with your left hand.
If it turns correctly, that is good.
And if it does not turn, insert a needle where the thread is located at the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread upwards, and let it be close to the actual hairs, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards along with the eyelid, and turn it with a probe.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid with hairs added from the greater tear duct down to the lesser tear duct.
Then remove the thread, and place a small piece of cloth or fabric under the eyelid; then mark on the eyelid with wax, which should resemble the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that it be shaped according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: since this now varies among people.
For there are those who need for a large portion to be cut from the eyelid, according to the amount that is softened by the eyelid. Then with a needle, find along the two lines that you marked, and start from the greater tear duct down to the lesser tear duct, and let the incision be close to the natural hairs, as thick as the width of a hair.
Then insert the hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then remove the entire piece of tissue. Then sew together the two edges with a needle and fine thread; and wipe away the blood, and make it adhere so that any excess thread does not protrude above the eyebrows, if you wish to do this: and if not, do not worry about it.
Then leave the stitches and threads for three days or four: after that, take care of it. And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches and treat it with something that dries and contracts it.
For the eyelid should be raised at the sealing of the wound and its union; but this will be better.
This method of treatment was taught by the ancients to Ataxmir.
However, there is concern for the sick person, and it comes from good practice, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method used by Ataxmir as well: it involves marking a figure on the eyelid that resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have recounted.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks, following the shape shown below, then cut away what is excessive using small forceps, following this shape, with equal precision in the incision.
但如果无法使用钩子或无法保持平衡，那么拿一根带有线的针，将其插入形状的中心：再在较大的泪腺附近插入一根线，在较小的泪腺附近插入另一根线：然后用手指均匀地拉紧这些线。
Then raise your hand with an equal elevation: and raise the skin on which the marking is made, as we have recounted.
Then join the two lips of the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
但如果在你的切口或裂口处形成了脓肿，用软膏、类似含有镇静成分的药膏来治疗这个脓肿。
有时也会发生睫毛反转的情况。
Regarding the treatment of Ataxmir with canes.
And you should turn the eyelid and cut the cleft that is inside, as I have described.
Then skillfully make two canes or two thin pieces of wood: their length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be narrower than the width of a finger: and now cut at the ends of each on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then attach each one carefully to the part that protrudes from the eyelid, and tightly bind the two canes on both sides with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days. For the skin that is tightly bound will die, blacken, and decay until it falls off on its own.
If it is delayed, then cut it with forceps.
Then treat it until it heals.
When it has thus consolidated, the eyelid will be raised: and the hairs will not sting.
And this is the shape of the two canes, which you should make according to this figure, and in quantity regarding length and width.
Regarding the raising of stinging hairs in the eye with a needle.
Chapter XII.
The procedure is to take a fine needle and insert into it a thin, soft silk thread. Then join the ends together, and tie them tightly with a fine knot: and let the length of the thread be one palm.
Then arrange another fine thread underneath it briefly, and tie the ends if you wish.
Then let the patient place his head in your lap, and be close to the light so that the operation can be clearly seen: for the operation is subtle, or minute.
Then insert the lancet with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you withdraw it from above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up over the Alinxotati: and insert that hair into the Alinxotati: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the Alinxotati from the eyelid with the natural hair.
If however the Alinxotati is pulled and the hair does not come out with it: pull the Alinxotati down, with the thread that you arranged in it, until it comes out from the upper opening, and you see it with your eye: then you will pull the Alinxotati and the thread: and remove both, and close the eye: and leave it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from the natural hairs, and let it be pulled out with it: or leave it, until it grows longer over time, and then pull it out.
Concerning the treatment of al-xatrati, which occurs in the upper eyelid.
Chapter XIII.
When this al-xatrati occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this al-xatrati is either natural or accidental.
The accidental al-xatrati is caused by the healing of a wound, cutting, cautery, or similar treatments.
And the method of treatment is to cut through that hardened tissue, and to separate its edges, placing between them a bandage made of linen, and binding it until it heals.
And you should not use drying and constricting substances in its treatment; for if you do that, the al-xatrati will become worse than it was. Instead, use softening substances such as fenugreek: and apply a poultice made with water in which marshmallow root and flax seeds have been cooked: and anoint it with diaquilon ointment, melted with some oil: and wrap it with linen and treat it thus.
And the goal of your treatment is to try every means to prevent it from healing, according to its original form.
And the treatment we have described is merely a correction of the al-xatrati, so that it does not return to its original form completely. Concerning the treatment of al-xatrati which occurs in the lower eyelid, and it is a wrinkle or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This is what is done below and is truly called Alxatrati.
And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental occurs from a wound, or a crack, or cautery, and things similar to these.
And the way of the operation is such that you should take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left lacrimal bone to the right lacrimal bone until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a thin blade.
If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take a rod and place it in the fissure, and use it to turn the eyelid: and make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two cuts come from the two corners of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when they join, they form this shape, which is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that piece of flesh in the quantity of what is its sharp lower side from what follows the eyelid.
Then join the separated parts: or sew them together with thread and wool.
Then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines and applications until they heal.
And if Alxatrati occurs from a crack, and sewing, or cauterization: then it is necessary that you cut the crack flat under the eyelashes, even as it preceded.
Then separate between the two lips with a licinus, as we have said.
And the summary of the discourse on the treatment of Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that the procedure should proceed rapidly according to how it is prepared based on the form of Alxatrati.
For it itself is of many diversities in form: and the prudent artisan prepares his method in whatever way it is possible for him, until he brings the figure back to its natural form or close to it, and even the sick person himself, according to what befits him from the procedure and instruments in many dispositions.
¶ On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Chapter XV.
At times this consolidation occurs in many people such that the upper eyelid becomes adhered to the white of the eye, and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a hook. Then cut the adherence with a blunt spatumile, which should not be sharp for cutting but rather dull: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation and the spatumile does not injure the eye with its sharpness: and make your incision as if you are peeling off that adherence with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adherence is healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye and wash it with water: or distill into it from a sieve made of ziniar dissolved in water.
Then separate with a cloth of linen between the eyelid and the eye: and place on the eye wool soaked in egg white: and after three days use a sieve, and with hardeners, until it is healed.
Concerning the incision of nails and protruding flesh of the eyelids.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is nerve-like: and it is similar to a hard fiber, subtle.
Or it is not nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture: which when you touch with iron, or try to grasp it with a hook, it is severed, and the hook does not hold onto it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger tear duct, gradually progressing until it covers the vision, and prevents light and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in cutting it is: the patient should place his head in your lap.
Then open his eyes and raise the eyelid with your hand.
Then grasp the nail with a hook of few folds and extend it upwards.
Then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair, or cow hair: and let the thread be strong, and double the tip of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with the needle, and tie it with the thread, and extend it upwards: and scrape off with the hair the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were cutting it with the hair to its end.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine scalpel or small forceps: and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct untouched, so that it does not happen from cutting it that there is an uninterrupted flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is lifted with just a hook: or with a thread, as we have said.
Then it is scraped off with a gentle scalpel, which has this shape.
And be careful that the scalpel does not touch the cornified membrane, so that it does not result in a rupture and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the cut, put some crushed salt or something made from zinc into the eye, and leave it until another day.
Then treat it with what is necessary until it heals. If the nail is not nerve-filled and you cannot insert a needle into it nor does a hook hold in it, then this type of nail is often cured with medicines and heals as I have described in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the sick person's eye and take a fine, gentle scalpel with weak sharpness, in this shape.
And carefully scrape the nail from above with precision and subtlety.
If you see that it becomes thin and breaks apart, and the blade leaves a mark on it, then let drops from your solution made of zinc or red solution, or crushed salt fall into the eye: and treat the eye until another day.
Then repeat over the operation until everything is completely removed.
Unless there is a warm abscess in your eye: then let it be left alone, and treat the abscess until it heals. Then repeat the operation on it with reason, until it is healed.
However, if the prominence of the lacrimal flesh causes great harm to the eye, suspend it with a hook and cut a part from it: and do not make the incision too deep, so that the flow of tears is not impaired.
Then apply drops to the lacrimal area made of red myrtle, or made from zinc compound, until it is healed. Concerning the incision of Alguardenic and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
A red flesh sometimes grows in the eyes of some people, either composed or placed such that it covers the pupil, approaches it, or stretches over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a rose bud.
And the treatment for this condition is such that the patient should place their head in your lap.
Then open their eyes and remove that flesh entirely with suitable hooks: and hold it with one forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh initially until the entire piece is removed with a scalpel.
And be careful around the eye so that you do not injure it during the operation: and let your cut when cutting this flesh be either with a spatulum, as we mentioned in the incision of a nail: or with small forceps, with which dandelion seeds are collected, according to how its shape will appear after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and all the bandage removed, then fill the eye with ground salt: or pour into it powdered red precipitate, and similar medicines that are corrosive: and place over the outer part of the eye a dressing mixed with egg white: to secure it against a hot abscess.
If some of the bandage remains and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot abscess: then leave the eye exposed, and treat it with something that soothes the abscess.
Then repeat the treatment on it until it is healed.
And do likewise with added flesh that occurs in the eye from this condition.
However, it is necessary that you treat any weak eye through either a natural method or an accidental one, operating with iron: and do not intervene with your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate such treatment.
¶ On extracting a thorn from the eye.
Chapter XVIII. Thorns are red veins that weave over the eye and prevent vision from functioning properly: and they weaken the eye over time.
Therefore, it is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye in which there is a thorn is strong, and there is no illness in it other than the thorn: then extract the thorn from that eye.
And instruct the patient to place his head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one or two hooks according to your discretion: and let the hook be delicate and double-twisted, in this form, or let there be two hooks gradually in one body, in this form.
Then collect with fine tweezers those veins with care, and remove the blood hour by hour until you see those veins removed from the eye, and they resolve: and be careful not to injure the eye with the extremities of the forceps.
And let your work be at noon in the presence of the sun, and be very resolute in your work: so that you cut only those veins.
And when you have finished, then instill into the eye a green or red decoction: so that with its sharpness it may dissolve what remains of the inflammation.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of that at that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that alleviates the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days until the pain subsides: and protect it from a warm abscess: then proceed upon it according to the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the tweezers.
¶ On the Reduction of the Deviated Nasal Septum.
Chapter XIX.
Doctors name the Deviated Nasal Septum Fistula, which you treat with cauterization or with sharp medicine, depending on its previous course.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in that: except to cut into the abscess near its origin, and extract all the moisture and pus within, until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called Rough Head.
Make it from smooth iron, and let its head be round like a dirham, which is punctuated with fine points as if by a file or a subtle punch, and place it on the corrupted bone area. Then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand for a moment until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: do this several times.
Then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand for a moment until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: do this several times. Then restore the place with drying and astringent medicines.
If the place then consolidates, and flesh grows in it, and the pus flow stops: and after forty days it does not recur, and does not form an abscess, and no accident happens to it: then know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is no other option but to redirect the fistula to the nasal opening, following this method.
And it is necessary to expose the bone secondly with iron or with a sharp medicine: and when the bone is exposed, then take a drill in this form, with its tip being made of iron and triangular: and its wooden part should be tapered until the end as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the lacrimal area: and keep your hand a little away from the eye.
Then rotate your hand with the drill until it penetrates the bone, and let the patient feel it; by this, when the patient holds their hand over their nose, they will feel air coming out.
Therefore then restore the place with styptic drying medicines as I have taught you.
When flesh is born and the place hardens, then the substance that was poured outwards returns to its origin; thus it is lighter upon the patient.
On the Reduction of an Eyelid Swelling. Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes along with its entire structure, and there is no damage to vision or reduction in size, then you should relax the patient; afterwards, bleed them; then apply cups to the neck without incisions but with suction.
Then apply a poultice to the eye made from acacia, aloes, frankincense, and styrax.
Then bind the eye above with a plaster covered in many small pieces.
The method of using the small pieces is as follows: take soft cloths, many of them, and double each cloth over four times; make many such cloths. Then place them one on top of another according to the size needed by the eye. Afterwards, bind them with a hard cloth tightly.
And apply cups with suction without incisions again.
Then remove the cups and leave the eye bound day and night.
If the ligature becomes loose again, then it is necessary to bind it tightly once more; then remove the ligature after one day and night, as we have said.
If you see that the eye has already returned to the eyelid, it is good: and if not, then apply the plaster again, and dusting powders, and tightening, and suction cups, until it is healed.
Concerning the Incision of the Eyelid.
Chapter XXI.
When a tear occurs in the eyelid membrane, and it protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of sand, disfiguring the appearance of the person due to this condition, and you wish to cut it: then the procedure is as follows, as I describe: You should insert an needle at the base of the eyelid from the lower part to the upper part.
Then insert another needle with double thread from the lacrimal side, and let it penetrate: and release the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place where the double thread is, and tie it around the eyelid near the needle: and tighten it significantly.
Then remove the needle, and place a woolen cloth soaked in egg white over the eye: and leave it until the thread falls off with the eyelid.
Then treat the eye with something that strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eyelid is tightened from all sides with a circular bandage made of cloth, until the eye becomes significantly swollen.
Then pierce it with a very fine needle that reaches the depth of the eye, and allow the moisture from the egg white to run, and let the eye descend, and immediately begin to tighten it: then continue to tighten it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of Alcomnati.
Chapter XXII.
This illness called Alcomnati is not, in fact, a pus, which accumulates in the eye, similar to water descending, and it is not that itself.
And the method of treatment is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat, either straight or as directed.
Then take the patient's head with your hands from both sides and move it until you see the pus reach the lower parts of the eye.
Then let it be fixed, and do not allow it to descend, and clear the light: and the patient should see things as they were before; and if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
但如果脓液没有按照我说的方法下降，那么让患者坐在你的双手之间。 然后取一根细探针，在角膜与巩膜连接处的边缘轻轻刺入，直到脓液排出。
当脓液排出后，然后滴入温水中混合的蜂蜜水入眼；或在已经煮沸了百里香和蜂蜜的水中滴入。随后按照其余治疗方法进行治疗，直到痊愈。
关于眼中流水的治疗，或白内障的治疗。
Chapter XXIII.
我们现在已经讨论了水的种类在划分中的情况，以及哪些适合通过言语描述和解释来处理，然后根据健康状况采取同样的方法。
Then you must have the sick person sit between your hands, facing away from the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye tightly, and then press with your right hand on the eyelid of the eye in which there is water, if it is the left eye; or with your left hand, if it is the right eye.
Then take with your right hand the almond, if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then place the tip of the almond near the cornea, by the thickness of a radius where it appears on the white part of the eye near the tear duct: then push the almond with force: and you will turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the whites of the eye: and you will feel that the almond has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the almond's journey to its depth be equal to the space that exists from the pupil to the end of the black part: and this is the cornea of the eye.
For you will see it in the very pupil of the eye due to the clarity of the corneal tissue.
Then place the almond until it reaches the place where there is water.
Then press it downward with one force after another.
If the water descends immediately, then the sick person will see it as soon as their vision opens, and the almond will be in their eye.
Then rest for a little while.
If the water descends, then place it again second time, except that the almond should come out.
When it is therefore fixed and does not rise: then extract the almond with ease: and you turn your hand gradually. Then dissolve something of clear salt in water: and wash the eye with it from within.
Then place over the eye a poultice of flax or wool infused in rose oil, and egg white: and bind the healthy eye with it.
We, and those of our time, place on it ground cyminum with egg white.
If the almond does not obey you upon entering the eye due to its hardness, since it is made by humans and the person's eye is very hard: then you must take a small spatula, which is called Alberid, whose shape is as follows.
Therefore, use it merely to gently separate the conjunctiva, and do not insert your hand into the opening: and it is only meant to create a narrow passage for the almond.
Then insert the almond as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare a decently made bedroom for the patient, in which he may sleep on his back in a dark room: and prevent him from all movements and coughing: and give him food that soothes his nature: and do not allow him to move his head either to the right or to the left at all.
And let the bandage remain in place according to his condition until the third day. Then remove it in that dark room and test his vision: and have him look at objects.
Then reduce the ligature as far as the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this at the time of treatment or immediately after cutting; rather, it should be done later because water rises quickly due to a strong gaze.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs, then it is necessary to open the eye before the seventh day. And treat it with what soothes the abscess until it is soothed. Then relieve its sight and place over its face an oral device that regulates its vision for several days while they remain in a dark room.
Then let them leave the house gradually and return to their homes.
And know that in zalta the student is not exempt from vision exercises; then he becomes bold regarding the operation.
And indeed, one of those who came from Alayrach has told us that a perforated jug was used in Alayrach to draw water.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the books of the ancients. It is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of signs from the jug, so that those who do not know it can stand by them.
They should be made of pure copper: and their extremities should be finely triangular and pointed.
Forms of the jug.
Concerning the treatment of flesh growing on the nose.
Chapter XXIIII.
Sometimes flesh of various kinds is born in the nose, from which something resembling a many-footed scorpion is produced; and from that there arises a cancerous stone-colored flesh, and from it also arises a soft flesh that is not stone-colored.
In dealing with the flesh that is soft and not cancerous or fraudulent among those mentioned, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing opposite to the sun, and open their nostrils. Then throw a hook into these flesh growths: then pull them outwards, and cut what you have hooked using a very fine and sharp scalpel from one side until you know that all of the flesh has been removed.
If some of it remains that cannot be cut away, then scrape it with one of the fine instruments with ease until nothing more remains.
If blood overpowers you, or if a warm abscess occurs: then apply what is necessary to counter it. If it is from malignant abscesses, then quickly cauterize it until the blood is cut off and all flesh is removed.
Then vinegar, water, or wine should be poured into the nose after the incision.
If the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you should know that it is now healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that inside there is flesh born on the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with its incision.
Then it is necessary to insert a linen thread of some thickness, and make many knots in it, and place between each knot the length of a finger or less. The patient should be instructed to send one end of the thread into the nose with a probe or whatever is possible for him after he has made it like azer: and let him pull out his smell, until it reaches as far as the chest and comes out over his throat.
And indeed, this is often done similarly with children in schools like Attom's: and it is an easy thing for one who wishes to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end that comes out over the nose, and the other that remains inside the nose.
Then, as the assistant cuts the flesh at the knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then remove the thread: and place into the nose after cleaning the blood a linen strip soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has dissolved everything that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end of the treatment in the nose for several days until it heals.
但如果需要干燥的治疗，则使用它。
为了制作头部净化装置，用于蒸馏橄榄油和其他鼻用药物，应使用银或铜制成：其形状类似于小型灯，开口像海螺一样：其管道也应类似。
而且如果你想制作一个封闭的管子，就像一根管子一样。
而且用于制作头部净化装置的海螺形工具应该是完整的，开口的：它应该有一个把手在末端，当你用它加热橄榄油或其他液体药物时可以握住。
这就是工具的形状。 ¶ 关于鼻瘤的治疗。
第二十五章。
常常在鼻子的末端会长出瘤子，随着时间的推移它会增大并变得更加明显，直到它的外观变得丑陋。
对于这种情况，在瘤子刚开始出现时就应该进行切割，并彻底清除它。
然后在该位置放置烧灼剂或燃烧性药物，以固定其位置。
If therefore the incision of it is delayed until it has grown large, then observe, if it is stony, hard, dark in color, and insensitive: then do not touch it with iron; for it is a suppurating sore that is cancerous.
For I have often seen that when one incises such an abscess, it results in great mischief for the one who had it.
And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be incised throughout its entirety, then evacuate the patient, and cut it without fear, without hesitation: and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it heals.
¶ On Suturing the Nose, Lip, and Ear.
Chapter XXVI.
Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, surgery is of little benefit, except in certain individuals.
Therefore, when someone sustains an injury from that, you must observe whether it is a recent wound with its own blood, and then bring the edges of the wound together with stitches; subsequently treat it until it heals.
And if the edges of a disrupted continuity have already separated and each part has become healthy: then you must remove all parts from the visible skin until it bleeds.
Then bring the two edges together with stitches and secure them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground frankincense over it; place a piece of soft plaster and another consolidating plaster on top of the powder; and leave it bound for two or three days.
Then loosen it, and replace the medicine: and leave it until the threads come off by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is to bring together the separated parts, either with needles, as we have described for abdominal sutures: or to bring them together using thread, as I have taught you.
Concerning the removal of nodes from the lips.
Chapter XXVII. Many people develop hard lumps similar to grain seeds inside their lips, some of which are small and others larger.
Therefore, you must evert the lip and cut above each node, then hook it with an uncino (hook) and cut it away from all sides.
Then fill the place after the cut with powdered zeger (zinc oxide) until the bleeding stops.
Then wash it with vinegar, and treat the area with it, where there is astringency, until the wounds heal.
Concerning the incision of flesh that has grown over the gum.
Chapter XXVIII. Flesh often grows over the gum, which the ancients called abuluss.
Therefore, you must hook it with an uncino or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the pus to drain or the blood to flow.
Then place on the ground of zegi powder, or other astringent powders.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Concerning the treatment of teeth with iron.
Chapter XXIX.
Sometimes on the surfaces of teeth, from both the inner and outer parts, there gather rough, unpleasant coatings, which can become discolored, turning yellow or green, until the decay spreads to the gums, making the teeth foul because of it.
Therefore, you must have the patient sit between your hands, and place their head in your lap. Scrape the molar and tooth where you see coatings that resemble sand, until nothing remains of them. Do the same for black spots, green discolorations, yellowing, and other impurities until they are clean.
If what needs to be removed is taken away from the beginning of the treatment, that is good. If not, then repeat the treatment on them a day later, a second time, and a third time, until finally you achieve your goal through persistent effort.
And know that a tooth requires scraping with tools of various shapes and forms, as you prepare for the procedure. Therefore, the tool used to scrape the tooth from below is different from the one used between the teeth, according to other forms.
And you should have these forms of scraping tools prepared, which you see.
On the Extraction of Tooth Pain.
Chapter XXX.
One must treat a tooth from its pain with all skill and delay in extracting it.
For there is nothing to replace it once it is extracted: for it is a lofty substance. Only when there is no excuse for extracting it should one proceed with extraction when the patient is compelled to do so, in order to stabilize and confirm the painful tooth with you.
For often the pain deceives the patient, who thinks it is in a particular tooth and extracts it. Then the pain does not subside until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen this from the practice of phlebotomists.
When the painful tooth is confirmed with you, then you must scarify around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy until the gums are loosened on all sides: then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps initially gently, until you agitate it.
Then place large forceps properly on it, and have the patient's head between your knees, which you now hold firmly so that it does not move: then pull the tooth in a straight line so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did initially.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then you must fill that hole with cloth and tie it tightly with the tip of a fine probe so that it does not break during the moment of compression on it with forceps.
And you should act with great care when making incisions around the gums on all sides.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, and leave part of it behind, and let it return to the patient from the evil which is greater than its initial pain.
And be careful not to do what ignorant bleeders do in their haste and boldness regarding its removal, beyond what we have described.
For they often cause serious illnesses in people, which are difficult to treat, and the roots of the problem remain entirely or partially. Or they extract it along with some bones of the jaw, as we have testified many times before. Then wash the area after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt. If bleeding occurs from the area (this often happens), then grind some zegi and fill the area with it. And if you do not have zegi, cauterize it if zegi is not available to you.
The forms of fine forceps used to move a tooth should have long ends, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when pressed against the tooth. The handles should be thick, such that when you squeeze them, they do not slip or bend. They should have short ends and be made of smooth iron or properly forged steel with straight ends: and on their ends there should be teeth, some of which fit into others to grip firmly by constriction.
And sometimes the ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called a heron, and they provide a strong grip.
On the removal of teeth, and the extraction of broken jawbones.
Chapter XXXI.
When some of the tooth that is being removed breaks and remains, then you should place a cloth soaked in butter on the site for one or two days until it softens. Then insert into it an instrument shaped like the beak of a bird called a heron, or use forceps.
The shape of these forceps is as follows.
Their tips should be made like the inside of a file: or like an aliskilfegi.
If these forceps do not suffice for the extraction, then you should hollow out around the root, expose all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small Lever, which has this shape.
The tip should be short and somewhat thick: and it should not be too flexible so that it does not break.
If the root comes out with this tool, it is good: and if not, you should assist with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows.
The shape of the first instrument has a triangular tip, with some thickness.
The shape of the triangular tip is fine and slender.
Also, you should use this instrument with two branches, which has this shape. And with other instruments and tools that have been mentioned earlier concerning teeth.
Also, let the aid be with this instrument which resembles a large hooked shape, of this form, with a triangular end twisted, in which there is something thickened, so that it does not break: and let it not be absorbent.
And you should know that there are many instruments for teeth: and likewise the rest of the instruments are not counted, and a prudent artisan, subtle in his art, finds by himself an instrument according to what the operation signifies to him and the ailments themselves.
Because there are ailments for which the ancients did not mention instruments, due to the diversity of their forms.
If, however, a bone from the jaw or from other bones of the mouth breaks, or rots: then examine it carefully in its place with what is suitable for it among the instruments and forceps that I mentioned for extracting roots, and assist with gestures, whose form is this.
Let there be something thickened gradually to draw it out or hold the bone with it, so that it does not retreat and go away until the bone comes out: and restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
If there is only a small rot in the bone, then scrape it from the rotten part, and treat it until it heals.
Regarding the cutting of prominent teeth that rise above others.
Chapter XXXII.
When teeth rise prominently not according to their natural course, it makes the appearance ugly because of this, especially when it happens to women and girls, namely those who engage in prostitution.
For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, nor can it be filed or smoothed: then remove it. And if it is connected to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has the following form.
It is like a small beak and is made of iron, with a very sharp tip.
And the cut you make to cut it should be done over several days, and due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that another tooth is not dislodged.
But if it protrudes and is exposed to filing: then file it with an iron file, which has this form.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle should consist of fine points, like a file used to make needles. With this, the tooth should be filed gradually over several days easily, so that the tooth is not dislodged and falls out; then smooth it, finally scrape it with some razors.
If a tooth is fractured in such a way that it injures the tongue: then you must file it as well, until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it is evened out: and smoothed, so that it does not injure the tongue nor impair speech.
Concerning the repair of teeth with gold wire.
Chapter XXXIII.
When the front teeth suffer from concussion and movement due to impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite on them without causing them to fall out: and you have treated them with astringent medicines but it was ineffective: then there is a method to secure them with gold wire: for silver turns green and deteriorates over time, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium fineness and thickness according to its quantity, so that it may fit between the teeth.
The form of the procedure is such that you should take a thread and insert twice its length between two healthy teeth; then weave with both ends of the thread between the moving teeth, whether one or several, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side.
Then repeat the weaving back to the part where you began: and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it cannot be removed at all: and let your binding when tightening the thread be near the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
Then cut the excess thread ends with tweezers: and join them together, and turn them as you move: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth so that they do not irritate the tongue: then let it remain tightly bound as long as necessary.
But if it loosens or breaks, tie them with another thread, and it will remain stable in this way for the entire time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of the weaving of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two return to their places after an injury, and are retained as we have described, and remain: and this is done only by a skilled and experienced artisan.
And sometimes a piece of bone from an animal is shaped: and it is made to fit the form of a tooth, and placed in its place, where it supports the tooth and is secured, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Of cutting the ligament that occurs under the tongue, and prevents speech.
Chapter XXXIIII.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and this is due to the healing of a wound: then apply a hook to it, and cut it horizontally until you sever the ligament and release the knot.
If however bleeding occurs, then apply crushed zechar (a type of plant) to the wound. If the blood overpowers you, then cauterize the area with a speckled cautery, which is appropriate for it: then treat it with the remaining methods of care until it heals. Of extracting a ranula which occurs under the tongue.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural function: and it may grow so large as to fill the mouth.
If you see that it is of a dark color, or black, hard, and the patient has no feeling in it: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it tends toward whiteness, with moisture present, then attach a hook to it, and cut it with a sharp knife, and free it from all parts.
If the blood overpowers you during your time of operation, then apply crushed zeig on it until the bleeding stops: then return to your operation until you remove it completely.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt: and treat it with appropriate care until it is healed.
¶ On the treatment of an abscess in the tonsils.
Chapter XXXVI.
And then either you will pierce it: or it will break on its own.
And if it is of a white color, round, and its root is delicate: then it must be cut.
And the procedure to be followed is that you should observe before operating whether the swelling has become quiet and warm in its completeness, or if it has decreased somewhat: then have the patient sit facing the sun, and place his head in your lap: open his mouth, and let the assistant take between his hands an instrument whose form is as follows, and press the patient's tongue with it below. It should be made of silver or copper, and it should be thin like a small knife.
When you press with it on the tongue and the swelling becomes visible to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook and fix it in the tonsil, and pull it out as far as you can, except that you also draw something from the surrounding tissues with it.
Then cut it with an instrument whose form is as follows.
It resembles forceps: however, its ends should be curved, such that the opening of each is directly opposite the other at an angle: therefore, make sure it is made of polished iron or brass.
但如果手头没有这种器械，那么就用剪刀来切割，其形状如下。
Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one almond-shaped area, cut the other following the same kind of incision.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if blood flow occurs, the patient should gargle with water in which bark of pimento trees has been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar astringents, until the blood flow stops: then treat it until it heals.
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two tonsils.
Cut them accordingly as I said regarding the incision of the two tonsils, equally.
And I have indeed already treated a woman who had an abscess that had arisen between her throat, which was causing darkening of the complexion, loss of senses, and was nearly closing off her throat: the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and food and water intake were already prohibited for her: she had reached the point of death if it had remained untreated for one or two more days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it extended two branches until they emerged above the two nasal openings.
I hurried quickly and hooked one of them with an instrument.
Then I pulled it out, and a large portion was removed from it.
Then I cut it where it could be grasped through the nasal opening.
Then I did that for him which protruded from the nostril on the other side.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue. After that, I fixed a hook into the abscess. Then I removed part of it, and only a little blood came out. Thus, the throat of the woman was cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, then she started to eat as well.
So I did not stop cutting from that abscess many times over a long period: and the abscess would grow back in place of what I had cut, until it became too prolonged with it.
Therefore, I devised a way and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
She thus abstained from additions: then I walked away on my part, and did not know what God did for her after me.
Concerning the cutting of an abscess on the throat.
Chapter XXXVII.
When catarrh descends to the throat and forms an abscess, and it is long, then it is called vertical. And if it is thick and round at the lower part, then it is called a berry.
When it is treated as we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the hot abscess has subsided from it, and it is subtle: then you must cut it.
And if what is aggregated from it is round and does not have length, and is of a blood-colored or dark hue, and has no sensation: then you must avoid cutting it.
For there is fear upon the sick person.
Therefore, when you see it according to the method I described, by its whiteness and length, make the sick person sit before the sun; and press his tongue with the instrument which was previously mentioned: then place the hook in it and pull it down; and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting the two tonsils.
And you should not cut from it except what is added beyond the natural boundary without any addition.
For if you cut from it more than necessary, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting, use what we have described for the cutting of the two tonsils: and take care of it until it is healed.
But if the patient is afraid of the cutting, then you should use ingenuity in cauterizing it without fear and without causing terror.
And the method of cauterizing it is not done except with sharp water: and you should place the patient's head in your lap.
Then press his tongue with the instrument that I mentioned.
Then take some of the water that I told you about in the chapter on cauterizing, and apply it to a coal that is not extinguished, and place it neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of this instrument, which has the following form.
Let the extremity of it where the medicine is placed be concave, like the bowl of a spoon.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva runs from his mouth due to the intrinsic nature of the medicine, so that nothing from it descends into his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you should apply it to the wound in the amount of half an hour until you see it turning black and the pain subsiding due to the medicine.
And if you wish to take a rag, and wrap it around the end of a rod, and pour medicine onto the rag, and insert the rod with the rag into a tube from above, until the rag adheres to the wound. Do this multiple times until you achieve what you desire from cauterizing the wound.
Then leave it: it will dry up and fall off after three days or four.
If you need to repeat the treatment with medicine, do so: and after cauterization, clean around the wound with a rag soaked in butter, and purify what is around it with the medicine: and wash it with cold water.
And treat it externally with applications and internally with gargles until it is healed.
This method of treatment is therefore healthier than cutting and more distant from the risk of fear.
And at times the wound is also treated with something subtler than cauterization and cutting: it is treated with fumigation, in this manner.
Take a leek, hyssop, origany, rue, cumin, chamomile, southernwood, and similar herbs; and mix all of them or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged with vinegar and boiled: and the pot should be sealed with clay appropriately: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot above which place an instrument concave according to this manner.
Make it of silver or copper: and insert the end where there is a grenade into the patient's mouth until vapor rises up to the cloth on top of the tube, until the cloth becomes very dark.
Then repeat this process multiple times until it dries.
And be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the abscess's onset.
For it usually adds to the abscess: and you should not do this unless the abscess is beginning to show signs of heat.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a tube and attach a piece of cork at the end so that it does not burn the patient's mouth: for the cork prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is part of good treatment with safety.
Concerning the removal of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often an object such as a fish bone or spine, or something similar, adheres to the throat.
Therefore, you should remove what is apparent above and visible after pressing the tongue with an instrument near a light source, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must have the sick person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach.
Perhaps what is attached will come out through vomiting.
Let the sick person swallow a piece of turnip, or the root of lettuce, or a bite of dry bread; or let them take a small piece of dry sea sponge and tie it to a thread, then let them swallow it.
When it reaches the place where there are spines or bones, and it is extracted, then it comes out. If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in the following form.
Let it be thicker than a radius for a little while, and at its end let there be a curvature, which he should insert into his throat with ease: and he should keep his head raised upwards.
And he should be careful not to touch his epiglottis, so that it does not cause him to cough and push out with it the bone or spine, or the physician should insert it himself with his hand.
However, it is better for the sick person to insert it, due to his knowledge of the location of the attached object: and he should push it downward, or pull his hand with the instrument upward, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him, until it comes out.
Concerning the Removal of a Leech.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with what I said in the division about treatment with medicines and it does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in front of sunlight, or near the sun after pressing their tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook or with fine forceps properly.
If it is not possible with them, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient up to near the throat: then insert into the hollow of the tube a glowing iron with fire.
Do this multiple times: and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
Then let him take a vessel filled with cold water and open his mouth in it: and rinse his mouth with it, and do not swallow any of it: and stir the water one hour after another with his hand.
For when the leech feels the water, it falls immediately.
If, however, it does not come out as we have described, then fumigate the patient with crushed flies, or with wormwood with the instrument that I described for vulvar fumigation.
Do this multiple times, for it will fall on its own.
The method of operation in fumigation is as follows: take a pot in which there are live embers with fire: and the pot should be covered with a cover, in whose middle there is a hole: and place the end of the instrument in that hole.
Then proceed with the fumigation, and let the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the leech.
For the leech will fall immediately.
If it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And if the patient can tolerate thirst, let him eat salted foods and garlic, and do not let him drink water. It is necessary therefore that he follow this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is removed from the throat when it falls there.
It is like forceps, as you can see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat.
And its end is like the beak of a bird called a heron, which has the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let go entirely.
Regarding the incision of Abscesses, their division, and general treatment.
Chapter 40.
The types of abscesses are many and varied, as they come to mind, namely one by one in this book: and they differ in their incision and division into two methods.
One of these is due to the nature of the abscess itself and what it contains from humors.
And the second method is due to the locations where they occur in the body.
Because an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from one occurring in the joints: and each has its own judgment based on the procedure.
And there are abscesses which should not be pierced unless after the maturation of the pus in them and its completion: and among these are those which ought to be pierced while they are raw, and do not mature according to their completion.
Like abscesses which are near joints.
Because when an abscess occurs near a joint and persists until what is around it putrefies, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be damaged, hence it becomes more likely to cause contraction of that member.
Or the abscess is near a principal limb: for if you delay piercing it until it matures, it will harm either itself or the principal limb through which it affects.
Or if it is near the anus, pierce it even when immature: and you should not pierce an unripe abscess that has not completed digestion unless it is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply and extend to the inner parts of the anus, thereby causing a fistula or becoming chronic and incurable. You should know the time for piercing an abscess that has matured according to its completion: this is when the pain subsides, the fever recedes, and there is a decrease in redness and pulsation, along with sharpness at the apex of the abscess: and other signs. And you should make the same incision at the lower part of the abscess and where there is greater prominence: and the incision should run along the length of the body if the abscesses are in parts of the hands and feet, and in areas such as armpits, groins, and in all places that do not have a bend or reflexion.
In those that are reflected, proceed with the incision along that limb.
When an abscess is in fleshy areas, it is better to postpone the incision until its digestion has become firmer, as we said according to the supplement.
If you pierce it before that time, the course of the pus will be prolonged, and there will be much dirt and filth, and its lips may harden, and its depth will increase.
And some abscesses should be incised according to the width of the body when necessary: or according to what the limb requires.
It is necessary to administer a small incision for small abscesses, and a large incision for large abscesses: or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
There are abscesses in which the skin must be hollowed out: and it should be incised when it has become like cloth, and has reached a point where it is already dead: as often happens with doubts and buboes.
And among them are those that should be incised in a triangular shape.
And there is one from which an incision should be made in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like the groin abscess.
And among them are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision should be made: and similar ones from other types of incisions.
For those that do not have a head, such as soft superficial abscesses, it is necessary to make a superficial incision or a flat one.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not hurry to extract all the pus at that time; rather, remove only a part of it.
Then let the abscess be opened again on another day.
Then extract some more of the pus again.
Do this repeatedly in stages until the pus is fully discharged: especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old person who is frail: for the vital spirit may be repeatedly weakened with the discharge of pus, and the patient may die, and you would not realize it.
Therefore, be very cautious with this chapter.
And after your puncture, with which you pierce abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound: and pay attention.
If the wound of the abscess is small or the incision is shallow, then apply a dressing made of flax or old cloth.
And if the abscess is large and there are many openings from the puncture, then it is necessary to insert a dressing into every opening until they meet.
And if you have removed a part of the skin in the abscess or have hollowed it out around it: then you should fill it with old cloth, or as when a fabric is patched or flax lint is applied without moisture: and secure it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If blood flow occurs during your time of operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which soak a cloth in them: and place it on the site of the blood flow many times.
If the blood flow persists, then it is necessary to administer treatment, care, and powders, which I have described in many places throughout this book, and according to the division.
If it is during the winter season, and the site of the abscess is near many nerves: then you should pour warm powders mixed with wine and oil onto those areas.
And if it is during the summer, and the areas are fleshy: then you should place powders soaked in water and oil, or mixed with wine and oil, and make sure all of it is cold.
On the third day, as we have said, it is necessary to open the abscess, clean it, and administer appropriate care for its treatment until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary to know universally about the treatment of abscesses.
According to the method of distinction, I have already discussed every abscess, how the way to its cure is outlined chapter by chapter individually.
Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur in the skin of the head.
Chapter XLIV.
Small abscesses occur in the skin of the head and they are of the type called Nodorum, which are contained within membranes that serve as sacs: as if they were hen's eggs.
And their kinds are many.
Of these, some are fatty; and of these, there are those that contain moisture similar to mud; and of these, there are those that contain moisture similar to gruel and porridge; and similarly, there are those that are hard and stony.
And in the cutting of all of them and their removal there is no fear, as long as during their cutting the artery does not cause opposition.
And the procedure in cutting them is to test them with an instrument whose form comes next, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then dry it by cutting along its length with a superficial cut, in this manner.
And begin the cut from line b to line g. When the moisture has been evacuated, then peel off the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not leave anything inside.
For it often returns if anything remains from it. Then dip a piece of lint in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; and if not, in water and salt. Fill the wound with it and leave it until another day.
For it will corrode what remains of the cyst. Then repeat the treatment with lint and the second Egyptian ointment, and third, and if necessary continue this until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst. Then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the abscess contains a soft knot, then cut it in this manner, with the cut having a cruciform shape: and insert hooks between the two lips of the cut, and excoriate it from all sides: and strive to apply your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If an artery impedes you, then do what I will tell you next.
And do the same for an abscess that is hard, from the cut and cure in the same way, as we have said. And the cut on a hard abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and moisture.
And there are sometimes abscesses among these that occur in people's heads, in which there is no moisture at all.
Or place the puncture always at the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus is alleviated towards the lower parts.
Then treat them with what is appropriate for them from the methods of treatment.
§ On Cutting Strangury Swellings in the Neck.
Chapter XLII.
Such abscesses frequently occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And concerning those that occur in the neck among them, there is one type and many types: and they generate from each other: and every Strangury among them is within its own membrane, as it is in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many varieties of these Stranguries.
And among them are some that are stone-like: and there are those that contain moisture: and there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, for the one you see among them to be of good disposition upon touch, whose color is clearly close to that of the skin, and which moves freely in all directions and is not attached to the neck's nerves, ligaments, or arteries, nor is it deep: you should cut it superficially from the upper part down to the lower part of the body along a line from b to g, and scrape it away entirely: then with an uncino (forceps), or multiple forceps if needed, as we mentioned for abscesses of the head, gradually remove it.
It is important to be cautious not to cut a vein or nerve.
And the cutting tool should not be very sharp: so that it does not slip from your hand during the incision or disturb the patient, and you do not cut what is not necessary.
However, if you cut a vein or artery, or if it prevents you from performing the operation, then apply ground egg whites or certain powders that stop bleeding, and bind the wound, and leave it alone until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound softens: or until it begins to putrefy.
For the blood is clotted. Therefore proceed to your operation until you complete it.
Then attend to it.
If the boil is cut out completely, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound: and do so immediately as soon as you see that there is no excess fluid remaining.
If however you see that there is excess fluid remaining because of the size of the boil, then you must proceed to cutting out its root and extracting it: and apply the stitch as we have mentioned.
And for those boils that contain moisture, pierce them with a shallow incision: so that the location of their maturity may be apparent to you: and place this incision from there below the body, as we have said.
Then apply licorice with ointment and similar substances after the piercing, to corrode what remains from the corruption, until you see that the wound is now clean: then treat it with generative flesh ointment until it heals.
§ On the incision of the Epiglottis in case of an abscess inside the throat.
Chapter XLIII.
The ancients said that this section is in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the text of their speech.
However, in cases of hydrothorax, the section of the epiglottis must be avoided, as it does not provide help through it: because all veins and the lung are weakened.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the windpipe, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis to avoid the danger that results from suffocation. Therefore, when we wish to do this, we must cut the epiglottis below three circles of the epiglottis, or four, with a small section horizontally, in that part which is between two circles by quantity, such that the section is made in soft tissue, not in cartilage: and this place is suitable for the section because it is away from flesh, and blood vessels are distant from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook.
Then he should cut the skin until he reaches the windpipe: he must avoid blood vessels if he sees any of them.
Then he should cut the tissue as we have described: and it is indicated above that a discharge from the windpipe due to phlegm occurs with it when it ruptures, and by the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When, therefore, the time is passed at which suffocation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew them up alone without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasis says.
The summary of the discourse which we have narrated has no explanation unless they see that one of these abscesses has already obstructed the throat of the sick person: and the patient is raised to a state near death, and wishes to alleviate his breathing: they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound with some respiration and be saved from death: and for this reason they have ordered the wound to remain open until the malice of the illness is consumed, which lasts about three days, and nearly so: then they advise sewing up the wound and treating it until it heals.
And what I saw myself is that a servant girl took a small knife and sent it into her throat, and with it she cut part of the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, and I found her moaning as one who is dead does.
I examined the wound and found that only a small amount of blood had come out from it.
I was therefore confident that she had not cut an artery or the windpipe, and air was coming out of the wound.
I acted quickly, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it healed: and nothing serious happened to the servant girl except for hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after a few days to her normal condition.
Therefore, I say: there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
Concerning the Cutting of a Hernia of the Throat.
Chapter XLII (42)
This swelling is called a hernia of the throat, it is a large swelling, according to the color of the body: and it occurs frequently in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either naturally, or accidentally. In the natural case, there is no need for intervention.
The accidental case occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to fatty tumors.
And the other way is similar to a swelling that occurs due to constriction of an artery.
And there is fear in this case, and one should not presume to treat it with a knife unless it is small: and you should examine and investigate it using an Intromittee.
If you find it similar to a fatty tumor and it is not suspended with any veins, then cut it as tumors are cut: and remove it along with what contains it from the pouch, if it is in a pouch: and if not, then thoroughly examine the entire area.
Then treat the area as required by the healing process until it is healed.
Concerning the Cutting of Swellings Similar to Tumors.
Chapter XLV There are many types of tumors, and I have already described all their kinds in the division: and it is necessary for me to describe here the difference between a tumor and an exitus, as there is some confusion about them. I say then that when Exeter [likely a misspelling or misreading; should be "Excitura" meaning 'excitation' or 'irritation'] is heat, and fever, and very severe pains, until the boiling over of excess is calmed, and putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fever and heat cease.
When with the Node there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and they contain them in sacks called sifachin, which are proper pouches for them, and they are of the color of the body: and their beginning is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a batkhah, and larger or smaller.
And they are of two kinds: either fatty, or containing moisture.
And the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division. Therefore, when you come to the treatment of the Node, you must examine it and first search for it with an instrument called Intromissum, as its form will appear in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of examining abscesses and all nodes is to take this instrument and insert it into a more moist place that you find in the abscess: and you should move your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has now penetrated the skin.
Then extend your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then remove the Intromissum and examine what comes out with it.
If moisture comes out running, whatever the color may be: then dry it with superficial incision, as I said regarding other abscesses.
And if the moisture does not come out in the track of the insertion, then you know that it is fatty: therefore dry over it with a cross-shaped section, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and strip off the skin from all parts easily: and keep a box if you can over it, so that you may draw out the healthy part along with the knot.
However, if the sac is ruptured during the procedure and it is not possible to remove it intact, for this often happens, then remove it piece by piece until nothing of it remains.
For if even a little or much of it remains, the knot will return most certainly.
If it overcomes you and a little remains from it: then fill the wound at the end of your treatment with certain corrosive sharp powders: and constrict the wound, and place something warm above it that sits on the abscess, and treat it along with the rest of the care until it is healed.
If therefore the knot is large, then suture its two lips, and treat it with what causes flesh to grow. If, however, there is a contrary pulsating vein or non-pulsating vein: then hurry and fill the place with triturated colocynth, and leave it constricted for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies and the bleeding subsides: then return to cutting what remains of the knot.
Concerning the design of instruments for cutting and piercing.
Chapter XLVI.
These are the forms of probes, and they are of three kinds.
For among them there is a great one, and among them there is a medium one, and among them there is a small one.
Let them make from iron small squares with pointed ends so that they may quickly enter the abscess.
And these are the forms of probes, that is, those that pierce; and one of them is called "beris," that is, piercing; and they are of three kinds.
For among them there is a great one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They come together so that abscesses, exits, fistulas, and lymph nodes can be investigated through them because of what lies between them in the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and gentle, like large needles with handles, made of citrus wood, or bronze, or iron, or silver. And the best of them are those made of citrus wood.
And probes are also made of black lead, which are used to examine fistulas, whose concavities have reflections so that they can be gently examined with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. For among them there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the quantity and width of the fistula and its constriction. The form of hooks, and they are of many kinds. For among them there are simple ones, that is, those with a single curvature; and they are of three kinds as you see: large, medium, and small.
And there are five blind hooks: and they are of three kinds.
And there are hooks having two curves, and they are of three kinds: and there are hooks having three curves, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped: and they are of three kinds: for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Their ends with which the cutting is done are sharp, other ends are not sharp: and they are not used otherwise than to provide relief in scraping nodes when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve: and to heal the patient through them and bring about temporary tranquility from the burning sensation experienced during the scraping of an abscess.
These are Magdas, and they are of three kinds.
They are made of metal, and they resemble a rod used to stir alcohol: and at the broad end there is hidden a point for puncturing: and it can be directed inward or outward as you wish, as you see.
The form of punctures that are hidden between the fingers during the piercing of abscesses: and the patient does not feel them: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of instruments with which the flow of blood is stopped: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They are made of metal or citrus wood, round in shape, somewhat long as you can see: and they should be fine in texture.
And it is necessary that these types of leeches be large and small among you, so that you can quickly remove blood when needed, and then when medicine is not present.
However, do not use them to cut blood from every part of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas such as the thighs, hips, arms, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar moist flesh regions.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the rinds of figs according to their shape: with which blood is cut when it flows from a phlebotomy site, or during an incision of a vein or artery; and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Regarding the treatment of human nipples that resemble women's breasts.
Chapter XLVII.
At times, the nipples of some men become inflamed at the onset of nocturnal emissions until they resemble women's breasts, and they remain swollen and unpleasantly infected.
Whoever wishes to treat this should make an incision in a crescent shape over the nipples, following this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off all the fat.
Then fill the wound with a flesh-restoring medicine.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
If the nipple sags downward and softens due to its size, as happens with women: then it is necessary to make two incisions on both upper sides in a shape similar to that of a crescent, each connected to the other at their ends so that one line encompasses the other, following this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what was mentioned about stitches and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it is healed.
If you do not complete the incision that you ought to make because of the patient's restlessness or due to blood flow: then you should fill the wound with lint soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it, until what remains of the fatty tissue is corroded.
Then care for it until it heals.
Regarding the puncturing of an abscess that occurs under the Titillicus.
Chapter XLVIII. These abscesses that occur under the Titillicus are of the species of hard Strophulus, which contains cysts, and among them are those that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut with a lunar incision, following this form, from line b to line g. Once everything within the abscess that is pus has been evacuated, then fill it with old lint and leave it until another day.
Then remove the lint and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the species of nodular Strophulus, then make an incision on it as we said regarding the incision above the Strophulus evenly.
If the wound extends such that it discharges pus, then apply a cautery to it as we mentioned earlier.
Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs due to an artery and vein.
Chapter XLIX.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes consolidated, suppuration often results; and similarly with veins, so that a swelling may occur in them as well.
The signs by which it is recognized that suppuration and swelling are due to an artery or a vein are as follows: when the suppuration is due to an artery, it is long and aggregated deep within the body; and when you press the suppuration with your fingers, you feel as if there were a rustling sound.
And that which is due to a vein is round and on the surface of the body.
And to perform surgery on such a suppuration is an error, especially when it is located under the armpits, in the groin, on the neck, and in many other parts of the body; and it is indeed very serious.
Therefore, the treatment of such conditions should be avoided with the use of iron instruments, and those that occur at the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
Therefore, for those that result from the swelling of the artery opening, make an incision in the skin along its length.
Then open the incision with forceps, and subsequently expose the artery: free it from its sheaths until it is fully exposed.
Then insert a needle beneath it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread at two places, as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a scalpel until all the blood that is in it exits, and the abscess is resolved.
Then administer treatment that produces pus until the tissues fall away; afterward treat it with ointments appropriate for this condition until it heals.
If the abscess is due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much as possible of the abscess along with the skin.
Then insert a needle under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: there should be a double thread in it until you extract it from the other side.
Then tie the abscess with a good ligature: as I told you about tying a grape vine, from both sides with the two ends of the thread. If you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert another needle with a different thread under the abscess near the needle incision: press and secure your threads in four places.
Then dry out the abscess in its center until what is inside comes out; then cut away the excess skin and leave what is tied from it.
Then place a poultice on it that you have soaked in wine and oil.
Then administer treatment with decoctions and ointments until it is healed.
Concerning the abscess that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Chapter 50.
Just as an abscess can occur in an artery or vein, so too can it occur in nerves: this happens due to a blow, or from excessive labor, and similar causes; it most often occurs in places such as the helper bones (wrist) and heel, and in any place where joints move; and such an abscess is serious. Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is usually in various conditions without pain: and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels something like dizziness in it.
And it is not a swelling gathered deep within the body, but rather it is beneath the skin, and it moves to every part, neither going forward nor backward.
Therefore, what is among them in the joints should not be attacked with iron.
Perhaps a contraction may occur.
In that which is among them in the head or on the forehead, cut open the skin with a scalpel.
If it is a small swelling, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then lift it with a hook and scrape it off; then remove it and close the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
Concerning the incision of a swelling that occurs in the abdomen.
Chapter LI. In some people, there often occur in their abdomens and throughout their bodies growths called Fungalia, named by analogy with fungi.
Their root is delicate, and their head is thick, and their lips are turned inward.
Some of them are small, and some become very large.
And I have indeed seen a man who had two growths in his abdomen that were more similar to fungi than to other things: there was no difference between them; they were white, with fine roots, their lips turned inward, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
I therefore cut them open and found one to weigh about ten and eight unciae and the other about six unciae. The operation during the cutting should be such that you consider then whether the patient is humid, and if the color of the bloodletting (thelil) is white, moist, and has fine roots: then cut it with a broad scalpel, and have cautery instruments ready over the fire.
For often much blood is expelled during its cutting: hurry then if the blood overpowers you, and at that time cauterize it.
If you see that the patient is fearful and timid about cutting with iron, then take a properly made lead thread and tie it to the bloodletting site: its method is as we have described, and leave it for two days.
Then add something to the constriction of the lead.
So do not hesitate to apply pressure to the lead when it is placed on the wound, until it cuts through and falls off by itself without effort.
But if the wound is deep and has a large base, then there is some fear and dread in cutting it, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Nevertheless, it is possible to cut through its midpoint.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then treat it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to presume to cut a wound that is dark in color, has little sensation, and appears foul; for it is a cancerous abscess: and I will return to the topic of cancer after this.
§ On the Treatment of the Navel Eminence.
Chapter LII.
A prominence of the navel can result from many causes.
It can result from fissures above the navel: and what comes out of it may be fat or intestine, depending on how it occurs in other ruptures.
Or it can result from blood that flows from a vein or an artery, as previously mentioned.
Or it can result from trapped wind in the navel.
If it is due to a fissure and the expulsion of fat: then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and its appearance varies in different locations.
And if it is because of the protrusion of the intestine, then its condition, as we have described, shows a much greater difference.
When you press it with your fingers, it retreats and becomes hidden; then it returns, and perhaps a sound is heard. It is greatly enlarged at the entrance to the bath, and the labor is very severe.
If it is because of moisture, it is soft; then when you press it with your hand, it does not retreat, nor is there constriction or addition.
If it is because of blood, then with these signs, an abscess appears turning to blackness from the clivus.
If it is because of flesh grown naturally, then the abscess is serious, large, hard, and adheres in a fixed quantity.
If it is because of gas, then its touch is soft. And the procedure is to determine whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas. Then you must refrain from treating it.
For there is fear and caution in that case, as I taught you in the chapter where I discussed abscesses due to an artery and a vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or bladder, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and stand with arms extended.
Then mark the area around the entire navel with cerement.
Then instruct him to lie supine between your hands on his back.
Then surround with a spatula with a wide blade around the navel above the place which you marked with vermilion.
Then extend the middle of the abscess to the upper part with a large hook.
Then tie it tightly around the circumference with thread, or with a silk cord of firm ligature: and let the knot of the ligature be secure.
Then open the middle of the extended abscess above the ligature.
If you find it already caught by the ligature: then remove the ligature and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a swelling, then take it with a hook, and cut away its excess.
If, however, an artery or vein is contrary to you: then surround it extensively.
Then return to your operation.
And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert the two needles around the circumference you made around the abscess in a cross shape, making them penetrate.
Then bind the abscess in four places above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the area until the extended flesh becomes rotten and falls off by itself: or cut it when it has become thin and rotten.
Then care for it with what is necessary from ointments until it heals.
If the protrusion of the navel is from flesh or moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we said.
And let out the blood, or moisture, which you find there.
Then treat it with something that strengthens the area.
Concerning the Treatment of Cancer. Chapter LIII.
For I was unable to heal anyone from it: nor did I see any other before me who succeeded in treating it.
And the treatment when it is located as we have said is to precede with purging the patient from black bile several times.
Then let blood if you find it with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which they are placed for the operation.
Then apply hooks that are suitable for the cancer.
Then hollow out the cancer from all sides with the skin, according to your examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it off quickly, but press the areas and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or whatever is possible from the instruments you have.
If the flow of blood from cutting an artery or vein causes trouble for you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped.
Then treat it along with the rest of the care until it heals.
§ On the Treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter LIIII.
Now we will describe the types of dropsy and how water accumulates, as well as the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines.
And the type that is treated with iron is only the single type of ascites. The type of tympanites is not approached with iron, nor is the type of hyposarca completely treated with it, for this is fatal.
When you have already treated this type of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines and your treatment has not been effective, then consider the situation.
For if the patient has already become weakened, or suffers from another illness in addition to dropsy, such as coughing or diarrhea, and similar conditions: then be cautious about treating with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
But if you see the patient as having abundant strength and suffering from no illness other than dropsy alone: and if they are neither a child nor an elder: then the method of treatment is to lift the patient standing between your hands, and have an assistant behind him press his belly with their hand, pushing the water toward the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spatinum with spines in this shape.
Let it be of two pointed parts, long, with a sharp end like a spatula.
However, let it be somewhat shorter so that you do not pass through with it during the procedure up to the intestine and injure it.
Then consider.
For if there is a generation of hydrops due to the intestines, then you must extend the incision from the navel by the length of three fingers, downward directly above the pubis.
But if the generation of hydrops is due to liver disease, then your incision should be three fingers to the left from the navel.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side: and it should not be made on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow to a weak area.
Then pierce with the instrument the entire skin.
Then insert your hand into that incision, and raise it with a spatula between the skin, as if you were peeling it off: and let the amount that is peeled off be the size of a nail, or thereabouts.
Then pierce as if peeling, until the spatula reaches the empty space: and this is the place of the water.
Then remove it, and insert into the opening an instrument, which has this form.
And it is similar to a tube: it is made of silver, or copper, or bronze, smooth and polished: at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: the end of it is cut like the incision of a reed, as you see: at the upper end of it there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water a medium quantity in an hour.
For if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, perhaps the patient may die within an hour due to the resolution of his vital spirit: or a syncope may occur which approaches death.
However, evacuate from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the patient's condition signifies to you through the quality of his pulse, and through his overall well-being.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
It is retained immediately because of the skin which holds the opening that is above the sifac: regarding this, I have narrated how to pierce it according to that method.
Then insert the instrument on the second day if you see that the patient can tolerate it: and also remove a small quantity from the water. Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there remains only a small amount of water.
But if you are afraid for the patient and allow a large amount to be removed from the water: then treat him as if burying him in hot sand, and induce much sweating in a bath and under the sun, and let him endure thirst: and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, the spleen, and the epigastrium after removing the water: according to what I have narrated previously.
Regarding the treatment of infants who are born with their urinary passages not perforated.
Chapter LIV. When a child exits the womb of its mother and the fontanel on its head is not open, or it is narrow, or it is out of place.
Therefore, one must assist with its opening immediately upon birth using a very fine spatula, following this method.
Then place a fine nail made of lead into the fontanel and secure it: keep it there for three days or four.
When the child needs to urinate, remove it, and let it void.
Then replace it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine, as it passes over the area, will not allow it to close properly.
He whose fontanel is narrow is treated with lead, as we said, for many days until it becomes larger.
Those in whom the fontanel is out of place are injured.
This is because in those who are born, the fontanel is at the end of the top of the head: therefore, they cannot urinate forward until they lift their head with their hand toward the upper part. Nor is there proper generation because the sperm cannot reach the womb in a straight line: and it is a very foul illness.
And the method of treatment for this condition is to lay the patient supine on their back.
Then extend the head of the rod with your left hand forcefully, and cut off the head of the rod from the place of the penis, with a sharp point or a small sharp knife: just as is the cutting of a reed, or as you would cut some root, so that its middle comes to resemble the head of the rod: and so that a hole falls in the middle as is required.
And be careful with regard to the flow of blood during your operation.
For that happens very often.
Therefore, apply something to stop the bleeding and treat the wound until it heals.
¶ Concerning Albather which occur in the foreskin and head of the rod, and regarding corruption, blackening, and adherence.
Chapter LVII.
These Albather conditions often occur in the rod and are marked by an elevation of foul flesh.
And some of them are harmful, and some are not harmful.
Therefore, you should not remove the harmless one with a fine hook and cut it off until you have cleaned it entirely.
Then apply a piece of cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment to it. Then treat it afterward with the ointment called dyafinicon until it heals.
If the Albather is harmful and of foul color, then you should apply cautery to it after cutting it and treating its condition.
If Albasar is on the foreskin of a captive who has not been circumcised, and part of it is inside the foreskin while another part is outside: then you should remove the part that is inside first until it hardens, then treat what is outside; for if you treat both parts at once, the foreskin will resist.
And now blackening and corruption also occur in the testicles and foreskin.
Therefore, you should hollow out all that is already blackened and what tends to become corrupted or is already corrupted.
Then apply a dressing over it with the mixture of honey and flour of pomegranate rind, and finely sieved dock herb.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs, then apply cautery with a lunar cauterizing instrument, in this manner.
For cautery is beneficial for two conditions at once, namely bleeding and when a wound becomes corrupted.
If the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed within an hour: then you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhering foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adherence does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and who has not undergone circumcision: and sometimes it happens due to a wound or abscess: therefore, you should remove it with a blunt spatula until the ligament separates, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then you should scrape something from the head of the rod and from the foreskin.
This is because when the foreskin is thin, it may be penetrated quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the rod using a fine linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with astringent wine until it is healed and consolidated. ¶ On the cleansing of infants, and the treatment of errors that occur to them.
Chapter LVIΙ.
Circumcision is not the same as the treatment of other wounds; however, since it results from our procedure and is performed at our discretion, and its use is specific to children, it is necessary to mark in it a better operation and a gentler path leading to healing.
I say then that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books; for they do not use it in their laws, and we know only what we have acquired through experience.
This is because I have found that the majority of artisans and phlebotomists use cleansing by circumcising with a razor and scissors, and they employ antiseptics, ligature with thread, and cutting with a scalpel.
And I have indeed tested all these methods and have not found a better cleansing method than using scissors and tying with thread.
Since during the cleansing with scissors, the skin often escapes.
Since the foreskin has two layers of skin; therefore, it is possible that the upper layer is cut, and the lower layer remains intact: hence, to avoid cutting the second layer and causing future pain, one must be careful when making an incision.
And when cleansing is performed with astringent alum, that is, by digital manipulation, as tailors use, the foreskin is not cut: because perhaps it might enter into its opening.
However, in cleansing with a scalpel, the blade may slip and spoil your work: and the skin of a child is by nature short, and often they are born in such a way that they do not need cleansing; I have already seen this.
However, the cleansing with forceps and a thread has shown me a good method: because the forceps are suitable for proportionate cutting: therefore, what is sharp above is like what is sharp below.
When you apply your hand, the two sharp points are proportioned and cut simultaneously according to a single operation: and it creates a compression of similar shape, holding the skin of the shaft from all sides without any error.
And the method of this operation is such that you should reassure the child, especially if he is among those who can understand to some extent, that you do nothing but tie a thread on his own shaft, and let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way possible for you to do so, because of what he understands.
Then insert your hand into his member, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the member emerges.
Then clean it from the dirt that has accumulated on it.
Then ligature the marked place with double thread.
Then tie below it a second ligature for a short distance. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature firmly, and cut between the two ligatures.
Then quickly raise the skin up, and extract the head of the member.
Then let the blood flow gradually (for this is better), and put powder on top: and above the powder place a cloth in which the egg of a hen boiled in rose water has been spread, crushed with rose oil. Recently apply this treatment: and let it be placed on him until another day: and care for him with the remaining treatments until he is healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows.
The two ends should be blunt and inclined towards each other, with no protruding claw tip: and the length of the two sharp points should be equal to the length of two handles equally.
However, an error falls during cleansing because perhaps the entire inner layer of skin escapes, or a part of it near the incision. Therefore, it is necessary to stretch it out during your hour with your nail before the suppuration of the area: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with a hook, and cut it.
If, however, three days have passed and what is under the rod remains swollen and suppurating, then leave it until the suppuration becomes warm, and easily peel it off, and cut it as you prepare it: and be careful about the head of the rod.
For it will not harm him that.
Therefore, treat it with what heals the wound from powders, which we have mentioned in the chapter on powders: and if it is cut from the skin beyond the measure and reaches the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
Therefore, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Concerning the Extraction of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Chapter L VIII.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to an obstruction caused by a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh growth, and similar conditions from those we have mentioned in the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine does not pass and you see that its retention is due to a stone that has already moved to the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over with knees raised.
Then let his feet be placed on his back, and let him stretch out his belly at the upper part of his back, and let the patient hold his breath as much as possible.
Therefore, when the bladder neck is pressed to expel the stone towards the rear, urine is released.
If it does not resolve as we have said and is severe for the patient, then you must administer its removal with an instrument called a siringa, which has this form: It should be made of silver, subtle, gentle, concave like the tube of a bird's feather in fineness, about the length of one palm and a half; it should have a slender tube at its head.
And the method of urine exit through this instrument is to take a doubled thread and tie wool or cotton at its end with a good knot: then insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the siringa: and cut with scissors if any excess protrudes from the wool, but insert it into the tube forcefully, like lifting.
Then anoint the siringa with oil or butter, and egg white: and have the patient sit on a seat, and direct the bladder, and his member with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the siringa into the member with ease until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it above from the part of the navel. Then push the siringa inside until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached an empty space: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually.
For the gum will follow the wool.
Then remove it and make the gum run along the urine path: and continue with the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is evacuated, and the patient finds relief. Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
For it is surda, that is, closed.
And it has three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave space where there is what impels should be according to its size without addition, so that when it draws something with it, moisture is drawn: and when it is propelled, it expels it to a distance: as the clepsydra does, by which naphtha, that is, Greek fire, is projected in battles.
When you wish to project the liquids into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the liquid, and pull with it what propels it upwards. The moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the clepsydra. Then insert the end of it into the tube, as we described for the syringe.
Then drive out the moisture with what drives it, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it. The form of a fine enema by which the bladder is cleansed.
Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they are pierced. Then gather the circle together as an alembic does: after you place in it what you wish from moisture, oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument: and proceed with it as you did with the bladder by squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
¶ On the Extraction of the Stone.
Chapter LX. Now we have discussed the classification of stones and their treatment with medicines, and I have described the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those in the bladder, along with all the signs thereof. I have also explained the operation performed on them by hand and by cutting, distinguishing between stones that are properly formed in the bladder and those that adhere to the urethra. I am now narrating this with clear explanation and conciseness.
I say therefore, that stones generated in the bladder most frequently occur in children.
And from the signs of this condition, it is evident that urine exits from the bladder similar to water in its fineness: and sand appears white in it. The patient rubs his penis, struggles with it, and often hangs from it. Then he becomes erect, and feces exit with it in many cases.
And the treatment is easier for children, from the time they begin to be affected until they reach fourteen years of age.
And it is difficult in the elderly.
In young adults, it is intermediate between the conditions of children and the elderly: and for those whose stone is larger, the treatment is easier; if smaller, the opposite is true.
When we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with enemas to remove all feces from their intestines, as this sometimes impedes the discovery of the stone during examination. Then the patient should be made to stand with their feet and shaken, and moved downwards: so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or jump from a high place several times.
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely tilted downwards.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If you feel a stone in the space, then hurry immediately with a incision upon it.
If it does not yield at all to your touch, then you must wipe your index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a boy; or your middle finger if he is a grown man: and insert it into his anus and examine for the stone until it stays under your finger: and gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it towards the exterior opposite the place where you intend to make the incision: and instruct one assistant to press the bladder with his hand: and another assistant to pull up the testicles with his right hand towards the top: and with his other hand to move aside the skin that is under the testicles on the side of the place where the cut will be made.
Then insert the incising spatula, which has this shape.
And find the spot between the anus and the testicles, but not in the middle, on the left side: and let the incision be over the stone, with your finger in the anus: and make a transverse cut so that the external part is wide and the internal part narrow, according to the size needed for the stone to exit without being too large.
Perhaps the finger in the anus will press the stone near the incision, and it will come out without difficulty.
And you should know that it is from a stone that has angles and edges, which is why its passage out is difficult because of them.
And it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its passage out is easy.
Therefore, for one who has angles and edges, add something to the opening.
If it does not come out this way, then you must devise something above it: or tie something over it with a gesture properly prepared, whose end is like the crescent Moon, which presses down on the stone without slipping away from it: or insert below it a delicate instrument with a curved end.
但如果无法从上方处理，那么稍微扩大孔洞。
如果有些血块阻碍了你，那么用器械将其割除。
如果结石不止一个，那么首先将较大的推至膀胱口。
然后在其上方进行切割。
随后将较小的推至其后：如果不止两个，也按同样方法处理。
如果结石非常大，那么应当在其上方进行较大的切割。
因为病人会出现两种情况之一：要么死亡，要么出现持续的尿液滴漏：因此，是因为那个部位没有完全愈合。
然而，要持续促使它排出，直到它完全出来：或者在碎石的情况下使用夹钳，直到你将其分段取出。
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloes, and dragon's blood: and apply astringents to it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that an abscess may be heated.
Then have the patient lie on his back with his neck as it was tied up, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
When you have loosened it, rinse the area with water and a lot of oil.
Then treat it with the ointment dyafinicon and the ointment basilicon until it is healed.
If an abscess becomes hot and corroded in the wound, or similar conditions occur, such as when blood clots in a bladder and prevents urine from passing, which can be recognized by the presence of blood mixed with urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and draw out the blood.
For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply all appropriate treatments until it is healed.
And during the entire period of treatment, you should bind both thighs together because of the medications that are applied to the area.
If the stone is small and is in the passage of the urinary tract, and it obstructs the flow of urine: then treat it with what I have described before you reach the point of surgery.
For you will often be spared the need for cutting by this treatment, for I have now proven that. And you should take a perforating instrument made of soft iron, which has this form: it is triangular at the end and sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take some thread and use it to secure the rod under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the rod with ease until the perforating instrument reaches the stone itself: and rotate the perforating instrument with your hand within the stone gradually: and attempt to pierce it, until you cause it to penetrate from the other side.
The urine is immediately cleared.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the rod.
It will break apart and exit with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you due to something that prevents it: then tie one thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cauterize over the stone on the rod between the two threads.
Then remove it.
After that, loosen the ligature and clean the clotted blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder: and another thread above, unless so that when the thread above dissolves after the stone's exit, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to lift the skin upwards when tying the thread above, so that it returns to its place and covers the wound, as we have said.
Of the Extraction of the Woman's Stone.
Chapter LXI.
The Stone is rarely produced in women.
If, however, a stone should occur in any woman, then the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited due to many methods.
One of them is: that the woman may perhaps be a virgin. And the second is, because you do not find a woman who will expose herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or one who has a husband.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, especially the manual procedure.
And the fourth reason is the distance from the location of the stone: therefore, it requires deep incision, and there is fear involved.
If necessity compels one to deal with it, then you must take a female doctor who is well-versed: and such are rarely found.
If you are to treat her privately, then seek a chaste and skilled doctor, and have a knowledgeable midwife present who is well-versed in matters concerning women, or a woman who has some knowledge in this art: make her present, and especially instruct her to do everything that you direct regarding the examination of the stone. First, she must check if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to insert a finger into the anus and search for the stone.
If he therefore finds it, let him press it under his finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the wound of the woman, and search upon the stone, after she places her left hand upon the bladder, and presses it with good compression. If he therefore finds the stone, then it is necessary for him to gradually move it from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts with all his strength until he reaches the root of the thigh.
Then let him cut above it at the midpoint of the wound near the root of the thigh, from whichever side it is prepared for him and where he feels the stone: and his finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing under it: and the incision should be small at first.
Then insert the probe above that incision.
If he therefore feels the stone, then let him extend the incision according to a proportional amount so that the stone can exit from it.
And know that there are many types of stones. From these, there is a small one and a large one, a smooth one and a rough one, a long one, and a round one with branches.
Know therefore its type, so that it may be indicated to you by this concerning what you wish.
If blood overwhelms you, then add crushed zinc to the area, and keep it there for one hour until the bleeding stops.
If the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that was cut: then apply powder to the area, and bind it with bandages appropriate for compression: and do not change it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it.
Perhaps the sick woman will die.
Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood is alleviated after days, and the area putrefies, then return to your procedure until the stone comes out.
Concerning the incision for a hydrocele hernia.
Chapter LXII.
A hydrocele is not a hard swelling, but an aggregation of fluid in the tunica vaginalis, which is beneath the skin containing the testicle; and it is called a tunica. And sometimes it occurs in its own fascia, which nature has prepared for it near the spermatic cord, until it seems to be part of the testicle itself, along with the skin of the testicle between the white tunica; this is rare.
And the generation of this condition is due to weakness that affects the testicles: therefore, this material accumulates in them.
And sometimes it happens as a result of a blow to the testicles.
And this fluid can have many colors. The color of this fluid may be slightly yellowish, or it may be reddish like blood, or it may be dark and foul-looking, or black, or it may be clear and white, and the last is more common.
For if it is on the white area that we mentioned, then the abscess is round in length somewhat like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own specific pouch, then the abscess is round with an egg-like part, and for this reason the patient swells because there is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white area, then it falls below the surface.
When you wish to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square probe, whose shape was described previously.
According to what emerges following the insertion, judge about what is between it.
When we come to the treatment with iron, then you must instruct the patient to be bled if it is possible for him, and observe whether his body is full.
Then have him lie on his back on something raised slightly, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, who will extend his limb to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part near the navel.
Then take a broad scalpel and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to near the scrotum: and make the incision according to a straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white area enclosing it: and peel it off and observe carefully, or be cautious not to cut too deeply: and let your peeling be from the part that hangs more with the egg: and examine thoroughly with peeling as much as is possible for you.
Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide incision, and remove all the water. Then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the bladder upwards, and do not touch the skin covering the testicles. And cut the bladder wherever it is possible for you to cut it, either entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side.
For if you do not examine it carefully, there is no security that the water will not return in the incision.
But if the egg protrudes externally from the skin during your operating hour: then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it.
Then join the two lips of the skin covering the testicles with stitches.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
If you find the egg corrupted by some darkness, then it is necessary to tie off the vessels, which are the suspensory muscles, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspensory muscle, and remove the egg; afterwards treat it as we have described.
If the water has collected in two parts, then know that there are two branches: cut the other part as you did the first one equally.
And if it is equal for you to perform the operation in one step, then do so: afterwards remove the blood.
And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and place outside another piece of wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the lower abdomen: and put a double layer of cloth over it, and use bandages to secure them above with a ligature shaped like this: ⧫——⧫.
Then two cloths are taken and softened, and filled with red carding wool according to this likeness: and the ends by which it is pressed should be of cork or wet wool: and they should be gathered together with binding at the elbows: and one end should reach from the anus up to the back, and the second should reach to the groin area: and two ends over each thigh below, and two other ends over each inguinal region, and let the whole binding gather at the elbow joints.
And sometimes this method is artificially treated with a cautery at the place of section using iron: and you take a thin knife-like cautery, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited as we have described: until when the white moist tissue becomes exposed: then take the cautery in this manner.
It is assimilated to the Greek letter.
Then pierce with it that moist tissue, and it is to be ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
Then extend the tissue with hooks, and scrape it with a thin ignited cautery, and cut it as much as possible until all of its roots are removed.
And be careful, lest the fire touch it.
And know that this operation is safer, more distant from blood flow, and better than the operation with cutting.
But if opposition arises for you at the time of cutting or at the time of cauterizing, such as a hot abscess, blood flow, or something else: then it is necessary to treat what opposes you with the appropriate treatment for it, as was mentioned before.
If the patient is fearful and does not await this procedure because of its horror: then administer the puncture as I describe it: and that is all.
When you have determined by what we said about the signs that the flux is watery: then it is necessary to seat the patient on a raised chair.
Then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a thin blade: and place the incision along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until the water runs out completely.
Then place a cup over the site and secure it, allowing the remaining fluid to drain: then care for it until the wound heals.
If, however, there is resistance to the outflow of water when you pierce it: and this is only because the white membrane causes obstruction at the wound opening and prevents the exit of water: then you must insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument used for extracting water from hydroptic patients, which was described earlier: or add it temporarily during the treatment of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time.
When it accumulates, then it should be treated in the same manner, and the patient will complete their days.
§ On the Treatment of Fleshy Fluxes.
Chapter LXIII.
Know that in the treatment of this flux, fear often leads to harm in many cases.
Therefore, it seems to me that its discharge is beneficial for salvation from it.
And I am recalling the procedure performed and the appearance of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses occur in the body parts from which the testicles are composed: and this happens for many reasons, namely. Or from an acute excess, or something sharp and bitter that is discharged to the testicles.
Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found in it: and this abscess is serious.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from the constriction of arteries and their swelling: as has already been mentioned before: or from the swelling of veins.
What is caused by the swelling of arteries can be recognized by the disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers.
And there is no need to touch it completely.
However, what is caused by the swelling of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers. And now it is possible to perform an incision on this type of abscess and on other flesh as well: and you should cut the skin of the testicles.
Then stretch the egg upward, and remove it with a white cloth: and release the suspensory ligament from the vessels, and tie off the vessels: and cut the suspensory ligament after you have released it from all parts of the egg.
If therefore a clot has become consolidated with the tissues that have grown, then you must pull out the clot and cut it. And if there is an adhesion between something from the abdomen or in what lies between the vessels, then you must free all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If there is a growth of flesh in the place of an adhesion that is behind, then you must cut away all of it and extract the clot, as we have said. When your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
¶ On the Treatment of Swellings, which are associated with the Vein.
Chapter LXIIII.
An abscess is a concealed swelling, wrapped in some folds, resembling a bunch, with a softening of the testicles: and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient, as well as walking.
And in the treatment of this illness is due to fear, because of what preceded its onset.
However, it is necessary to describe the procedure in this case as it was done by the first practitioners. I say therefore, that you should have the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then cut with a sharp wide scalpel with a transverse section directly over the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then strip from all parts as we have told you when extracting the arteries that are in the temples.
Then cut it in the middle along a straight line according to the length of the body, and remove what accumulates from foul, corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound as you would other wounds, where you wish pus to form, so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles may fall.
For it is not harmful through that.
If all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary to remove the testicles with the vessels: so that the sperm does not lack nourishment due to the incision, and thus waste away or dry up, and be of no use.
¶ On the Treatment of Intestinal Ulcers. Chapter LXV.
Therefore, the intestines descend due to that rupture to one of the testicles.
And this rupture is either from the thigh or its extension.
And these two kinds occur for many causes. Or from a blow. Or from jumping. Or from shouting. Or from lifting a heavy object and similar actions.
And the sign is when it occurs due to strain.
It happens gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly: it is an abscess equal in depth: therefore, because the strain compresses the intestine.
And the sign when it is from a tear of the strain is that it causes sudden severe pain at the beginning: and it is a different kind of abscess, appearing under the skin nearby: and this is because of the exit of the intestine and its passage to the outer part of the strain.
And sometimes it comes out with the small intestine: and this is called an intestinal hernia or bulge: and sometimes it happens due to gas.
And sometimes feces move into the intestine and are retained there: and this is harmful to the patient: for it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the forms of this illness, there is fear of using iron: therefore it is necessary to avoid any risk involving it.
And the method of treatment is to instruct the patient to return the intestine to the interior of the cavity with their own hand, if it obeys the reduction.
Then he is laid back onto his neck between your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows to the upper part, and shave the entire skin of the scrotum lengthwise.
Then fix hooks in both lips of the incision as needed to open it with them: and the incision should be made in such a way that, as far as possible, an egg can emerge from it.
Then strip the siphak and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white, hard part of the siphak is exposed from all sides: then insert your index finger into the area behind the testicle, between the white siphak that is under the scrotum skin and the subsequent siphak, and separate it from its attachment at the back of the scrotum.
Then move with your right hand the skin of the testicles towards the inside: and with this, extend the white siphak upwards with your left hand: and lift the egg with the siphak to the part of the incision: and instruct an assistant to pull the egg upwards: and you separate the attachment that is at the rear upon completion of the lifting.
And search with your fingers to ensure that there is nothing from the intestine wrapped around the white hard siphak.
If you find any of it wrapped around, then push it towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle with which there is a thick thread, made of licium from ten strands: and insert it at the last siphak, that is, the tunica, which is under the skin of the testicles following the incision: then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four strands.
Then arrange some of them above certain ones with a figure in the shape of a cross: and bind it with alsifach, which we have mentioned, because it is a strong ligament under the skin of the testicles, until none can pass from the vessels that nourish them to them anything: so that a hot abscess may not occur there.
And place another ligature outside the first ligature, at a distance of less than two digits from it.
And after these two ligatures, let loose from the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a digit: and cut away the remainder completely around it, and remove the clot from it.
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the testicles where blood and pus flow, as we have described in what was said before.
Then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound: and apply the ligature as we have described.
And sometimes the white sifach, which we mentioned, is cauterized after cutting it to avoid a flow of blood.
For this often happens.
And leave the ligature in place until it falls off on its own.
But if it delays in falling off, then apply it with warm water: and place on it what we have mentioned until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the usual care for wounds until it is healed.
Of the Windpipe.
Chapter LXVI.
In this matter of the windpipe, I have not seen anyone who has dared to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done as we have narrated for the windpipe that is with a vine.
This means that you should ligate the vessels above it after sectioning and do so easily below; then dry in the middle, and treat finally with what opens it until the vessels fall off: and treat the wound as we said, until it heals.
Of the rupture that occurs in the groin.
Chapter LXVII.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and a place protrudes but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if something does descend, it is little, and returns at all hours; however, if it extends over time, the fissure in the scrotum increases until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And that happens due to the stretching of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we said.
This means that the scrotum stretches, then softens, and the place becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And its treatment is with cautery, as was previously mentioned in its narration.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is done by having the patient lie on his back between your hands.
Then dry the area of rupture and protrusion, cutting across its width, according to a length of three fingers.
Then pull the asifak and what is under the skin until the white sifach, which is beneath the skin that follows it, becomes visible.
Then take the rod and place it on the protruding area of the sifach, and press it down into the depth of the abdomen.
Then sew the two protruding areas above the end of the rod from the sifach together with a suture; then remove the end of the rod.
And do not cut the asifak completely, nor stretch it, nor do anything else as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal hernias. Then treat it as you would treat a wound.
When you cut the thread, clean it and treat the wound until it heals.
For the sisach contracts, and does not increase the prominence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this case: for it is closer to providing healing.
¶ On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Chapter LXVIII.
The skin of the testicles often becomes softened in some individuals, due to which the flesh between them also softens, and the appearance is disfigured.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat this condition to have the patient lie on their back and to incise all of the softened skin onto the natural skin. Then join the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, first reduce the excess of softened skin with three stitches, or four, and make a firm suture.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals and the stitches fall out.
¶ On Castration.
Chapter LXIX.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law; and because of this, it would be fitting for me not to recall it in this book of mine: and there is no need to recall it unless for two methods.
One of them is that it should be known by the physician when asked about it: and that he knows its treatment for one to whom it has happened.
And the other method is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our livestock purposes, such as rams, boars, and cats, and similar animals.
I say, then, that castration is performed according to two methods. Or through abrasion.
Or through a cut and section.
In the method that is performed through abrasion, the way of operation is as follows: we should seat the animal in warm water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then abrade them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear to the touch.
In castration, however, through a slit and cutting, you must hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better than the one that is done by rubbing: because rubbing might leave some part of the testicles, which makes the animal desire copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
¶ On the Treatment of Hermaphrodites in Two Methods.
Chapter 70.
A hermaphrodite of the male type is considered in two ways.
One of them is because it appears in the space between the testicles, or on the skin of the testicles, in the area between the two testicles, having a shape like a female vulva, where there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs from that part of the skin covering the testicles.
In women, however, there is one type, and it is a female vulva on the mons pubis like a small male penis entirely protruding outward: one part is like a male penis, and two parts are like two testicles.
And the treatment for the three types, two of which are male and one is female, is as follows: because you must cut away the added flesh until the impression of it disappears.
Then treat them with the treatment of other wounds.
In the second type of injury involving the passage from which urine exits, located in the skin of the testicles, there is no surgical operation, and it does not require treatment at all.
Regarding the incision of stretch marks and protruding flesh in women's wounds.
Chapter LXXI.
A stretch mark may form over the natural area until it becomes disfigured and unattractive in appearance. And sometimes it enlarges to such an extent in some women that it spreads like it does in men, even reaching the point of affecting intercourse.
Therefore, you must hold the excess of the stretch mark with your hand or with a hook and cut it. Do not cut too deeply, especially near the root, to avoid excessive bleeding.
Then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it heals.
The flesh that has grown is the flesh that arises in the opening of the womb until it fills it, and sometimes it extends outward resembling a tail. Because of this, some call this condition "tailed illness.
Therefore, we must cut it as we would a stretch mark and treat it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of Alratica, which is an unpenetrated wound in women.
Chapter LXXII.
Alratica is when there is an unpenetrated wound in women, or when the opening is very small.
And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental is due to a disease that preceded it: and this indeed arises either from flesh naturally added, or from fine or thick phlegm; and it occurs either in the depths of the uterus, or on its sides, or at its upper or lower part; and it prevents intercourse and impregnation, and birth, and perhaps also menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is gained through the observation of midwives, if there is an apparent obstruction that is close to being detected.
But if it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is due to fine phlegm and is close to the two lips: then hurry and remove it.
And you should place small pieces on the two lips.
Then place the index fingers of both hands simultaneously, and the woman should lie on her back with her legs spread.
Then spread the two lips with force until the fine phlegm is ruptured and the obstruction is opened.
Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the site: and let the woman have intercourse every day so that the site does not heal by some other means.
But if the phlegm is thick and dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a sharp instrument similar to the leaf of a myrtle tree.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh that has grown naturally: then suspend it with hooks and cut it: and have medicines with you that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then administer a lead tube of ample size so that the wound does not heal too quickly; let him hold it for several days. And apply lint made from dry flax, then proceed with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes the birth of other flesh occurs within the womb. Therefore, it is necessary to proceed with an incision as follows: when there is no malignant abscess, do not make any opposition with iron for a malignant abscess that is in the womb at all.
¶ On the treatment of hemorrhoids, athehelil, and bothor of the reddened wound in women.
Chapter LXXIII.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the dilation of venous openings, through which much blood flows continuously.
When hemorrhoids become old, they form tumors: and I have already mentioned their types and signs in the division. Here, I will say which of them receive treatment and which do not.
I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the senses: then they cannot be treated with iron.
Those among them that are in the opening of the womb and can be perceived by the senses can be treated.
Therefore, it is necessary to admit the woman into a cold room.
Then extend the hemorrhoids with forceps or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle on them near the flow of blood from one of the powdered substances without causing irritation: such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, and similar items.
Then he should urge his feet against the wall at one hour.
Then lay her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gall nuts, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it to apply to her back.
If the blood is severed with it, that is good: and if not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without making cuts.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of taramira, or archangel herb, or the juice of horehound branches, that is, aglantine wine, and apply it to the wound.
When the abscess has subsided, then treat the area with ointments until it heals.
However, white horehound is similar to the heads of hyssop, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you should cut what appears to be affected, as I said regarding the thistle evenly: and treat it until it heals.
Concerning the piercing of the Exiture which occurs in the womb.
Chapter LXXIV.
Many types of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, stony abscess, ulcers, adubelati, and alekilati, which is herpes, seasonal sores, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadia, thistle, and hot abscess.
And indeed I have already described all these illnesses and their types, and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division; it is necessary that I say in this chapter about a hot abscess which occurs in the womb, when it arises from abscesses that collect pus, and you wish to know how it is opened with iron.
Therefore, you should consider this.
Then if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with a throbbing sensation, and there is fever and inflammation: and you see it become red; if feeling (sensation) returns to it, then do not hurry with piercing it: and treat it with what aids maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
Then you should have the woman sit on a seat that has two footrests and recline, or lie down on her back, and draw her feet towards the lower part of her abdomen: and let her hips be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and secure them with appropriate straps.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is made.
The form of which comes in those that follow.
And when you wish to use this instrument, it is necessary to insert it with the Radius deep into the womb of a woman: so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the womb and injure the patient.
If the instrument is deeper than necessary, then it is necessary to place buttons above the covering of the deep part of the womb: so that the entry of the entire instrument into the depth of the womb is prevented: and it should be placed with a spiral running on the upper side of the instrument: and it holds the instrument, and the assistant should rotate the spiral until the deep part of the womb is opened.
When the opening appears and is touched by hand, and it is soft and yielding: then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a thin blade.
When the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary to apply a lint soaked in rose oil: or green oil, which has a slight astringent quality: and place the lint, and extract the section deep within the womb.
And place externally on the womb, and on the pubic area clean wool soaked in water in which medlars have been boiled.
Then treat it after two days with an ointment that is appropriate for it, until it is healed.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed so that they are enemaed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or Aristolochia longa has been boiled: then return to using ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the womb, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, but instead treat it with what we have mentioned in the division.
The Teaching on Obstetrics, how living embryos are treated that have emerged in a figure not natural.
Chapter LXXVI.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know above all the figure of normal birth.
From these signs, therefore, it is clear that when you see a woman pressing downward and desiring to smell the air, and what is on her facilitates the birth, and the exit of the embryo hastens: then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is over its head, and the placenta with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel. When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press her abdomen so that the embryo descends quickly.
Any birth that occurs otherwise than this is unnatural and disapproved of.
For sometimes the fetus exits on its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and one foot or hand, or one leg, or its head and hands: or it is born breech: and perhaps it turns over its neck, and similar things from disapproved figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent and subtle in all these matters, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure among them, and how the nature of each is, and what it signifies, and how to deal with it.
When the fetus emerges head first with its natural exit and becomes violent against the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is weakening: then make her sit on a chair or have women hold her; and vaporize her loins with fenugreek decoction and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatula between her fingers and cut the membrane with it, and she should tear it with her nail until what is inside flows out from its moisture: and press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman should be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil.
Then instruct her to hold her breath after the enema: and make her sneeze with something powdered, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour.
For the fetus will emerge immediately.
If the two hands of the fetus come out first, it is necessary to gently guide them back gradually.
If it does not obey and come out easily, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet upwards: then shake the chair upon the ground: and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the shaking.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut them, and remove the rest of the fetus: tie its hand with a cloth, and remove it gently: for it will come out.
The exit of the embryo feet first.
When the fetus steps out on its feet, then it should be lifted up; then gradually turn the fetus: afterwards level it.
Then take one of its feet and gradually extend it.
When they emerge up to the thighs, then instruct it to be compressed, and make it sneeze while you press: for it will come out, if God willing.
And if it does not come out as we have described, then gradually return the fetus until you place it in its natural position.
For it will then come out easily.
If it is prevented as we have described: then take mucilage of barley, sesame oil, and dissolved gum; and pound all together well in a mortar: then apply it to the woman's vulva and below her abdomen.
Then have her sit in warm water until she relaxes.
When you see that her lower parts are now warm, then give her a decoction of myrrh: and apply it.
When she has held the decoction for one hour, then have her sit on a seat.
Then make her sneeze: and press her mouth and nose: and gently press the lower part of her abdomen.
For the fetus will come out immediately.
¶ The exit of the fetus over the knees and hands.
When it comes out in this form, then he will devise a way to gradually introduce his hands.
Then the woman lies back over her neck, and let her feet hang down below; and she should lie on the bed and clench her hands.
Then press gently over her abdomen gradually.
Then remove what is under her feet from the coverings until she is prepared at the lower part.
If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a vigorous motion.
Then press gently on what is above the pubic region gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper part.
Then introduce his hands and ease the fetus out gradually: and instruct the woman to push, until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus hanging laterally from the hands.
He will devise a way to return his hand.
If he is unable to return it, then lift the woman and have her walk.
If she is unable to walk, then have her lie on the bed: and shake her legs with a vigorous motion.
Then administer the ointment that you prepared from mucilages.
If she begins to give birth, then have her sit on a seat.
Then strive to return the hand, and ease the fetus out according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to push until it comes out.
The fetus exits with its body over its own neck, its arms spread, and its face toward the mother's back.
The midwife must hold the fetus's hand, then gradually turn it, and align it with ease.
When it is aligned, then apply what we have described from oil and mucilages to its surface.
Then instruct it to be moved gradually.
When you have done this, then have her sit on a seat and instruct her to lean to the right side.
Then instruct her to be compressed: and make her sneeze with appropriate preparations.
The fetus exits prepared on its side.
When it descends to the mouth of the uterus in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is clear of moisture.
If it is caught on the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the umbilical area so that it does not remain stuck and cause death.
Then push the fetus inward until it is positioned as needed: and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, for it will then emerge with ease.
The delivery of twins, or multiple fetuses.
Know that twins often are born: and sometimes three, and four are born.
However, that is uncommon and rarely happens.
There are five which are unnatural and do not live fully; and they are contained by one amnion although they may be multiplied; and they are separated by the sifah, distinguishing between them a cord tied at the navel of each.
And sometimes they emerge as one fetus would naturally and easily; and they emerge by an unpraiseworthy exit, as we have narrated. If some of them are difficult during childbirth and they reach what we mentioned about unnatural shapes, then treat them as we have narrated: and the instrument should be delicate, and it should act with ease and deliberation, and it should be crafted according to every shape with whatever is prepared for it by ingenuity leading to safety.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has been verified with me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them formed.
This was done through the measurement of the renowned sage.
Therefore, all of this must be known by the obstetrician. Perhaps she will encounter something like that; therefore, she should be prepared to deal with it as necessary.
¶ On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as I said in the division concerning treatment and it does not come out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then you must consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any accident from which loss might be feared: then she must lie down on her back upon the bed, on her back, with her head lowered downward, and her legs raised: and a helper must hold her on both sides, or secure her to the bed so that her body does not be pushed out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the os uteri with oils that are humid along with mucilage of linseed and fenugreek, and flaxseed. Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, then insert it into the womb gently.
Then she should search with her hand for the place where the hooks of the fetus are located and the suitable places around it.
Therefore consider whether the fetus is prepared to descend over its head: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its chin, or in the fork of its throat, or in places near the ribs, and below the navel.
If, however, the descent is over its feet, then fix the hooks in its hip bones and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand: and position its curvature between the fingers of the left hand: then insert it gently into one of the places we mentioned until it reaches an empty space.
Then it should be extended equally, and not just in a straight line, but moved to every part so that its exit is alleviated: just as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary for what is between them to be softened so that the extension can be eased.
If a part is retained within it, then the midwife should anoint some fingers with oil and insert them from that side to rotate what is retained with them.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then move the hooks to a higher place: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If therefore the hand comes out before other parts and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction: then it is necessary to wrap a cloth around it.
Then extract it until it comes out completely, and cut it either at the joint of the sole or at the elbow: and you must do this for the other hand and both feet as well.
If the head of the fetus is large, or constriction occurs during its exit, or water has accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a hooked tool and cut with it the head, and extract the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary to cut the umbilical cord or remove it with the afterbirth, as we have said.
Then pull the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and is stuck at the clavicle, then it must be cut until the moisture that is in the chest is released.
但如果胎儿没有缠绕，也不妨碍出生：那么你应该依次切割胎儿的头部，根据你能够做到的程度。
If there is an abscess or dropsy below the navel, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out.
If the fetus is above its feet, then it is easy to draw it and its direction toward the mother's birth canal is light.
If it is constricted near the abdomen or chest, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand and cut open the abdomen or chest until what is inside runs out.
If the remaining limbs are removed and only the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mouth of the birth canal is open, then insert your hand deeply into the womb and search for the head with it, and draw it towards the birth canal with your fingers. Then insert a hook or two hooks and draw it out with them.
If the mouth of the birth canal is constricted due to a hot abscess that has occurred: then do not labor over it, but instead administer an effusion of humid and fatty substances, and apply plasters. Let her sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it can be straightened: then administer what we have said about a living fetus.
If it is not possible to straighten it, then cut it in pieces and extract it.
And you must ensure that none of the afterbirth remains inside at all.
When you have completed your procedure, then administer what we mentioned for warm tumors that occur in the uterus.
If bleeding should occur, then let the patient rest in aromatic waters, and administer the remaining treatment.
And I have indeed seen a woman in whose womb a fetus had died; then she became pregnant again on another occasion, and later yet another fetus died.
It therefore happened that after a long time, she developed an abscess in her navel, which became swollen until it opened, and then began to discharge pus.
I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
I therefore applied some strong adhesive plasters to it, and the opening came out from its place.
Then after several days had passed, another opening came out.
I was therefore surprised by this, since there is no opening inside the abdomen.
I thought about it and realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I examined the wound and removed many bones, with the woman being in better condition; she then lived for a long time, and only discharged a small amount of pus from the site.
And I did not reinforce this foreign matter here except because there is knowledge and assistance in it, which the skilled physician administers with his hand during treatment.
¶ On the Forms of Instruments Necessary for Extracting a Fetus.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
Here below is the form of the stretcher, by which books are made even, to which two equal spindles are evenly placed at the extremities of two pieces of wood.
However, this spindle should be finer than the stretcher: and to make it, it should be either of ebony or of boxwood.
And the width of each piece of wood should be about two digits: and the edge of each of both is about one digit, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same type of wood, which are already fixed on both sides, whose length is half a palm plus a little more: and the width of each is about two digits or slightly more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the frame, so that it opens when you turn the two spindles.
The form of the spindle by which the frame is opened.
Another form similar to that one, finer and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers.
However, at its extremity there should be two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition is about a palm: and the width of each is two digits.
When you wish to open the frame with it, then have the woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her legs.
Then insert these two additional parts into the matrix: and you should hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs.
Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, evenly according to the quantity you wish from the opening of the womb, until the midwife achieves what she wants.
The shape of the vertigo which they called the shaper, by which the fetus is turned.
The shape of the almisdac with which the small fontanel is crushed. The shape of the hook having one spine.
The shape of the hook having two spines.
The shape of forceps with teeth like a saw, with which the fetus's head is crushed.
The shape of the spatumilis having two ends for cutting off the head.
The shape of two spatumilis that are also holders.
All these instruments are practiced with, and the more their varieties are multiplied and prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they are to use in their operation, and the more esteemed among people because of their variety.
Therefore, do not despise any of them so that the instrument is not prepared for you.
For their necessity is inexcusable.
Concerning the Extraction of the Afterbirth.
Chapter LXXVIII.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you must instruct the woman to hold her breath.
Then make her sneeze while pressing: and clench your hand over her mouth and nose.
If it exits as a result of this, it is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in its cover: and place herbs that open the womb in it, such as rush, rue, wild carrot, chamomile, hyssop, lignum cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs or some of them, and steep them in water, and put them over the fire.
Then place a tube made of reed over the hole in the pot's cover, and insert the other end into the womb: and have her hold it until the vapor reaches the depth of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said.
The afterbirth will then come out with ease.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or barley jelly. Then insert into the wound and search with it for the arrowhead.
When he has thus found it, then let him take it and gradually extract it.
If it is attached deep within the uterus, then insert his hand as we have described until he finds the arrowhead and gradually extract it along a straight line so that the uterus does not be pulled away forcefully; rather, it must shift easily to either side as needed: then add to the amount of traction.
For it will then yield, and be preserved, and escape from adhering.
If the mouth of the uterus is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with sneezing, and by the treatment of a pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with all the methods we have described, then be careful not to overexert yourself by repeating the extraction.
However, it is necessary to tie what comes out of the mouth of the uterus to the woman's thigh.
Then administer an enema with the four-ingredient ointment.
For it will rot after days, and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it putrefies, a foul odor will rise to the stomach and head, and it will harm the patient.
Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered for it.
Some of the ancients were already experienced with the fumigation of watercress and figs.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated for retained afterbirth and menstrual disorders.
Let it be made like an alcama from glass or ceramic, and place the wider end over fire. The fumigation should be placed above embers; hold it until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
Concerning the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Chapter LXXIX.
Many children are born with an unperforated anus, which has already been sealed by a thin membrane.
Therefore, the midwife should pierce that membrane with her finger: and if she cannot do so, she should use a sharp spatula to pierce it, taking care not to touch the child.
Then place on it wool soaked in wine and oil.
Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
但如果担心它再次闭合，那么就放置一根铅管在孔中几天，直到孩子需要排便时再移除。
而且肛门闭合也可能由于伤口愈合或脓肿形成而发生。
因此，必须切开那个闭合部位，然后按照我们所说的治疗方法使用铅进行治疗。 关于发生在下体部位瘘管的治疗。
Chapter LXXX.
Fistulas that occur below are Nodatio and Swelling which occur near the anus externally: or in the space between one of the parts: and there is either one fistula, or multiple.
When therefore that Nodatio becomes old, it opens, and watery white moisture, or thin pus runs from it.
And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas among these.
And there are among them fistulas when they are penetrating in the space reaching to the bladder, and up to the urethra.
And there are among them fistulas penetrating up to the hip joint, and up to the tailbone.
To distinguish a fistula that penetrates to the anus from one that does not penetrate, insert your index finger into the anus: and insert a fine probe into the fistula made of air or iron: when there is no curvature.
If there is a curvature in it, then insert into it a fine probe made of lead, or a hair from a horse's tail, until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it thoroughly, and nothing comes out of the opening during defecation, nor flatulence, nor worms as I said: then know that it is a non-penetrating fistula: hurry to its treatment.
And when a fistula reaches through to the bladder or to the urine passage: then its significance is the discharge of urine from it, and its prevention from this so that the place may consolidate with medicines.
If, however, it reaches through to the hip joint or to the socket of the hip: then its sign is that a probe can reach there, if there is no tortuosity up to the socket: and pain will be found around the area, and pus will always discharge from it: and it cannot be treated with medication, nor will it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and their treatment is labor and vanity by foolish physicians, on whom the blame falls. In the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing can be hoped for with thread: as I tell you, and I have already tested it: and let the patient lie under your hands on their back: raise their legs up above their hips, and let their hips be inclined toward their belly.
Then insert a probe of lead or iron, if there is a tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
If, however, the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe has penetrated by itself between your finger and either the canal or the flesh: then you will certainly know that it is penetrating: do not therefore labor on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say, however, that the flesh is healed in certain people and there is benefit from medication expected for them, it is to apply a fine cautery flame according to the width of the fistula, as was mentioned before, and insert it while burning into the fistula until it reaches near the anus.
Then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the added filtered tissues, which are like a bird's feather tube, have been cauterized.
Then treat it with lint wrapped in butter until the cauterized tissues fall out; then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If it thus heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if a probe comes out and does not reach your finger, which is in the anus, and there is a thick layer of flesh between it and the probe: and you see that the fistula follows what is on the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and proceed to cut with the probe that is in the fistula until the cutting reaches where the tip of the probe has reached, and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean those filtered tissues, which resemble a bird's feather tube, so that nothing remains of them.
But if blood overpowers you and loosens your ability to cut those tissues between yourself and the operation: then it is better and quicker for healing to cauterize it with fire or with sharp medication.
Since cautery associates well with fire, it aids in burning away added flesh, cutting off blood, and drying up moisture.
Then treat it with lint wrapped in butter or crushed greens until the place discharges pus, and the burned flesh comes out with the pus.
Then treat the wound with ointments that consolidate and generate hard flesh: these medicines contain astringents and drying agents.
For when it is being healed, then it is already cured: and you do not fear its recurrence. 但如果瘘管已经到达肛门深处，并且从身体的多余部分延伸出来：然后将你的手指插入肛门，用它来探查。
如果因此你能感觉到瘘管，并且在你和它之间有一层由肉芽组织或肉构成的屏障，而且接近穿透：那么在这个情况下，除了依靠信心和希望之外，没有其他的治疗方法。
这是因为在这个情况下使用三种方法之一进行治疗：要么像我们所说的那样用火灼烧它，要么切割它直到达到其凹陷处，以便你可以插入纱布并近距离治疗。
并且在切割时不要过度进行，以免切到控制肛门的肌肉，导致病人不自主地失去排便控制。 然后用我说过的方法治疗它。 也许它会因此治愈：或者你可以拉长那个屏障，然后在切割后清洁它，如我们所说，要么用探针，要么用其他尖端工具。
Then cleanse those filtered tissues which are in the section as far as you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with the section and at the upper opening where it consolidates: and there will remain an open fistula on the inner part of the anus, which will be less severe for the patient.
And sometimes a fistula is treated in this way: it occurs when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and the edge of the anus: then take a perforated probe, which is like an aleph needle, that is, prepared for piercing membranes, in this form.
And insert into it a thread wrapped with five threads, and wrap around it.
Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If it penetrates near the inner edge of the anus, then withdraw the thread from that opening: insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and join both ends together: tie them securely, and leave it there for one or two days: and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, tie it well, until the tissues between the two ends of the thread fall away: then treat the wound until it consolidates and heals.
It is not for you to do this out of fear that you might cut it accidentally.
Then proceed as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the Spatumilis with sharp spines used to incise a fistula, one end of which is very acute and the other end is not acute, so that it does not cut what need not be cut, as you see.
Concerning the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood flows due to their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
Chapter LXXXI.
There are hemorrhoids according to two methods.
They are either inside the anus, similar to coal blisters or thorn blisters, or they are like the seeds of a grape.
And they can be small or large: and blood flows from them continuously, and there can be one of them, or there can be many.
And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are mostly few and moist, from which flows a small amount of clear water or a little blood continuously: and they are in color like the body.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to strain, and express them until the anus protrudes, and the tissues become visible to you.
Therefore, suspend them with hooks: or hold them with your fingernail.
Then cut them at their roots.
If the hooks are not retained in them because of their humidity and softness, then take a coarse cloth or a piece of felted wool and remove them with your fingers.
Then cut them open and sprinkle certain hot powders on them after the cut, in place of cauterization.
Or cauterize them as was described previously in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat them with the remaining methods of care until they heal.
If the anus does not obey evacuation, then administer an enema containing a mild stimulant so that it cleanses when the patient expels it, and thus obeys evacuation quickly when the patient releases.
If they are external to the anus, then their removal is easy and simple: take them with your fingernail or hook them with a hook, and cut them.
Then treat them as we have said, until they heal.
And for those who avoid cutting with iron, then you must administer stitching according to this method.
Take a rolled thread and insert it into the needle.
Then pull the growth upwards and make it penetrate with the needle to its root from the other side: and tie both ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, and let them be horizontal: and tighten the growth firmly with the ligature.
Then knot the thread, and remove the needle.
Do this with all arteries, and leave one of them untouched: do not cut it, so that the excess blood may flow from it.
Then place a cloth infused in rose oil or cerate on the anus, and apply it there: and instruct the patient to rest.
Then leave it until it falls off.
When the arteries fall off, care for them with ointments and other treatments until they heal.
¶ On the Treatment of Fissures.
They often occur due to the dryness of feces and the constriction of natural functions.
When they become old and medicine is not effective on them: then it is necessary to scrape them with the points of a spatula or with your nail until they become soft, and the outer layer that prevents their healing is removed.
Then care for them until they heal as necessary.
If they do not heal: then repeat the scraping with a more vigorous reason than the first, until they bleed heavily and become inflamed. Then care for them until they are healed.
¶ On the Treatment of Almirmar Inverted and Not Inverted: And of Dry Arteries and Ants.
Then treat it: and if you wish to cauterize it as was mentioned previously in its chapter.
However, from the dry Athelil, there is a small, rough, filtered, round elevation on the surface of the body.
And they often occur in the hands of children.
And the treatment for it is to stretch the Athelil and cut it: or tie it with silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off.
And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned earlier with fire, or with a sharp medicine: and now the inverted and non-inverted Athelils can be removed with an instrument that I will describe. However, a mole is also a small, rough elevation on the surface of the body, thick and going very deep: and when it encounters cold, it feels like an ant bite, and it can appear all over the body: and it occurs most often in the hands.
And the treatment for it is to take a tube from the feather of a goose, or from a strong vulture's feather: and place that tube on the mole until the circle of the tube covers parts of it.
Then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the mole: and place it deep into the flesh, and extract the mole from its root. And if you wish, do this with a tube of copper or iron, in this manner.
Let the upper part of the tube reach the higher area pulling the concealed deafness, so that its grasp above the finger may be alleviated and its rotation performed.
And if you wish to cauterize the Ant according to what was stated earlier regarding the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
¶ On the forms of Instruments used for Enemas in diseases of the Rectum, and for relieving abdominal distension, and Colic.
Chapter LXXXIII.
An enema is sometimes made of silver, or brass, or cast metal, or hammered metal.
And sometimes it is made with these Instruments small and large, according to those in whom they are used.
Therefore, what is administered in the treatment of small children should be small: and for those whose rectums are weak or painful, their enemas should also be such.
Large Enema.
Small Enema.
The tube of it, that is, the upper part where the tip is tied off, should be wide in this manner: and there should be a distinction so that the tip can be tied off as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the rectum, should be concealed, that is, not open, gentle, very fine, reaching subtlety: and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side there is one hole.
And the size of the holes should be according to the thickness of the radishes, and slightly thicker, and it should contain a tip where medicines are placed, made from an animal bladder: or from sheepskin, which is in the shape of a small asofrati: whose base should be one palm wide.
When the bladder is thus placed in it, it should be tightly tied at the head of the enema between two constrictions.
Then use it for an enema.
And this is the circular shape depicted here, with the holes. The quality of administering an enema with it is as follows: fill the bladder or bag with medicine that has been warmed according to the patient's tolerance level; and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on his back and raise his legs upwards: and place a cushion, that is, leather or cloth on which people can lie.
Then anoint the end of the enema with oil, or egg white, or fenugreek mucilage, or something similar.
Then insert it into the anus with ease.
Then the attendant should grasp the bladder with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until everything in the enema is evacuated into the intestine. Then remove the enema, and have the patient raise his legs towards the wall. If medicine intends to bring it to an end, then let it hold as much as it can.
And if he sleeps with it the whole night, it is more beneficial for recovery.
If you administer enemas to him in cases of abdominal illness, and if the discharge is prompt: then continue with further enemas until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or inflamed sores in the anus, then use a very fine and mild enema, like those given to children.
And this should be the form of a fine enema, such that the skin is tight.
On the Treatment of Head Wounds Without Fracture of the Bone.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already mentioned in the division on the treatment of wounds that it was appropriate to include this with the book, and here I will describe their treatment by hand and with medicines according to the completion.
I say therefore, that wounds differ according to the instrument by which they are made and according to the place where the wound falls.
The objects by which wounds are made are often like a stone thrown: or a cut from a sword, or a knife: or a blow with a spear, or wood, or an arrow: and similar things from many other objects.
Wounds that are made according to the parts of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or back: and similar ones from other limbs.
And I am telling about the treatments of certain wounds, so that I place this reasoning and rule over other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: since the description of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say.
When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture of the bone: consider if it was caused by throwing a stone or something similar, and if it has only broken the skin: this is a serious wound, and you fear for the patient's outcome due to the risk of a hot abscess: then hurry and perform immediate phlebotomy on the cephalic vein: do not delay in doing this: and remove blood from the vein according to the strength of the patient: if there is nothing prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if little blood is coming out of the wound.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
And let the patient be cautious of overeating, wine, and heavy foods.
But if something prohibits phlebotomy, then reduce the intake of food, and do not approach meat or wine.
And apply to the wound if it develops a hot abscess, a poultice infused in rose oil alone, or with wine that has an astringent quality.
But if you are free from the risk of a hot abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and has not yet been affected by the air, the powder that I will describe shortly: and if it has already been affected by the air, then apply some ointment to it until it heals.
If the wound is large, or comes from a sword cut or similar, and its edges do not come together with stitches, then join it using a suture as I will describe for belly wounds concerning their sutures.
If the wound is already exposed by the bone and hangs loose, and there is no support for it except a small suspension, then cut it away.
Then treat the wound with medicines and restore tough flesh in place of skin. Instruct the patient to nourish themselves with foods that promote healing, such as heads of garlic and cooked wheat until it becomes pulpy, and similar items.
If you find putrefaction in the skin that does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the putrefied tissue and discard it. Then treat the wound.
If there is an artery or vein from which blood flows in these wounds and it does not stop with medicines, then probe around the artery.
If you find it not cut, then cut it with a scalpel, or ligate it.
If the situation requires and what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
Method of Preparing Flesh-Colored Powder.
Take one part frankincense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts quicklime that has not been extinguished: grind all of this well and sieve it. Apply this powder to the wound and bind it with good bandaging until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood.
Then tie it above with pads, and leave it as such, without removing it while it remains, so that it does not become an abscess.
For medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
Then treat them with the remaining methods of care until they heal.
### On Wounds of the Neck.
Chapter LXXXV.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
If, however, a nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut: then if it is a nerve, there is no treatment for it except to avoid treating it with substances that cause severe contraction, such as zinc oxide and myrrh, and similar ones.
Since they harm the nerves and contract them.
And do not place anything cold on the wound at all: since the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is higher than other parts of the body. And let what is used for treatment be mild medicines, such as lime washed with sweet water infused several times with oil, or with rose oil, and tuthia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
但如果伤口很大，那么就进行缝合：或者用粉末将其边缘紧缩。
然后治疗它，直到愈合。
但如果伤口有深度，或者在其下部形成了一个脓肿积聚的凹陷部位，则应在该较低位置对其进行穿刺。
如果动脉在伤口中被切开，导致其血液流出：那么分离或绑住它，并结扎该动脉：或者在必要时用烙铁处理它。
但如果已经切到了喉骨，或者是整个切开，而其他部分安然无恙：那么用缝合线将皮肤边缘与喉咙的支架缝合在一起，不要触碰喉部，而是将其保持平整，并恢复其自然形状。
然后适当包扎它，让它休息几天。
然后用具有收敛和干燥效果的药膏治疗它，直到愈合。
但如果伤口已经影响到骨骼，那么仔细检查它：如果里面有骨碎片，取出所有你能取出来的部分：对于无法处理的部分，让它自然腐烂，直到伤口分解并减轻其排出。
If the wound is recent, then powder the aforementioned powder upon it.
If an opening is seen in the wound and a fistula is formed, then treat it as described in its respective chapter.
Chapter LXXXVI.
If wind (gas) exits from the wound when the patient breathes heavily, then you will know that the wound is mortal.
If the wound does not have great depth and is fresh with its blood, then do not apply powder to it from the first hour, nor should you bandage it tightly so that the blood does not remain within its depth and return to the heart, causing the patient's death: instead, apply an attracting ointment and loosen it twice a day.
If you do not have ointment available, then place old leather over the wound opening so that it absorbs what comes out from the moisture: and make sure the patient lies on the wound so that what accumulates can be absorbed.
If three days or more have passed since the wound occurred, and the patient has not experienced spasms, nor a bad tremor of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see that their other conditions are good: then you will know that the wound is safe.
Treat it accordingly with lint and other forms of care until it heals.
If, however, healing is excluded and it remains open, then you know that a Fistula has already formed.
Therefore, treat it according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what precedes from stitching, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already made an impression on the bone and fragments have broken off: then examine the wound and hurry to remove those fragments if they are separate.
If they are not separate, then leave them until the wound putrefies; for their removal is alleviated when the wound has putrefied.
The judgment on the treatment of other accidental wounds in other limbs is the same as what we have said.
¶ On wounds of the abdomen, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their treatment.
Chapter LXXXVII.
The disruption that occurs in the abdomen is great, medium, and small.
From a great disruption, the intestine or a number of intestines sometimes protrude.
Therefore, there is an insertion of them, and their stitching is more severe and difficult.
And even a small disruption becomes difficult to treat in another manner.
It follows, then, that the reduction of them becomes more difficult if you do not hurry to return them promptly to their place: for it swells, opens, and enlarges: hence, the reinsertion becomes difficult.
Therefore, a median incision is better for disruptions: since with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in these two types.
Know that the suture of the vein is according to four methods.
Two common sutures are used for the suture of the abdomen and for the suture of other wounds on the body: and two other sutures are specifically used for other wounds.
However, they are more specifically used with the suture of the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with explanation and clarification. I say therefore, that when the wound is small, and something from the intestine protrudes from it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then this is due to one of two methods.
Either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said: or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When it is thus, then you must warm it by soaking a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water alone.
Or boil it in water with sage, and bulrushes, and grains, and herbs until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it is done with wine that has astringent properties: and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
When you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which alterae (likely meant to be "herbs" or a specific herb like aloes) and mallows have been boiled.
For by that means the entrance of it is alleviated with a small object.
But if there is an excessive return after this treatment, then proceed with slight cutting using the instrument used for hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared than cutting: and there should be no forcing to cut after necessity and due to lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and let the tip not be as fine as that of a spatula, but rather slightly blunter: and this is the part that resembles a cauda, as you see.
When the wound swells and enters the intestine, it is necessary that it be reduced according to its natural form to its proper place, if possible: for this is better.
When there is a wide incision in the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary to have the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head.
And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen: then place their head and chest higher than their lower parts.
And similarly if there is an incision in one of the two parts of the abdomen: then always direct your attention and consideration to ensure that the part with the wound is higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary to administer this for major wounds and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, place it as you prepare it.
Then have a devout attendant present in your hands, who holds the entire incision with his hand: and bring together its lips.
Then have him who follows reveal it from her bit by bit: and this is the method of a common suture of one kind.
And take an awl, or a number of awls according to the quantity and width of the wound.
Then leave from the edge of the incision a length equal to the width of the ring finger, that is, of the physician's: and place one awl, then pass a thread through it at both ends of the skin, and both ends of the sifac (a type of surgical needle or thread), as if it were under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and now you have brought together two ends of the skin and two ends of the sifac: and thus four orders are made.
Then tie with double thread around the needle several times from both sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are brought together properly.
Then leave the thickness of a finger as well, and place another awl in it: then secure it with thread as you did with the first needle.
Do not cease doing this with as many awls as you need, until you complete the closure of the entire wound.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between thin and thick: for very thin needles cut flesh quickly, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin. Therefore, they should be of medium fineness and thickness.
And it is not appropriate to place the needle too closely at both ends of the skin: so that the flesh does not cut quickly and the wound does not reopen before it has healed. Nor should they be stretched too much with sutures, so that the healing of the wound is not hindered.
Then cut the extremities sharply so that they do not harm the patient during sleep: and place little pieces of cloth around them from all sides, which hold the sharp ends: and leave them until you know that the wound has already healed.
And this type of suture with needles is particularly suitable for small wounds.
Since one or two needles, or about that many, are sufficient for suturing them.
The second type of suture is common for joining together four ends: two skin edges and two inner surfaces at once, using a needle with thread wrapped around it that matches in fineness and thickness.
Then when you pierce with the needle these four ends, withdraw the needle from the side where you began, so that the thread falls back from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture is like a seam in cloth used to stitch cloths together, and place between each suture an amount equal to the thickness of your little finger.
People know this type of suture.
And with this suture, I treated a wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, who had been stabbed with a knife, and the length of the wound was about one palm: and two palms of the middle intestine had protruded, and there was a tear in the center of the abdomen.
I therefore returned it after his intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound thus healed within about fifteen days: and I treated him, and he recovered: and he lived for many years afterward, living according to his circumstances.
And the doctors had judged that it could not be healed.
And it was miraculous that I did not cure it with ointment.
Since I was in a place where ointment could not be found, nor anything from medicines.
So I placed an old cloth on the wound twice a day, and I continued to wash it with honey water until it was healed.
I will describe two types of stitches according to the account of the discourse.
And it is such that you start with an acute stitch: and insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle penetrates the skin and moves along the length and width of the entire body: release the end as if on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from another end from the inner part to the outer part on the other side.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this at the same end on the other side from the outer part to the inner: and release the end as if on this side, and make the needle penetrate the other end from the inner part to the outer part: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you do it in the end that is on the other side, until it penetrates throughout.
Then begin from this same side as well, and sew it with the end that is on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the skin through which it has penetrated.
Then bring it back to that skin, and sew the end on the other side with this end on the opposite side: and withdraw it from the skin on its side, and do it in one turn, and another: and do it in a turn after a turn until it is done entirely according to that example.
And the main point of this stitching is that just as the stitching of the skin should follow its natural lines: so you should make one stitch at a time from one end of the skin, and let it go in turn from the other side until it is complete.
The second type of proper stitching, which Gale called "nus.
This statement is described as follows: just as it should be done according to the likeness that certain surgeons have, so that they gather all parts together in accordance with their nature and fit one end of a suture to one end of another, and one edge to its corresponding edge.
And that is done as I tell you.
You must insert the needle at the edge closest to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner side: and let both ends of the stitch go.
Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner side at both ends of the stitch, that is, on both sides.
Then turn both ends and make them penetrate from the inner to the outer side, at both edges on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common and easier stitch, and it is a stitch whose description precedes its memory.
This is therefore the statement of Galen as well.
And some have said.
The stitching of the abdomen is corrected with two needles.
That is to say, insert a single thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of a needle, from what is near you, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, according to the stitching of those who are making the leather even.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen: then its stitching is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of the wound is the judgment of other wounds.
That is to say, when you encounter a fresh wound with its own blood before the air has altered it: and you reduce the intestine, and return it to its proper place, and fit it: then apply powdered incarnate.
If the air has already altered the wound: then apply some ointments that are present to you, until they produce pus: and let threads fall out, and heal as if with mīrāch.
Then treat it as you would treat other wounds, until it is healed.
但如果手头没有药物，那么当伤口开始排出脓液时，立即放置旧布在其上：每天更换两次，如我所教导你的，直到它愈合。
但如果担心伤口会感染到主要部位，那么你应当将柔软的羊毛浸在适度加热的油或玫瑰油中：然后将其放在腹股沟和腋下的周围区域。
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then give him an enema with astringent, black, and warm wine: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine, and there is an exit wound penetrating as far as its concavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal: and what comes from the small intestine is harder to heal.
However, the intestine which is called the jejunum does not heal at all from a wound that occurs in it: and this is because of its multitude of veins and the size of them, and due to the fineness of its body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
But if what comes from the wound is fresh blood, and you encounter it recently: reduce it according to your method, by which you equally reduce the intestines.
But if time has passed and it has become green or black: then you must bind it with a thread above the place that is discolored by it, so that there is no flow of blood.
For in fresh blood there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that there may be relief for you in its attraction and extraction in the case of fresh blood and the discharge of pus from the wound.
¶ Recall of the wound that occurred in the intestine.
When there is a small tear in the intestine, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people: because I saw someone who was wounded in his belly with a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had healed, but a fistula formed, and feces and gas exited from it.
Therefore, I undertook the treatment until I was no longer confident about his healing; nor did I cease to treat him carefully until he was healed and the affected area had become firm.
After I saw the affected area had become firm and healed, I was still concerned about the patient, fearing that something bad might happen in his belly; but nothing bad happened to him as a result of that.
And he remained in better health, eating and drinking, and engaging in sexual activity, and taking baths, and continuing with his usual activities.
And some experienced practitioners have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it must be treated in this manner.
And you should take ants with large heads.
Then bring the two edges of the wound together and place one of these ants, which have an open mouth, on top of the two edges of the wound.
When the ant bites down and clamps its mouth shut, cut off its head; it will adhere to the wound and will not let go.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop placing ants in this manner next to each other according to the length of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and sew the wound.
For those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is nourished, and healed, and no harm comes to the patient thoroughly. And now it is possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread: one that has been removed from the animal's intestine and attached to it after being inserted into an instrument.
And you should take the end of this thread from the intestine and strip it extensively.
Then tie a fine rolled linen thread to its end.
Then insert that thread into the needle, and sew with it the intestine.
Then reduce it to the site of the injury. And this method of stitching with threads and intestine is nothing but according to a way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no skill except to narrow it, nor is its healing at all possible.
¶ On the Treatment of Abscesses and Fistulas.
Chapter LXXXVIII.
Know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal, and continuously discharges pus, and cannot be excised: then it is universally called a fistula in whichever part of the body it may be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is, in truth, a filtered node, hard, white: with which there is no pain, it has the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of that some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And at certain times it is moist, which emits pus.
And perhaps the moisture may split open at certain times.
And sometimes this moisture is much, and sometimes it is little: and it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have already mentioned in the division, then when I said wounds, that every sore which does not heal, nor does flesh grow in it, is none other than due to one of nine causes.
One of these causes is either due to a lack of blood in the body, or because the blood is poor in quality, or because there is hard flesh between it and above its lips which prevents the growth of new flesh, or because it has much filth and dirt, or because the sore itself is putrid and the matter discharged from it is of bad quality, or because the medicine used for its treatment is inappropriate, or because the corruption falling into the region is a type of pestilence, or due to the nature of the place itself, as happened in Caesaraugusta: where there is difficulty in digesting illnesses and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature, or because there is one bone, or a number of bones in it.
And I have already shown you all these causes and the signs of them, as well as their treatments with medicines in the division: and it is necessary here to make you know the treatment of fistulas and zukens, which is done through an operational method using the hand.
Therefore, you should know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body.
Of these, there are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons; or they go to the intestines, bladder, or one of the ribs: or they affect one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the complex joints such as the hand or foot: and among them are those that approach the principal part of a limb and similar areas.
Therefore, those fistulas among these that occur in this manner are from illnesses difficult to heal, and they do not receive treatment, and dealing with them involves labor and ignorance.
If there is any fistula whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope and trust in its treatment, and wish to understand it, then take a probe of air or iron, if the fistula runs straight, and investigate it with this.
However, if there is a curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead.
Since lead, with the gentleness of its body, floats and can curve around the curvature.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate on it with a probe.
Therefore, use one of the openings for an enema.
For the moisture with which you administer the enema goes towards the other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully investigate as best you can: to understand whether there is a cavity, nerve, or that the fistula is deep or shallow: or if it is one fistula with many openings, and stand over all of it with your utmost strength: by questioning the patient and discovering pain through compression with your hand on the area, and similar signs and causes related to an abscess.
When you therefore stand above all those things in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you should consider at that time whether there is a Fistula close at hand, or in a safe place far from a joint, or a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you about. Then cut the Fistula as was stated in my narration, and remove what is inside it by filtration, and the flesh that has become corrupt, which grows out of its opening from flesh, or granulation tissue, or similar substances: and treat it until it heals.
If however the Fistula is of great depth and runs straight: then you must cut it deep as much as is possible for you.
Then clean it of all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply lint wrapped in sharp medicines: and insert it up to the hollow of the Fistula that you have grasped with iron: do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that remains in the hollow of the Fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
If however it does not heal through that treatment, then cauterize it as we have narrated.
If the cause of the Fistula is a tooth, and you are convinced of this: then search for it, and cut it as I have told you, if nothing from a vein, nerve, or principal limb prohibits you, as we said.
If therefore the tooth is exposed to you and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it until all of its corruption is removed.
Then treat it with what causes it to heal until it is healed.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as before, then you know that you have not completely removed the corruption.
Therefore, expose it again and carefully examine it, and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it.
If it heals, that is good; but if not, then you know that the corruption is deep within the body where you could not reach it.
Therefore, it is not for you to intervene further with it, except to leave it to nature.
If the small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you to do so, pull it out with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and leave nothing behind with your strength.
If any moisture or soft tissues oppose you and there is no risk or error in cutting them, then cut through those moist tissues and soft tissues, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the means to remove the bones at that moment, then apply something to the wound that will cause it to putrefy, and leave it until what is around those bones in terms of flesh and moisture putrefies.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal.
And ensure that the section you cut during the procedure becomes constricted.
Place over it, if you fear, cotton dipped in sulfur ground with oil: or cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, or in some green ointment.
For when those moist parts putrefy and separate from the bones, their removal is lightened, and their attraction is reduced.
但如果是一个大的骨头，如腿骨或髋骨，以及类似的部分，并且从它腐败的部分很大：那么用刮刀最终刮除它，直到移除那部分的黑腐物质。
然后修复伤口。
但如果腐败的部分很大，且腐败已经蔓延到骨头的骨髓，那么必须锯开它，并完全切至腐败到达的地方：然后治疗它，直到其愈合巩固。 我告诉你一个发生在一个人腿上的案例，称为zuken：将其作为你的操作示例和参考。
有一个大约三十岁的年轻男子，他的腿上出现了疼痛，原因是体内深处产生的问题，即从内部开始，直到物质蔓延到腿部并形成了一个大的脓肿：而且这不是由外部原因引起的。
因此，由于医生的误诊，时间被耽搁了，直到脓肿被切开，大量物质涌出。
随后对他进行了治疗，直到他的腿形成了瘘管，并在他的腿上出现了许多开口：这些开口都排出了脓液和体液。
Therefore, many doctors took care of him for about two years, and there was no one wise in the art of hands among them. I was called, and I saw his leg, and matter was running from those openings in great abundance: also the whole man's body had already wasted away, and his color was citron-yellow.
So I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the cavity.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them reaching each other from all parts of the leg. I hurried and cut around one of those openings until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: it was already corroded, and blackened, and had putrefied, and was perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
So I cut away what was exposed to me and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I set aside what was not part of the bone except for that corruption, which I cut away and removed.
And I had now removed it entirely.
Then I applied treatments for the wound's healing with consolidating medicines over a long period.
And it did not heal.
Then I attempted its restoration.
And it has not been restored.
Then I restored it with medicines and it healed quickly and became healthy. This repetition in the operation and cutting was not necessary except due to the patient's weakened condition, his limited tolerance, and my fear of him dying, since he suffered from fainting spells at every hour due to excessive evacuations.
He therefore recovered with a complete healing: flesh grew in the place of the bone, and his body was properly disposed, and his strength returned: he resumed his normal activities, and walking caused him no harm at all.
However, if a protruding bone is already fractured in the body, then you must set it in this manner: take a bandage and wrap it at the end of the protruding bone. Instruct someone to pull it upwards, and place another bandage made of thicker wool over the first ligament. Then wrap it above the flesh that is near the bone, and extend its end so that you pull the flesh downward. Cover the flesh in the area where you wish to cut so that the blade does not injure it.
Place a piece of wood or a board underneath the bone below appropriately: when you do this, it prevents the cutting of healthy flesh.
And it is necessary for the cut to be made above the damaged area slightly, so that there is no corruption in the concavity of the bone: and it should not appear upon inspection as needing further cutting. If the bone is corrupted, and it is not prominent, but rather its part continues with another part: and corruption is in the middle of it, or in one of its parts: then expose the flesh from all sides entirely.
Then place the wood below.
Then cut it from the first side where there is corruption until the cut continues on the other side: and let the cut be along the length away from the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut open the corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues on the other side.
If the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then there is no other remedy for it except abrasion.
If the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or in the ankle of the foot: then the situation is very difficult.
However, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you.
And you should scrape it away, and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever method corrects it for you: as long as a vein or nerve does not make it difficult for you.
And you should know that there are many cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, according to the placement of the bones, their preparation, their thickness and fineness, their size, their softness, their hardness, and their density.
Therefore, it is necessary to prepare the appropriate instrument for each type of procedure for that particular operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the kind of instrument you need when you have long practice with them.
And knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of illnesses: then you will find for yourself what is suitable from the instruments for every ailment.
Shape of the Saw.
Shape of another Saw.
Shape of Another Saw.
Shape of a Different Saw.
This shape of the saw should be properly depicted. Let its upper part be curved, its sharp edge made of iron: and its handle should be made of boxwood, and should be properly shaped like a pyramid.
Shape of the Surgeon's Razor for Joints.
Let the head of this razor be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped claw hammer: and its points should be in the shape of the points of an elischetfegi.
And it is not appropriate except that they should be rubbed with it when the joints are corrupted, or there is a large and open wound.
The form of the larger razor.
The form of the medium razor.
The form of the broad razor.
The form of the razor with a concavity.
The form of another fine razor.
The form of another curved-edge razor.
The form of the small, fine tapered razor.
The form of the razor with which bones are cut.
The form also of the large razor.
This is similar to a file, and its end is like a saw: it is shown in many places due to the reason of bones.
The form of the razor that is suitable for the reason of what is perforated from bones.
Its end is triangular, with sharp points.
It is made from India.
And similarly, it is necessary that all the items we have mentioned be made from razors, cutters, and saws.
¶ On the cutting of extremities, and the Sawing of Bones.
Chapter LXXXIX.
The extremities decay either from an external cause or an internal cause.
When you have treated that corruption with medical care and the treatment is ineffective, and you see the corruption affecting a limb that has not been injured: then it is necessary to cut off that limb as far as the corruption extends, so that the sick person may escape death or greater harm from the defect of the limb.
And the sign that this affects someone is that the limb turns black until it appears as if burned by fire or rots after turning black: until that corruption spreads to what follows that limb and creeps throughout the entire body.
Hurry with the cutting if it is necessary, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from being struck by some poisonous creatures, such as a marine scorpion, viper, rattlesnake, or similar.
If the corruption or injury is at the extremity of a finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread further to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it off from the root of the wrist, and do not give space for the corruption to spread until it reaches the arm.
And if it invades the arm, then cut it off at the elbow joint. If the corruption spreads through and you see it around the elbow, then death is imminent for the patient.
And to administer beyond that in treatment is an excess of care.
And similarly do for the foot, when corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one joint: and if it seizes the ball of the foot, then cut off the entire foot.
But if it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill in it except to let go and leave the sick person to death.
And the method of cutting or sawing off a limb is such that you should tie up the tendon below where you wish to cut: and bind another tendon above the place.
And let one attendant stretch one tendon downward: and let another attendant stretch the other tendon upward.
And you should separate the flesh that is between the two tendons with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed.
Then cut or saw it.
And it is necessary to place a linen cloth between all parts, and let the saw not touch the healthy area: and if an additional injury or hot abscess occurs to the patient.
But if bleeding occurs internally while you are working, then cauterize the area quickly: or apply certain powders that stop the bleeding.
Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man with his foot, the same thing that I am telling you.
This is because blackness occurs on his foot, with a burning that resembles the burning of fire: and that corruption first happens in his toe, until it begins to affect the whole foot.
Therefore, the man operated on himself after seeing the corruption affecting his limb with such vehemence, which he felt from the pain and burning: and it affected the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, that same corruption occurred in his index finger. He came to me, and I tried to recover the excess with medicines that I applied to his hand after cleansing his body: but the excess did not recede, and it began to spread to another finger: until the corruption started affecting his entire hand.
He called upon me to amputate his hand: and I refused, hoping that the excess could still be expelled: and I also feared for his life if I were to cut into his hand.
For the man's strength was great in bearing the case.
After he lost hope in me, he returned to his own land: and he came back to me from there because he had acted quickly and amputated his entire hand: and he was healed.
And I have not brought this story forward except to be of assistance regarding that which falls under the category of this kind of illness: and to serve as an indication according to which it should be understood and acted upon.
Concerning the treatment of the sinuses, and the nature of enemas with medicines.
Chapter XC.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and extends over a period of time until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and what is inside it emerges as pus, leaving a hollow space like a vessel: and the skin that covers it becomes thin like cloth; and if it does not reach its final stage of corruption nor spreads to bone, nerve, or ligament, it deserves to be called a Sinus: but it is not called Fistula. However, if its duration allows the corruption to spread to any of these members, then it is called Fistula or zuken.
And the treatment for it is to cut away all that skin as it has turned, especially when it has become thin like cloth: and you can be confident that it will not adhere to the place because of its condition.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and it does not reach that final stage of corruption: and if there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with enemas: and proceed as if treating a Sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul odor: then administer an enema with Egyptian medicine, which consists of equal parts of vinegar, oil, and zinziberi (ginger), mixed in a vessel: and boil them over fire until the medicine turns red: and thickens to the consistency of honey.
Then take what you need from it and dissolve it with water and honey, and administer the enema with this to the Sinus: and apply a plug to its opening, and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then remove it after expressing it: do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water mixed with ashes, when you do not have this medicine at hand: take the ashes of vine branches or oak wood ashes and add them to the water.
Then cleanse it and use it for enema cleansing until you are confident that the sinus is now cleansed.
If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then cleanse with water and honey to which a little of crushed ziniar has been mixed.
Or cleanse with honey and wine mixed together, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine helps the sinus to adhere, especially when the wine has a surplus of acridity and dryness.
When you do this several times and are confident that the corruption in the sinus is now removed: then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you should take some dyafinicon from the plaster and dissolve it with rose oil and acrid wine: or cleanse it with certain medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in the chapter on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow the enema tube to enter: then enlarge it slightly with iron: or apply licinia wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it enlarges.
And similarly, if the opening is also too wide, then bring its edges together with stitches: and leave enough of it so that the enema can enter without additional widening.
And similarly, if the opening from which the pus flows is raised towards the upper parts: then cut it at a lower place within it, so that the pus can flow from there downwards: for when pus is compressed in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated therein.
And if it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part as you wish: then try to prepare the member with a preparation so that the pus can flow from it easily as you have prepared it.
Try to ensure that nothing from the pus is retained within it: and take medicines for consolidation which are placed on the mark, suitable for what you wish.
And extend them over a linen cloth.
And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire sinus.
Then cut with forceps directly at the opening of the sinus, making a hole slightly larger than the opening of the sinus.
Then apply a layer of mild ointments on another cloth according to the size of the hole: and place it over it at a distance from the opening of the sinus, so that the pus can more easily exit from it: and do not remove the large cloth until after several days at once.
The cloth that is over the opening of the sinus is the one you remove at every hour, so that what accumulates in it from the pus can exit: and to know whether what flows out of it is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And while doing this, again consider the location of the sinus itself, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess in it or not.
When your treatment is carried out in this manner, and you see the material that comes out over the opening of the sinus, then you know that the sinus has already adhered or is approaching adhesion: therefore dissolve it either in the morning or on the third day: and when you open the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment. If, however, thin pus comes out of the sinus after a long period, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are people who take longer to generate flesh in their wounds, and among them there are those who act contrary to this.
If, however, undigested pus comes out of the sinus after many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
If adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then add to the drying medicines, but ensure that the medications are moist in their substance and dry in their efficacy: such as the ointment dyafinicon, when an excess of zegi is added to it.
And from the most recent treatment method, take ointment dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil, and sprinkle over it an equal amount of old wine by substance.
Then prepare it with that mixture and use it.
And now it is similar to this action when you do not have ointment dyafinicon at hand, use honey, which you boil until it thickens, and then use it.
Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: crush all of it, and powder it over honey while it is over the fire.
Then place a bandage over the cloth, and secure it above the elbow: and soak linen in honey which you have boiled until thickened: and sprinkle powdered herbs over it, and place it on the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes aristolochia longa, and roots of the heavenly lily, which is a type of lily, and flour of a herb, and centaury are administered.
Use them singly or in combination, grind them, and sieve them: and mix the powder with the honey I have described, and use it.
If the condition of the elbow persists and does not heal with this treatment: then you should know that there is corruption deep within it: either it has already affected the bones, or other hard parts of the body, or the ligaments: in that case, treat it according to the method for Fistulas as described above. Regarding the treatment of Panaritis and worn nails, and the incision and division of the finger.
Chapter XC I.
A Panaritis is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot: and it may also arise in other fingers.
When the condition persists and is neglected in its treatment, and it develops into a hot abscess: or it becomes corrupted and discharges pus until it destroys the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the entire nail, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foul odor: and the extremity of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns dark.
When you treat it with the method we described for division, and your treatment is not effective: then you must cut away with a knife all the excess that remains from the nail.
Then cauterize the wound after that.
For cauterization is very beneficial.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, but the empty space of the nail begins to press against the flesh towards the interior and starts to irritate it and injure it: then you should place a thin piece of Radium under the angle of the nail that presses on the flesh, and push it upwards: cut away the flesh with ease along with medicines that burn and corrode, until all of it is removed.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you must cut out that bone and extract it: for it will never heal while the corrupted bone remains.
If you see the corrosion and decay spreading to the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, as was previously described.
Then treat it until it heals.
If the nail is injured by rubbing or hitting, and it causes severe pain, then you should bleed the patient first.
Then dry the nail with an acute cross-sectional piece of Spatumil from top to bottom.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for doing so would cause severe pain to the patient and would lead to the addition of new flesh in that place.
Then apply a remedy that soothes the pain.
However, the extra finger that is born on the hands of some people may be entirely fleshy; and sometimes there are bones in them, and sometimes there is a nail on them: and some of them are born at the root joint, or their origin is in certain nodes of the finger.
Therefore, the one that is born at certain nodes of the finger is not moved: and the one that is born near the joint of the finger may be moved.
Therefore, for the one that is entirely fleshy among them, its section is easy.
That is to say, cut it at its root with a broad scalpel.
However, the treatment for the one whose origin is at the root joint is difficult.
Therefore, abstain from cutting it.
For the one that is born on the finger at the last node, then you must cut the flesh around it initially with a round incision down to the bone.
Then saw through the bone with one of the appropriate saws.
Then treat it until it heals.
However, the joining together of fingers, which often occurs, can happen either from birth, that is, it is born with the person, or from the healing of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar causes.
Therefore, you must cut that joining until the fingers return to their natural form.
Then place between them licinia or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not harden too quickly, and separate them. Or place a thin sheet of lead between them until the area has hardened as necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut away that consolidation according to what is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
§ On Incising a Defect.
Chapter XCII.
Varicose veins are wrapped, thick, and full of excess melancholic humors that occur in many parts of the body; and most often they appear in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk a lot, work hard, and carry loads.
Therefore, you should administer shaking of the body from black bile several times with a strong shaking.
Then let the phlebotomist bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
The treatment of these conditions with iron is according to two methods.
One method is to cut them and extract black blood.
And the other method is to lift the vein and remove it entirely.
However, the cutting of it is according to this method.
First, apply hot water fomentations to the leg until the thick, foul blood is dissolved.
Then bind the affected leg from the upper part of the hip to the lower part of the knee with a bandage.
Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision.
Then let the blood until the quantity that you see is sufficient and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
Then tie it up: and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and this is harmful to the patient.
The raising of it is according to this method.
Shave the patient's leg if there are many hairs on it.
Then introduce him into the bath: or apply a hot water compress to his leg until it turns red and the veins become prominent: or let him exercise vigorously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
Then dry the skin directly along the course of the vein: or at its end near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and strip the vein from all sides until it appears clearly: and when it appears, you will see it turn red to a bluish hue.
When it comes out of the skin, you will see it white as if it were a cord.
Then insert a probe under it until it comes out of the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook gently.
Then make another incision near that one, three digits away.
Then strip the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
Then lift it with the forceps as you did before, and suspend it with another hook, as you did initially.
Then make another incision, or several more if you need them.
Then lift it and cut it at the final incision near the heel.
Then extract it to the incision above it.
And do this until you extract it from the upper incision, or the highest of all incisions, until it comes out completely; then cut it.
But if it does not obey you in coming out and lifting: then insert a needle with strong double thread, and tie it, and pull it out; or insert forceps under it: and move your hand to every part until it comes out.
And be careful that it is not cut.
For if it is cut, it will be very difficult for you to lift it, and harm will come to the patient from it.
When you have thus extracted it completely: then apply wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, to the site of the wound, and care for it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted, with twists that are coiled into parts, and it is not as we said straight: then you must cut along its entire length of twisting and the places where it is coiled.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it entirely: and be careful at your cutting not to cut a vein or wounds on it: for it will be difficult for you to lift it up or extract it.
Therefore, preserve your prudence.
The Method of Treating Vine Diseases.
The Form of a Blind Hook.
It does not have the curvature of other hooks, nor does it have a sharp tip so as not to wound a vein: and it has an extra flexibility, gentle in nature: for if it were fine, its fineness would cut into the vein; rather, it should have an excess of thickness, as we said.
On the Extraction of the Thigh Vein. Chapter XCIII.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands such as Alizeg (likely referring to a region or climate), and in dry, warm lands with little nourishment, that is, where no grass or tree grows.
And it may also be generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as snakes and worms like ascarids, and other worms generated between the skin and flesh occur within the body.
And the sign of the onset of this vein's occurrence is that inflammation suddenly appears in the thigh.
Then the area is treated with cupping.
Then the vein begins to emerge from that place of cupping, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore that extremity becomes apparent, then you must wrap a piece of lead over it, whose weight should be from one dirham of silver to two dirhams and tie it: and let the lead hang freely from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it to the outer parts, wrap it in lead, and tie it.
If it extends too much, then cut part of it and wrap the remainder.
And do not cut it from the root before it has emerged completely.
For if you cut it, it contracts and enters the flesh: and it causes an abscess, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad wound.
Therefore, it is necessary to gently handle it and slowly extract it until it completely emerges from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body: and this vein emerges in some people to a length of five palms and ten.
And now it has reached me because it emerged from the man for twenty palms.
But if it is cut for you during your treatment time: then insert a probe into its opening, and perforate it with a long needle until everything that is inside it of matter is evacuated: and treat the putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days. Then treat it as you would an abscess.
And this vein indeed often has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself: and it has many openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Therefore, treat it as we said in the division, and along with what was mentioned before.
Concerning the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called Cow Disease.
Chapter XCIIII.
This disease is called Cow Disease in a certain land among us: because it often occurs in cows, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the entire body, ascending and descending: and its movement is felt as it travels from one member to another, until it breaks through wherever it breaks the skin and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors.
As worms and snakes, that is, earthworms and roundworms, occur in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malicious nature.
Because when it moves within the body and rises to the head, and reaches a certain place: then perhaps it breaks through there and emerges, and destroys the eye: and this often occurs.
When you wish to treat it and remove it, then this can only be done during its movement and when it becomes apparent to the senses.
Therefore, you should tie what is above it and what is below it with a strong constricting bandage.
Then dry it above it and remove it.
If it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then apply a burning cautery to the place until it dies.
And what is more feared is its corruption, which can damage the eye, as we have said. If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then tightly bind below it above the eyebrow.
Then dry it above it and remove it.
And the patient must use cleansing of his body with medicines that dissolve foul and corrupt humors.
And he should be careful to avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
Concerning the treatment for the illness called Nakir.
Chapter XCIV.
This illness is called Nakir in our land: it is pain that occurs in certain limbs: then it changes from one limb to another.
And I have indeed seen it as I tell you.
I was called to attend to a woman who is ill with certain stitches.
And he uncovered his arm, and I saw a small swelling in the tendon vein of the arm.
And after I stayed for one hour, I saw a swelling move with heat, like a worm crawling, ascending to his shoulder faster than can be imagined: it is like living silver as it moves from place to place.
The pain therefore receded from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it raced through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that it moved throughout his entire body, as I had seen.
I was amazed at the speed with which it changed from one limb to another.
And I indeed had not seen this illness with my own eyes in this manner before.
However, I have seen many who experience pain changing from one limb to another: and I have not witnessed it myself with my eyes as I did in the woman.
And I do not think it is anything other than because the woman was among those who have dried stitches with exposed veins; hence, this windiness changing appears to the senses.
And it is necessary that they should not appear according to this method in those who are delicate, and in bodies with moist hidden veins.
When you wish to treat it and the patient feels pain from it: then if it is visible to your eye, as we said, bind above it and below it quickly: and cut above it until that windiness, compressed, comes out: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with bodily exercise, and with what expels windiness, and anoints them with foul pills, and pills of serapin, and similar remedies.
¶ On the Extraction of Arrows.
Chapter XCVI. Arrows differ according to their kinds, and according to the places where they fall from the body.
However, their difference is as follows: there are those among them that have large and small points: and concave, and blunt.
And there are those among them that have three angles.
And there are those among them that have tongues.
And there are those among them that have barbs.
However, those which fall according to the members they hit, are in two ways.
For either the members are from main concave organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar parts.
When therefore a dart falls into one of these members, and the signs of death appear to you which I tell you about afterwards, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many cases.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For the signs when an arrow falls into the head, penetrates the skull, and exits through the soft part above the brain are as follows: violent headaches occur, along with scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of thought, and vomiting of bile.
And perhaps blood may exit from the nose or ears.
And perhaps speech may be impaired, and the voice destroyed.
And moisture similar to that of gruel exits from the wound site.
And something like the watery part of flesh exits from it.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not exit on its own.
The signs when an arrow falls into the heart are: it is near the left nipple, and one feels as if it were fixed in a solid part, not in an empty space.
And the arrow may move like the motion of a pulse, and black blood runs from the wound.
And there follows this coldness of extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting.
Therefore, know that death certainly approaches.
And the sign that an arrow has pierced the lung is the expulsion of frothy blood from the wound: and the glands that follow the neck become abscessed, and the color of the sick person changes.
And he exhales a great, deep breath: and seeks to attract cold air.
If the arrow falls on the padding that is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs: and there is a great breath with severe pain, with sighing: and all the shoulder members are moved.
And if the arrow falls on the stomach, then perhaps something undigested will come out of the wound from the food.
And if the arrow falls on the abdomen and is embedded there: something like feces will come out of the wound, or a twisted part, or an intestine that is already torn.
There is therefore no hope for his cure, nor for the removal of the arrow.
If the arrow falls on the bladder and urine comes out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger than usual: then know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder blades, armpits, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, hip, leg, and similar parts of the body are healed according to various conditions: when the arrow does not encounter an artery or nerve: and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you that I saw concerning these arrows, so that you may understand thereby about your treatment.
Which is that an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose.
So I removed it from the other side, underneath the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I removed an arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only find a small part of it, with which it adheres to its wooden shaft: and the arrow was large, one of the arrows used by Turkish bows, made of soft iron, without notches.
Thus the Jew was healed, and no harm came to his eye. And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and this one had notches.
So I cut above it between two cartilages: and it was already submerged in his throat.
I carefully worked with it until I removed it: and the Christian was healed.
And I removed an arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I cut above the arrow: and I worked on it carefully, and removed it: and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow fell on his back, and the wound healed over it.
And after seven years had passed, the arrow came out from the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her abdomen, and the wound healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and none of her conditions changed, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell on his face: and the wound healed, and it remained without causing him much pain: and many things similar to these.
And I extracted an arrow from a man among the king's leaders, which had fallen into the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right side: and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was summoned for his treatment after the arrow incident for three days.
I found the wound from the arrow very tight.
I examined it with a fine probe, but could not feel the arrow: and indeed, he himself felt a puncture and pain under his ear on the right side.
I hoped that the puncture was from the tip of the arrow.
I applied a plaster with properties that attract and digest to the area, confident that it would cause an abscess to form and reveal to me a sign of the arrow, so I could cut around it: but nothing happened in the place indicating that the arrow had followed the treatment.
I therefore applied a plaster to it for many days; and no accident happened, and the wound healed in the meantime: and he remained ill from the extraction of it for some days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose.
And he told me about it.
I therefore applied sharp and corroding medicine to the wound for many days until it opened; and when I probed it with a probe, I felt the tip of the arrow, which was stuck in the wood.
Then I added the sharp medicine to the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrow became visible to us; and I spent with him about four months in this process.
Then, after the wound had enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, but it did not yield to coming out: I did not cease to refine my methods and devise ways with various tools until one day I began to work on it with well-made forceps, as their form will be shown at the end of this chapter, until I managed to extract it.
Then I restored the wound.
And indeed, doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
I therefore restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured: nothing harmed him at all.
And I tell you about the nature of extracting certain arrows: so that you may consider it a rule and explanation for what I have not mentioned.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended in the narration; nor does the book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsman compares little with much: and that which is patient, with that which is absent: and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descent of foreign things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrows do not come out of the limbs to which they are fixed except in two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered.
Or by the opposite part of the other limb.
And that which comes out from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding in fleshy tissue: and it is attracted, and it comes out.
If it does not obey coming out from the hour in which it falls: then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it putrefies: and its attraction is lightened, and its exit becomes easier.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone, and does not obey you coming out, then leave it for several days as well: and attempt to remove it with attraction and movement every day until it comes out.
If it does not obey you coming out after several days, then you must pierce around the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine drill until the arrow enlarges.
Then attract it and remove it.
If the arrow is fixed in the skull bone and has already penetrated into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the symptoms I mentioned are apparent from the injury: then abstain from attracting the arrow, and leave it be for several days until its condition stabilizes.
For if an arrow reaches the heart, then death is not prolonged for him.
And if the arrow is not embedded except in the bone and does not penetrate to the heart: and the patient remains sick for several days, and none of those accidents befall him: then skilled practitioners should attend to removing the arrow.
But if it is deeply embedded and does not yield to you for removal: then apply ligatures around the arrow, as I have told you: then care for the wound until it heals.
But if the arrow is already concealed in a part of the body and is hidden from sight: then search for it with probes.
But if you feel it, then remove it with instruments suitable for its extraction.
But if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and because the arrow is deep inside: and there is no bone, nerve, or vein near it: then wait until the wound enlarges, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
But if there are parts by which it can be held, then free the flesh fixed to them from every part with all means available, and use instruments, if necessary, to remove it from the bone fragments and twisted parts until it comes out.
And when you administer the removal of the arrow, in whatever part it is, then use twisting motions of your hand with forceps to all parts until you make it come out: and be subtle and careful at the end so that the arrow does not break, making its extraction difficult for you.
If you are not able to proceed with it after one hour, then leave it for several days until what is around it has putrefied.
Then proceed again: the tension will be relieved. But if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we mentioned in the treatment chapter, and guard against cutting into a vein, nerve, or tendon.
And apply all means possible to remove the arrow: let it be done with ease, calmness, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And when you pull out the arrow, it is necessary for the patient to be positioned according to the figure in which he was at the time of the arrow's impact.
For it is more beneficial.
If, however, you are not able to do that, then apply what is possible for you according to the figures.
An arrow that exits from the opposite side or has already moved inward towards the exterior: or it makes a bulge where the tip of the arrow can be felt near the surface of the skin, and you see it protruding: cut above it, and let the incision be as large as what forceps can grasp.
Then pull it out: for it becomes easy to extract.
If it is lodged in the bone, then rotate your hand according to the roundness until the arrow presses against the bone and enlarges itself: then pull it out.
And if not, leave it for several days: then proceed again until it comes out.
If the wood of the arrow is in it, then push it out with it.
If the wood falls out and you wish to apply pressure: then insert into it a hollow instrument, so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow; then push it out with it.
If the arrow is hollow, then push it out with an instrument inserted into it.
For the arrow is lightened by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do so.
Then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is near what you can touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be careful not to incise a vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then tend to the wound if you see one, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let the ends be like the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are made in many varieties, large and small and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its dimensions, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Shape of the Concave Forceps.
And the Shape of the Deaf Forceps.
This is the tip of the forceps like a radius, so that it may be eased into a concave arrow and pushed with it.
The tip of this concave forceps is curved like a bird's feather: so that it may be eased into the arrow and its movement facilitated.
On Phlebotomy of Veins.
Chapter XC VII. There are thirty veins commonly used for phlebotomy in the body.
Of which, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins located behind the ears, called the two Herbs; and two arteries that appear in the two temples; and two veins situated near the tear ducts of both eyes, called the Looking Veins; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose.
And two Guideg veins, which are in the neck.
And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins that are in the lower lip.
And these are the veins called Algecherich.
And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are phlebotted in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is called Cephalic and comes from the side of the temple; and the common people call it the vein of the head.
And Black.
And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein; and the common people call it the vein of the body.
And the Basilic vein, and it is located on the inner side; it is also called Titilliacis.
And the common people call it the vein of the abdomen.
And the Funis of the arm, and it is located above the joint; it is in this one that bloodletting is performed, and it is the one that appears above the thumb clearly.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the thigh and in the foot.
One of them is the vein that is under the curvature of the thumb on the lateral side.
And the second is the Saphena; and its location is near the heel on the inner side.
And the Nesse vein; and its location is near the heel on the outer side.
And in the thigh there are three veins similar to those.
Concerning the bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
However, phlebotomy of the two veins which are behind the ears is beneficial for chronic catarrhs, and migraine, and sahafati, and old sores of the head.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy is as I have described.
And it is such that the patient's head should be shaved: and the nape of their neck, at the location of the two veins, should be rubbed with a rough cloth with good friction.
Then the patient should tighten their neck with a cord until the two veins appear.
And the locations of these veins are behind the ears in two depressed areas of the head.
Search for them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, mark it with a hot coal.
Then take a small surgical knife, and it is called the one that cuts into the vein.
Then insert it under the vein in the skin until the surgical knife reaches the opening of the vein.
Then raise your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut into the vein along with the skin with an oblique incision.
And the length of the incision should be the size of two joined fingers, or approximately that: and let as much blood out as you wish.
Then bind it with lint, and let it be, until it heals.
And now the cutting of these veins and their cauterization have been described at the beginning of the book.
Of phlebotomy of two arteries in the temples.
However, the phlebotomy of the two arteries which are in the two temples is helpful for chronic headache, and for severe migraine, and for persistent eye inflammation: and to discharge excessive sharp accumulations towards the eyes. And the method of performing phlebotomy on them is as I shall describe to you.
The patient should strain his neck greatly until two veins become clearly visible to the eye, and you should feel the pulse of these veins under your finger.
Then mark the points with a hot iron.
Then lift the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the lancet from below, and lift the vein upwards.
And cut it as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need. Then release the patient's strain, and place your finger on the vein for one hour.
Afterward, apply cotton and powder to it, and bind it tightly with a bandage: and leave it as is until it heals.
And now there has been a reference to their description, cutting, and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Of phlebotomy of the frontal vein after cephalic phlebotomy.
However, the phlebotomy of the frontal vein after cephalic phlebotomy is helpful for chronic facial ailments: and for migraine: and for redness: and for ugly sores.
And the quality of that venesection is as I tell you.
The sick person ties a tourniquet around his neck with a strap until the vein becomes visible.
Then take the instrument called Fossorium.
This is its form.
Place the prominent point at the head of the Fossorium on top of the vein, and strike it with a comb or something similar in manner: and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish.
Then loosen the puncture of the patient and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide venesection knife.
However, it should not be sharp at the end like other venesection knives, but rather broad at the end.
And cut it across with the venesection knife: for the mouth is nearby: and the venesection knife may break there when it is delicate.
On Venesection of the Veins in the Two Lacrimal Glands.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two lacrimal glands of both eyes is for eye itch and redness: and pain in the eye, and facial ailments.
And the quality of that venesection is such that the patient should tie his neck with a strap.
Then perform bloodletting on her: and you should stand over her head.
And the bloodletting should be done diagonally across a short length, using a small bloodletting tool with a slightly broad blade, for there is little flesh in that area.
If the bloodletting instrument is delicate and fine, it might break.
Then let as much blood flow as you deem necessary.
And place a bandage over them, and bind them for one night, then release them.
Concerning the bloodletting of the nasal veins.
Bloodletting of the nasal veins is effective for acute fever, severe headache, and facial ailments such as migraine, and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of this bloodletting is such that the patient should compress their neck.
Then hold their nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long bloodletting instrument, and place it in the middle of the nasal septum.
Since the vein is not visible to the eye there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary to keep your hand with the bloodletting instrument for a short while: and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then bind it for one night.
For it is quickly restored.
On Phlebotomy of the Veins Guidegi.
However, the phlebotomy of the two veins Guidegi is helpful for constriction of breathlessness, and for the onset of leprosy, and for melancholic ailments, and for impetigo and bad ulcers, and for corrosive conditions, that is, herps and eczema.
And the procedure for their phlebotomy is that the patient should hold both sides of his neck with a bandage; and the practitioner should stand over the head of the patient, who sits on a chair.
Then, when phlebotomizing the vein, make the incision somewhat long.
Then draw out a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for the condition.
Then do the same with the other vein.
Afterward, remove the bandage and apply moderate pressure to both veins with a dressing, so that the patient does not suffocate.
And leave the patient until morning.
For the wound heals.
On Phlebotomy of the Veins Algeberich.
The phlebotomy of the veins Algeberich is helpful because it benefits conditions such as mouth sores, gum corruption: and bad ulcers: and cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of bleeding them is such that you should seat the patient before you and bind their neck with a strap.
Then turn up the lip and look at two veins: one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the location of each is indicated by their dark color.
And that is true, because around them are small veins, black.
Therefore, cut both with an oblique incision. But if you are in doubt and do not know which one to use, then pay attention to the larger of the incisions, and the more prominent of them will be apparent.
And similarly, do this for the two veins that are on the upper lip; customarily, it is most common to cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Regarding bleeding the vein under the tongue after the cephalic bloodletting.
The benefit of bleeding the two veins under the tongue is that cephalic bloodletting is helpful for suffocations in the throat, inflammation of the gums, and illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of bleeding them is such that you should seat the patient between your hands before sunlight; lift their tongue and look under it on one side for a vein, and on the other side for another vein; the color of each tends toward blackness.
Therefore, bleed both veins; and be careful not to go too far with your hand while bleeding them.
For under it are arteries, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from those arteries.
Concerning the Three Veins in the Elbow.
The three veins which are bled in the elbow are those whose bleeding has become customary practice for all people.
And the bleeding of these veins is performed according to two methods.
Either by puncturing with a broad myrtle bleeding instrument, or with an olive one for fineness; or by cutting with a small knife bleeding instrument, which is called Alnesil.
And this is its form.
Such is Alnesil, which is suitable for cutting.
And from these, there are broad and fine types according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of the myrtle bleeding instrument is broad, as you see.
And it is suitable for opening concave, full, protruding, visible, thick veins, and those that contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this bleeding instrument is of lesser width and finer at the extremities.
And it is suitable for bleeding fine veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.
Concerning the Bleeding of the Basilic Vein.
The basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, is beneficial for bleeding. Since it extracts blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, which extend to the chest and abdomen. It is fitting for a person who practices phlebotomy to be cautious with this vein, as there is an artery underneath it.
If therefore he makes a mistake and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery, and it will result in a flow of blood.
Therefore, it is necessary not to use a sharp phlebotomy instrument on this vein; rather, one should use a cutting instrument like an Alnasil.
If the basilica vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to move away from it and switch to another vein, or find a branch of it; or you may perform phlebotomy on the Funem brachii instead.
For it is clear, and cut it with a phlebotomy instrument like an Alnesil, as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on it, then before compressing the arm, touch the area until you recognize the location of the pulse.
Then mark the spot with a hot iron, then compress the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using a phlebotomy instrument like an Alnesil, as we have said.
And be careful that the incision does not fall in the space between the location of the artery.
And when you see that as you compress the area with a ligature, there is swelling at the spot marked with a hot iron, then that swelling is due to the artery. Therefore, avoid it.
If you see the blood at phlebotomy rising like a boy's urine, and it is fine and red: then know that it comes from an arterial blood.
Then hurry and place your finger on it for a long space, then remove your finger.
If therefore the blood is cut off (for often it is cut off), then compress the arm, and let it be: and the patient should guard against moving it: and let him be cautious of fear regarding it.
And do not move it for several days until it is healed.
But if the blood does not stop and overcomes you: and there is no medicine available to you at that moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you.
For its extremities contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the husk of a date, and burn it: take one half, and apply it to the site of the vein constriction with a bandage and powders until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good.
And if not: then treat it with what was mentioned earlier from the place of powders that stop the flow of blood: and stopping the blood is not difficult in most cases, due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of applying a bandage from the arm.
Concerning Phlebotomy of the Blue Vein.
Phlebotomy of the Blue Vein is beneficial for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of the branch of the Basilic vein and the branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to be above her so that he need not fear from the phlebotomy of her, for under her is a nerve.
If therefore he adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds a nerve, it results in numbness in that area, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it does not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the sense.
If, however, it is hidden in some people and is subtle and does not appear: then you should place your phlebotomy where you perform it, with a section using Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
Concerning the Cephalic Vein.
Phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and aids in ailments of the eyes.
And it is proper for this vein, if you wish to perform phlebotomy on it, to do so by puncturing with a olive phlebotomist or a myrtle phlebotomist: because it is safer than all other veins, since there is no superficial artery nor nerve beneath it. However, it is fitting for you during phlebotomy to avoid the head of the vein with the phlebotomist slightly, and seek a softer spot: and it does no harm if it is not found upon the first percussion, but rather repeated several times with the phlebotomy. However, it may abscess in some people when they are not bled during the first percussion, but such an abscess does no harm to them.
On the Utility of Bloodletting and Precautions to be Observed in It.
The quality of bloodletting and the circumstances arising from it, which you must consider for its proper execution.
First of all, you should know that bloodletting is administered only for the preservation of health, its maintenance, and as a precaution against the onset of diseases.
And for bloodletting to be performed on one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Fusca, and the Basilic.
And for bloodletting to be performed at the beginning of Spring after fasting, and in summer: and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness are apparent.
And bloodletting should be performed on the first day, or on the third day, after three hours have passed since dawn.
Bloodletting administered for illnesses does not have a fixed time; it should be performed when circumstances and necessity require it, whether day or night, and at any hour and in any season.
And it is not appropriate to bloodlet children until they reach fourteen years of age.
A pregnant woman should not be bloodlet unless from the fourth month until the seventh month.
And elderly people who have passed sixty years of age should not be bloodlet.
Therefore, when someone wishes to have bloodletting for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before bloodletting with a gentle enema, if there is much retained feces in them: so that the veins near the bloodletting site do not attract harmful putrid excesses from the bowels to the principal limbs.
The patient should not be bloodlet when they are stuffed, that is, have a nausea-inducing fullness; nor after being drunk, until such conditions are removed from them.
Nor should an ill person with dropsy be bloodlet.
And bloodletting should be avoided again after colic pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, and after excessive sexual activity, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and anything that dissipates strength from the bodily or vital substance.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before doing it, if the blood is thick due to food and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him to do that.
Then enter a bath, if nothing prohibits it: or engage in some exercise, to make the blood thinner.
And place the bloodletting for him in the chest area, around the third day, as we have said: and strive to ensure that his chest is evacuated on that day of all harmful animal accidents: such as constriction, anger, and fear: and of all bodily accidents, such as labor, pain, excessive sweating, and similar conditions.
And let the objects that are usually used by people because of their aromatic properties, scent, joy, and similar qualities be present at his seat in a quantity as is possible.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a raised cushion, which is higher than the usual phlebotomy cushion; afterwards, he should extend his arm and rub it twice or three times with his hand.
Then tie the vein with a strap and wrap it twice.
And the compression should be moderate, for when it is uneven, or too tight in the binding, then it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, then it also impedes the flow of blood.
Then after the compression, it is necessary that the person to be phlebotomized rub their hands together simultaneously until the veins become swollen and clearly visible.
Then the phlebotomist should clean the site to be phlebotomized with a little oil, specifically an old oil.
Then place the index finger of the left hand on the vein slightly above where he wants to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein does not slip away and ensure a steady puncture.
Because the veins are like a fleeing string at the time of phlebotomy; and they are also full of airiness: and when you place the lancet on them, they contract under the lancet, deceiving the phlebotomist, and do not open for the lancet: and if it does open them, it is constricted. Therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive to all these matters.
Then put down the lancet.
And if not, then repeat it another time below that place a little, or above it with haste: unless the area becomes abscessed.
If it becomes abscessed, or the patient grows worse, then leave it for a day, or two days: and do not tighten the ligature.
For perhaps it will attract a warm abscess.
Nor should he enter a bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy if desired.
If the incision is small, or the blood flows gently: and you fear that the quantity of blood you wish will not come out: then repeat the phlebotomy at the hole itself along its straightness, and add a little to the operation.
And do this with haste before the area becomes abscessed, for an abscessed area often occurs in many people during a minor procedure.
If you see that it is already abscessed, then do not repeat the procedure on it at all, for it will not benefit you to do so. And place something from olive oil residue on it: for it alleviates the flow of blood.
And it is better in this case than the oil itself and other oils.
And similarly apply oil residue in all your phlebotomies where you ligate the veins to restrict blood flow: and this is done with either tyrian cerate or sage ointment, when applied to the site.
For blood becomes refined and dissolved when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially for those who are not regularly bled or whose vein incision is small, then quickly apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the area, and keep it bound for one hour, as this helps to dissolve it.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood has been drawn from the vein completely, either from that vein or from another vein.
And abscesses and swellings often occur around the phlebotomy site at the Basilica.
Place your hand on the site, then if you find softness upon pressing it, then that swelling is harmful.
Be careful, therefore, not to apply anything from what we have mentioned to it.
For perhaps blood will flow from an artery there.
But apply a plaster to it with something that has astringent properties to harden the area.
Then treat it along with the rest of the care until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every person in accordance with the extent of their vitality.
And what appears from a reddish color prevailing over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it be allowed to exit until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it as thick, then let it be allowed to exit until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and requires bloodletting, that the incision of the vein be enlarged, and let it be lateral; and in the case of one who is weak, let it be contrary to this.
And it is necessary that he extracts it in stages, and that the opening be narrow: and what is better administered during bloodletting is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the excessive flow of blood and from cutting the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting by length and width.
And for those who are prone to fainting during bloodletting, it is necessary that they eat a little bread infused in pomegranate syrup before bloodletting: or scallion stew if it is heated: and extract blood from them in three stages, or four.
And if they have a cold complexion, then let them take bread infused in murri syrup before bloodletting: or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
And if fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause is excessive loss of blood, then it is necessary that they drink water from meat and fine fragrant syrup: and use aromatics with vinegar, and anoint their chest with it: and use other remedies which we have mentioned in the division on fainting caused by evacuation.
He who wishes to let his arm and release his blood gradually: it is necessary for him whose venesection is for the purpose of a large evacuation, and whose strength is weak, to release his blood little by little according to the measure of his strength over consecutive days.
He who wishes to let his arm and release his blood the second time, and whose body is strong: then he should do so seven or nine hours after his first venesection.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side to which it inclines: he should be bled on the second or third day.
In the body of him in whom there is already much heated blood that has become acrid and causes fever to occur: it is necessary for the blood to exit from him all at once, and a large quantity should be drawn out: and the incision should be enlarged until fainting occurs; after which you must maintain all conditions of venesection: and place your hand on his pulse near the flow of blood, so that death does not occur instead of fainting.
For this often happens when the phlebotaomer is ignorant and falls into negligence.
And it is not appropriate when you wish to let the arm and release blood a second time, if the vein orifice is already closed and the exit of blood becomes difficult, to press on it forcefully and quickly straighten out any curvature.
For that is very bad; indeed, leave it until the second venesection.
Or remove with care what has coagulated from the blood in the vein orifice and place something dissolved salt in water upon it.
And place on it something from Tyrian ointment of Alfarach or Sagzena, and apply it with gentle compression until the blood comes out.
But if the vein is already an abscess, then leave it open and do not cover it until the abscess subsides.
If necessity requires drawing blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then either use the phlebotomy instrument on that same spot again or do it on another vein in the other arm.
The vein of the arm is phlebotomized in the place of Fuscae and Basilicae when they are not found, since it is composed of them.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that the patient should immerse his hand in warm water until it turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible.
Then bind it above with a ligature of moderate tightness in the middle.
Then make the incision gradually across the vein, neither too wide nor along its length: let the cut be somewhat large, and when you perform the phlebotomy, do it for a short time over the joint of the hand.
And the flow of blood into warm water is greatest during the winter season.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, since there is no pulsating vein beneath it, nor any nerve.
But the phlebotomy of the right hand of Saluatus causes diseases of the liver.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that you should compress the hand with a ligature, or with your hand, after you introduce it into warm water, until the vein swells and becomes clearly visible.
Then phlebotomize it acrosswise.
And if you cut it completely, it will not harm it in any way.
And keep it so that you do not use your hand with the phlebotomy tool.
For beneath it are the naked nerves of the fingers from the flesh.
Then return the hand to warm water, and let the blood flow from it.
For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening and hinder its flow.
When you have thus extracted from the blood the required amount, then apply oil and salt to the vein: so that it does not heal too quickly.
And similarly, you should do this with every branch that is cut.
The phlebotomy from the left hand is for treating diseases of the spleen. And similarly, perform the phlebotomy on it as you did with the previous one equally.
However, phlebotomy of the great saphene veins is beneficial for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and kidney ailments, and old sores on the thighs and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the method of phlebotomy is such that the patient should immerse his foot in hot water: and apply rubbing to it until the veins swell: and tie above the joint of the foot with a tourniquet.
And the vein is located near the heel, appearing towards the big toe: and many branches extend from it on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, the phlebotomist should cut the vein at its larger branch or near the heel where it gathers: for it is better and safer.
If you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that lie beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And when you perform the phlebotomy where you cut it across, as if you want to sever it: and let the phlebotomy be neat.
If the outflow of blood is prevented, then immerse his foot again in hot water: and let the blood flow into it until it is emptied.
If the phlebotomist misses the vein on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly higher up, for that location is safe, and you need not fear harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And do the same with the great saphene vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we said, is near the heel on the outer side.
And the remedy for phlebotomy of it is, to relieve pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the procedure for phlebotomy of it is that the patient should enter a bath and hurry; bind his leg from the side of the ankle up to four fingers above the heel with a thin, long strip of cloth: it does not show unless because of this.
When it therefore appears, then let the phlebotomist cut it according to whatever method is possible for you, either across: and it is better, either by cutting it with an incision or by cutting it with a knife.
For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people.
If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the senses: then let the phlebotomist cut some branch of it, and that is which appears on the back of the foot towards the heel: and be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you wish.
Then loosen the binding, and place leather over the site of the phlebotomy, and bind the area.
It is quickly healed.
¶ On Venesection, and the Quality of Its Use.
Chapter XC VIII.
Venesection instruments are made from horns, and from metal, and from glass.
And ventosity is performed in two ways.
With scarification and bloodletting; the other is ventosity without scarification. And this ventosity which is performed without scarification is in two ways.
Or it is done with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And the ventosities that are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places on the body.
One of these is Ventosatio Alnocrati, which is at the back of the head; and Alkehel, which is in the middle of the neck; and the ventosae Alhagdahim, which are two plates on both sides of the neck simultaneously; and ventosae menti, which is under the chin below the mouth; and ventosae of the two spatulas: and ventosae Alachosos at the end of the tail; and ventosae of the two armpits, which are in the middle of both arms; and ventosae of the two thighs; and ventosae of the two ankles.
And ventosity indeed does not draw blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of this, their efficacy does not diminish as it would with phlebotomy.
Nor should ventosity, whether with fire or without fire, be administered in any diseases caused by congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
If necessity prompts ventosity due to illness or habit, we administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and in the middle, whenever it may be.
Which is to say, there are people who, when the blood multiplies within them to the point where it needs to be extracted by phlebotomy, find that they have a swelling in their head and a headache.
And among them are those who find their face, head, and neck filled with fullness and redness.
And among them are those who experience itching on their face and forehead, as well as darkness and dullness in their eyes.
And among them are those who scratch the site of their phlebotomy. And among them is one whose laughter increases.
And among them is one who tastes blood in their mouth: or their tongue becomes sore and spits out blood.
And among them is one whose sleep increases.
And among them is one who sees blood and redness, and the slain, and wounds, and things similar to these in their sleep. When we observe any of these symptoms, and especially if they occur on the fifteenth day of the month: we then order phlebotomy to be performed two or three hours after their appearance. The phlebotomy of the neck is helpful because it relieves heaviness in the head and what is discharged goes to the eyes.
