O, my children, now I complete this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine; and by its completion at the end, and by its explanations, and by its clarifications, it seems to me that I make clear to you whom I love this treatise, which is part of the operation as I practice it, namely surgery.
For the operation as I practice it is almost entirely lacking in our region and in our time; moreover, the science of it has become scarce, and its practice has ceased. Except for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much and led to those errors and hesitation where the intentions of it are misunderstood and the force of it weakened and the art lost.
And it seems to me that I should enliven this with an orderly arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work as is through addition of clarification, and preparation for it, which cause is necessary.
But the reason why a good artisan is not found in this my craft in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires the practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunctions and separations; having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and muscles, and their numbers and arrangement; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places for the incision of them.
And according to Hippocrates it is said that in name it is small, but in the work it is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be safe from error by which men are killed, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves into it without that knowledge and experience.
For I saw a mad physician who thought he had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die quickly.
And I saw another physician who thought he would remove a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone along with part of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
And I had already called to extract that stone and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew beyond a doubt that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was paid wages by a duke of our land to perform surgery on a castrated black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and due to the physician's ignorance, he exposed the fracture above the wound with splints and bandages in a strong structure, but did not leave room for drainage.
And he untied it according to his desires, and soon after he bandaged it again, and after some days he commanded that we untie the bandage; and thus it remained until the thigh and leg became abscessed, leading to his ruin.
Thus he calls out to him, and having prepared himself he loosens the bandage, and once calm is achieved he begins to relieve his pains.
However, if corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the malignancy of his work was greatly revealed to him by his lord.
The reason for this is that the cancerous condition is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to be treated with iron at all, but rather in the member which suffers and is accustomed to such treatment.
And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two ways: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
And I have already stated this in every place in this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and leave that, so that the pages do not find themselves without a way to speak and thereby dishonor you.
And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best method by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and avoid those things that make you fear, so that doubt does not undermine your faith and reputation: for it is better for you to preserve your glory, and more so in this world and hereafter for your sanctity.
Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries: Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
And I have devoted this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head and neck, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, about incisions and punctures, and about suction cups, and bandages, and the extraction of arrows and similar instruments, fully chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting and similar conditions; a chapter ordered about the head and neck, and the forms of instruments.
I will describe the quality of the movements of that cautery and its necessities, and in which condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movements of cauterization and its necessities is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; and many wise people have spoken much about it, and they are discordant about it, but for me a little of their speeches suffices to avoid prolongation.
Therefore, I say that cauteries should be applied to the whole body universally, whether it is made of matter or not, except for two parts, which are tail-like parts without matter.
In the tail-like and dry part made of matter, it dries out; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is unsuitable to heal a tail-like and dry part with what is hot and dry.
And let the one who says the opposite consider this: that cautery is beneficial for every tail-like and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is more fragile.
And I say by the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
But I do not wish to impose this on one who has already been tested and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes and accidents of them, and the time span of those.
But in the other parts, there is no fear for you, especially in fragile and humid diseases, because all physicians are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the benefit of cautery in such cases.
And you know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized and does not harm other members nearby except for slight damage.
Here is the translation:
May the fire, by its sublimity and goodness of substance, do nothing but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and length of service in studying this art about the truth of causes; and thereby I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were not read in my book in this pause would I hide from you secrets with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and expulsion thereof by which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharp in your ears.
And know, children, that they err who disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is drawn from cautery, and even more so if the cautery is necessary for pains or necessary to alleviate severe and urgent conditions, which cannot endure delay due to fear of the malice that might result, since it is better to have minor harm enter at a bad time than to suffer greater ill.
And this I do not say in your ears, or, children, what only the common people and foolish physicians believe is that for the illness which is cured by cautery there is not a suitable time always, and they pause at that consequence.
And the reason is not as such that they think, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities, which are the cause of pains.
But nevertheless, cautery surpasses medicine in speed due to the value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its efficacy.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what has reached him through its acquisition from food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cauterization was administered is a subtle illness in a limb with little superfluity and moisture, such as the cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that that pain will not return to him, but this is done rarely.
And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because those who understand it think there is no cure in medicine or any other cause before cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause cauterization is administered, and it proves effective. And here in what has been said so far that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the common misconceptions and errors of foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the location for cauterization does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have experienced this and have found that it only works in some bodies but not others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than iron as they say; however, when you use fire to cauterize with gold, it is not clear to you how to do it properly, since the hardness of gold requires a certain quantity for ignition, and it prepares to receive friction. If you adjust the heat over it by fire, the gold will melt due to the heat, and if you place some sheets in the fire, the craftsman can then use them for that purpose.
And thus is made the cautery of iron, which should be applied gently and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have placed those of the head among the parts, so that I relieve the inquirer who seeks what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the cold and humidity that cause headaches from which these two causes originate: they are the cause of soreness and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes called corizza, affecting the head and parts of the face and ears, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, and gout, and generally all illnesses caused by cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine that cleanses the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him seated on a padded bench with his arms resting on his own knees.
And then place the palm of your hand on the forehead above the root of the nose between his eyebrows. But when the heat of your middle finger has reached it, mark that place with ink, and then apply the olive wood cautery, which has this form:
And then pause there at the marked place with the probe, in such a way that it descends, by which the tissue may be gradually compressed, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of the head bone already uncovered, as much as the amount of grain in a bushel, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cooled, until you can see the bone which I have told you about.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and let it be for three days.
And then pause on the embedded cautery and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed. And then treat the place with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
And it is said that when the wound has become uncovered, the sooner you treat the arm, the better and more beneficial it is.
And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that with the cautery it should reach to the deepest point, until it presses strongly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of alpechini (cautery in small degrees): And it is believed that vapors from the head emanate from that place.
And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has become firm.
I have not seen these two species of cautery used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; and leave that one alone, for me it is better to heal with salves, when possible; for the head is easily damaged by breaking its continuity in this way as we have witnessed in other parts of the body, especially when the patient's constitution is cold.
And the first species of cautery is safer and better for me; use that one with salves.
Chapter Second.
Of cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head, and it has been prolonged in the patient through the use of various remedies such as plasters, compresses, caps, poultices, ointments, cataplasms, cauteries, and similar treatments, and especially if one cautery has already been applied without any improvement from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution and not cold, and if there is much pain, apply another cautery after that one for a little while. And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved. Cut open the affected area and expose the bone in the amount we have described, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head where it is called "vas" — which is the place where the windpipe is located. And approach it thus, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will experience great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I shall describe this cautery in its place, for it is more subtle than the one used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
On Cauterization of Recent Hemorrhoids.
When intense pain is found in the part of the head, or if there is lingering pain within the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head, and another treatment should be administered, which I have described in the sections on diseases; but if this does not benefit, then cauterization is to be performed in two ways: either by cauterizing with a sharp combustible medicine or with iron.
But if you perform the cautery with a combustible medicine, take a piece of cloth, burn it, and hold it by both ends. And then incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet until it reaches just below the skin, so that it is hidden.
And then press on it with a pad for about an hour and leave it there for three hours; after that, remove the pad and apply a poultice for two or three days, and afterward place a compress soaked in honey until the area becomes warm.
And then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, use with some medicines for burning which I have written in the second chapter about burning medicines.
And this is how you perform cautery with an instrument made of iron, which has the following form:
and it is called a clamp with a nail head, because the top of it resembles the shape of a nail head, which has some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small protrusion.
And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and rotate the iron slowly.
And if the amount that is adhered due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it for three days; and then place dry cotton over it, and subsequently treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, perform cautery at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this proper but non-traditional procedure.
Chapter Four.
On Cauterization of the Ancient Artery.
When you treat the artery as we have described in the previous treatment and in the sections on diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease it does not suffice with what we have said about the initial cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary for you to ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it along the site of pain in a line that is half the length of your finger or slightly more, and then remove your hand quickly so as not to cut the artery and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which affects chewing, and that the lizard [likely referring to a muscle or structure] is not adhered and the nerves which move it, so that no spasm occurs.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not skilled and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
And here comes as a reminder of the management of blood flow in cases of arterial injury according to the usual method, in this place of this book.
And if you see in this illness that these cauteries are not sufficient and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize at the appropriate place on the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you perform the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of arteries with a cautery having two edges, this is better and more effective.
Chapter 5.
Of the cautery for ear pains.
When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not improve, now use the cautery, and this one has the name puncta, and here is its form:
And approach the puncta to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that part. Take the cautery of the hair removal from the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
And if the cautery reaches those points throughout the ear, and wherever it does, take care of the places until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of the turtle (Note: It seems there might be an error or specific context needed here, as "turtura" typically doesn't refer to a turtle in medical texts but could mean another anatomical part or condition. If it's meant to be "auricula" which translates to ear, then it would be "On the cautery of the ear.")
The tumor which is cured without cautery is nothing but of the kinds which come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the kind that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that kind of tumor with scarifications and capillipurgies and guarism, and your cure is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the disease with three cauteries: one should be near the earlobe, the second a little further in the temple area, and the third should be at the junction of two lips [likely referring to areas on the body].
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the uppermost part of the earlobe, and a little above the horn of the head, and in another place in the temple area, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then hold your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the root is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special type for the surgeon, the form of which is shown below. However, even more subtle is that you should see it in a somewhat refined manner; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness slightly.
And then treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On cauterizing for chronic apoplexy.
When apoplexy is chronic and you have treated it with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment does not induce fever in the patient, then you should cauterize at four points: above all the temples of the head; one point on the middle part of the forehead, as we have said; and one point on the nape of the neck. And the method for the cauterization is done as mentioned above.
And it is also cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; this is better done later; and then proceed with the treatment as appropriate.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterizing for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
In the beginning, give the patient large draughts and pills made from substances that purify and cleanse.
And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the back of the neck using the recipe described in the chapter on plasters.
And apply this for several applications, as this is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the order of the method that I have already mentioned.
And if the patient improves with these treatments; if not, then perform three cauterizations in the rear part of the head, which are located descending from the highest part of the head to the part closest to the neck. Between each cautery, wait until the swelling of the finger subsides, and then proceed with the treatment using water.
If you are accustomed to the pain and can tolerate it, then proceed with the cautery in its proper place; and if you require more intensity, then apply the cautery over both sides.
Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and perform the olive-shaped cautery as described above.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed with the cleansing of the head using scissors and water as we have described; then shave the patient's head, and proceed to apply the cautery in its proper place on the head, over all sides of the head, and at the back part of it, and three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the illness of softening the body to apply that treatment and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then proceed with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply a cautery near the armpit, and raise the temperature gradually. Proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and this should be an olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter X.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic should not be cauterized except when the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, mix the brain at the beginning of the year and during the other treatment which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer gargle and mouthwash made from mixed brain, for several days before that with the improvement of food.
And then shave the patient's head, and immediately cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occipital region, and on each side of the head apply cauterization. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which I have described, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And let it be an olive pit cautery as was previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter .xi.
On Cauterization for Melancholia.
When the causes of melancholia are due to corrupted and flaccid humors, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which we have described, having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess inclining towards melancholia, and the patient's body is humid, then give them to drink what purifies their brain according to what was mentioned previously in the division.
Cut off the top of the diseased part, and then carefully place a suitable bandage around the circumference, and then position it in the middle of the head.
And if the diseased part is six inches wide, it should be held from all sides.
And then apply an ointment; and it is more suitable to use one made from sheep's wool. And warm that on the fire with moderate heat as needed, which the patient can tolerate when applied. And then place that in the middle of the head around it in a circle, and let it remain so that it can be rubbed.
And do this with the diseased part once a week, and follow another regimen until it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points as needed, but make sure to hold the hand properly when using cautery: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain with moderation.
And then place that cloth soaked in wool or goose fat.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery for water descending into the stomach.
When it has been determined that water is beginning to descend into the stomach by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that purifies the head, and protect him from all humidities.
And have him sweat in baths made of decoctions for several days.
Here is the translation:
Cut off all the veins and arteries that you leave for the ligature; and place the cautery at a distance in the region of the joints.
And guard against the flow of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come to the knowledge which is in the extraction of arteries and their ligation, as well as the care to prevent bleeding.
And in some cases it is cauterized at the neck, leaving two bones, with two cauteries applied subsequently.
Chapter XIII.
On the cautery of old wounds.
When tears from the eyes are persistent and flow through veins and arteries that are visibly on the head, and it is verified that this is due to excess phlegm, then at that time cauterize that area with the cautery which we have described in the chapter on how water collects in the eyes. Use one cautery in a suitable location on the head, and apply two cauteries near each temple, and also use two cauteries near the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to add cautery, then cauterize that area across the entire socket of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cautery for nasal odor.
When you treat that person with what we have said in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterward shave their head, and cauterize them with a moderate cautery using an olive oil-based preparation. And so cauterize that part with the cautery having two points over the two eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
And be careful with the cautery so that you do not burn that area.
And this is the form of the pointed cautery.
Chapter XV.
On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do so, cauterize that area over the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries throughout, and let them extend towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather so that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
On Cauterization of the Eyelid When the Hairs Turn Inside and Scratch the Eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and scratch the eye, cauterization should be done in two ways: either by performing it or using a burning medication.
If the cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to cut their hairs as those of ordinary people are cut, such that they are extended and even; and if they scratch from their origin, then you should bandage the eyes so that it does not happen again until the hairs grow back.
When a wound or ulcer appears, then place the head of the patient in such a way that one marks above the eyelids with some sign, which is according to the shape of a leaf of mercury, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
And then place a probe into the eye socket or in mucus of dust on the eye.
And then prepare the cautery, which has this form.
And then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in small stages, until the surface of the wound which is like a leaf of myrtle is completely burned properly.
And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hair of it raised up near the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and lay it aside for three days, and then place the probe on the border until the scar is eradicated. And then care for that with herbs until it is healed.
But if the hair around the area regrows and the eyelid is softened, then perform the cautery on that again just as you did initially.
But if the hair is below the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and becomes even so that the hair does not touch the eye.
But the cautery with a burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to stretch out the hair until it is extended and even, and then make it in the shape of a leaf of myrtle from paper or cloth.
Take soap known and live lard one unc. i, or as much water, and quickly mix those causes well, and make that without delay so that it is not chilled; and then spread that liquid over the sheet which is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on both wounds; and place underneath the poultice covered in white cloth, and let the head of the patient be towards you.
And place the hand on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for there is a burning in it like fire.
And as long as the burning sensation persists, leave the medicine on and move it with your hand; when the stinging stops, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then check if the eyelid is raised as it was washed, in which case you should apply constriction with heat or incision, for that is good; but if not, return to applying the medicine over the place where it has not been applied yet until it darkens before your operation is complete and the wound is constricted.
And then place over the wound with borders until the root of the injury is eradicated, and then care for it with a defined remedy or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no dust from the medicine falls into the wound, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened and some cause of hair growth appears in the wound, then reapply your medicine to that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then around it until it is healed.
This is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the leaves of men are diverse in size, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
And the way of rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head between your thighs, and hold his head still by someone else's hand between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shake.
And then place a cloth in egg white or on a pad of fine feathers over his eye.
And then light the cautery, which has this form:
which should be covered, as in the shape of a reed or an eagle feather, at one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to be like a thread, like a tentacle.
But the one that is covered is better for your work.
If you approach treating the fistula when it is suppurated, then drain it and dry it out. And if it is not suppurated, then open it and extract the putrefaction from it.
And if you proceed with the cautery, make sure it is well heated. Hold it at a distance but not too far from the nose so that your hand does not tremble or cause harm, and then place the cautery on the gums and burn it.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery you perceive it entering the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed. Then leave it for three days, and afterwards place a bandage around it and apply a drying agent until it is healed.
But if after these days it has not healed, then apply an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and proceed as appropriate according to its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which the ancients first described: Go to the location of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin piece whose shape fits it. And put in there one ounce of molten lead; hold your hand gently but firmly, so that the injury is not aggravated because the molten lead does not reach the tissue around it. You should also place over the injured area a poultice made from egg white or water, since the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer nasal irrigation and reduce the fistula to its proper place within the nose.
Chapter Eighteen.
On cauterizing the wound of the anus.
Often such fissures occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment is not effective, at that time use fire to cauterize it slightly with a small knife in the following manner:
And let the heat of the cautery be according to the fineness of the knife.
Apply the heated iron carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the base of the fissures.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter Nineteen.
On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess occurs on the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth, and it bursts, becomes ruptured, and then deteriorates to form a fistula, and when you treat this and it does not heal effectively, it is necessary for you to cauterize with fire according to the size of the fistula. Place the heated cautery into the tract of the fistula carefully until the red-hot end reaches its base; do this once or twice. Then treat it as we have described for healing until it is healed.
And if the diseased tissue is excised and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the affected area and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cautery for teeth and on softening the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, then apply these medicines and do not confine them. Place the head of the patient in a suitable position, and proceed with cautery in the following manner: place the cautery over the tooth and insert it into the area to be cauterized quickly while it is still heated, but do not let it touch the gum near the root of the tooth where the heat can affect the surrounding tissue.
And then remove your hand, and proceed to repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, after which they may spit it out, as the decayed tooth is now stabilized, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On cautery for toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness or there is decay or inflammation and the treatment with medicine does not confine it, then cautery in that case is done in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and heat it over charcoal, then take cloth and wrap it around the end of the horn. Proceed to immerse the heated horn in water briefly, and quickly place that on the painful tooth until it is cooled.
From there, apply some burns until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you do, soak a piece of wool or cloth in the aforementioned broth, and place it on the painful tooth, and put an ignited iron on top until the iron reaches the gum around the tooth.
However, for cautery with fire, you should use the tip of an iron or steel instrument, and place it in the center of any swelling so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, which will be in a specific form, and place it on the tooth with your hand until the cautery is thoroughly rubbed; do this several times until the pain subsides either on that day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient rinse their mouth with good broth due to the pressure of that cautery and hold it in for an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors and do not respond to digestion through medication and you wish to gently digest them, then ignite the cautery whose form is as follows: it has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end and place the ignited end on the abscess once or twice if necessary until it reaches the gum around the hemorrhoid.
And if the abscess is small, delay the use of cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and then let it rest for three days and place on it something wet every day until what the fire has burned is healed.
And then care for that which was burnt and bandage it with cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On Cauterization of Throat Inflammation and Constriction of the Tongue.
When the venous humidity comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and afterwards cauterize that part near the root of the throat.
And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the throat, nor burn more than a little of the windpipe.
And cauterize that part with another cautery near the junction of the collarbone at the last thoracic vertebra. And let the cautery be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
And then care for that which was treated until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize that part with two cauteries above the clavicles in the places mentioned; and with another cautery at the middle of the chest between the nipples; and let the cauteries be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
And if you want, let your cautery be a punctate one with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which precedes in the piercing for pain in the ears.
And let there be punctures within the cavities for those; and subsequently treat that with what has been used previously, so that it may be healed.
And let the cautery have three ridges, for that cautery is used for this purpose: on one occasion you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery of the tonsils, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the tonsil is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return to its place because of its displacement within the liquid it usually resides in, and subsequently becomes dislocated again as we have testified, at such times you should first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or side; and then lift the part inside the tonsil to the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then use the cautery with two tips; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the part so that it penetrates into the opposite side; and the figure of the cautery will appear when you perform the four-point cauterization.
And in some cases it is proper according to this method, and there are eight cauterizations.
And then pause over the cauterizations poured with salt, and then let the wound adhere in tranquility, and do not move the limb much for some time until it is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done as described, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dissipated, and the wound is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When blood flows into the stomach, rub and stir the moisture until it is well mixed with its substance and multiplied in quantity. If you continue the methods of treatment without hindrance, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their arms and belongings, and proceed to cauterize it with three cauteries: place one cauterization below the feet at a distance of one finger’s width with a sharp cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the initial cautery so that they form a triangular shape; and keep them apart so that they do not touch each other to avoid rotting.
And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the bone.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the form of a circle as follows:
And let it be cauterized the stomach puncturing for him who is frightened by this cautery: and that you know upon the stomach to pierce according to the quantity that you wish to test, and then cauterize that which was pierced with the cautery at the points; and then treat that with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cautery of the afflicted groin.
When pain arises in the groin due to coldness or moisture or excessive flatulence causing deviation from its normal condition by excessive evacuation, and it is treated with what we have mentioned without compression, then the patient should be placed on his back with his head raised, and you should apply three cauterizations according to this form and quantity, placing them over the groin below the hypochondria, as a person lies.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right arm.
And do not press your hand on the cautery site.
And if the quantity of that which adheres is half the breadth of a finger, and it should not be more tightly applied; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him sit, with his things extended, and raise his arms.
And it is possible for you to apply these cauteries with a cautery knife when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too quickly with the cauterization, and let the consistency of the entire poultice be such that it adheres to the whole body and reaches into the pouches, for the poultice here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the piercing of an abscess of the testicle with a cautery.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in its tunica, if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the pain will be heavy and severe.
And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, the pain will be sharp and intense, and often fatigues the physicians who treat it.
Therefore, you should position the patient on his back; and then feel the location of the abscess by touching it; and then use the cautery that resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire poultice is consumed, until it reaches the center, until healthy tissue appears.
And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not appropriate to use this method of cautery except for someone whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who has knowledge of many illnesses; but even then, one should attempt this experiment only a few times before daring to perform such an operation, but rather leave it to those more experienced, which is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On Cauterizing Pustules.
Thus say the ancients about cauterizing pustules: It should be done according to this method. Take a thin slice of the root of leek (aristology in medieval text often refers to plants like garlic or leek), which is as long as your finger and as thick as your little finger, from dried roots.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire. Cauterize with it at a point between the clavicle and the neck; and two small cauteries below that, slightly inclined towards the part under the beard; and two more slightly inclined between the fifth rib and the kidney, inclining slightly towards the back parts; and another cauterization in the middle of the legs; and one above the stomach; and three on the rear parts; and one at a point between the two shoulders; and two at the sides of the buttocks below the cauterization between the shoulders.
And do not cover it with your hand during the cauterization, but leave it exposed.
And some ancient authors also say that for some men who use a cauterization with iron resembling a blade, one should heat it and apply it to the point between the ribs so as to reach the abscess and cause it to discharge pus, as we have said regarding the abscess of the testicle.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is no fear, for it often happens that one dies immediately or an accident occurs at a place where healing is not possible.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the Melesa.
When you treat the disease of Melesa as we have said about its cure in the division and do not confer with your treatment, now you should cauterize according to three ways, all of which are appropriate. One way is that you make three or four linear cauterizations according to the length of the Melesa, following the figure of the cautery used for the fetus, the form of which has been described previously.
And there should be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cautery of the fetus.
And do not compress your hand during the cautery; and let the disease be above the skin.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cautery vertically in two places, which cause we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and raise the shoulder, which is on the right side of the Melesa where the pain of the disease occurs.
And let your elevation be such that when you raise the shoulder according to the length of the body, the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both ends, ignite one end, and at that point where it penetrates the shoulder on the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are completed.
And if you want to cauterize, have three burnings prepared.
And if your cauterization is such that it causes pain so severe that the patient cannot move their arm for several days, know that this may be more effective than other preceding methods in treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On Cauterization of Hydrophobics.
Cauterization is not applied to hydrophobics but to certain specific conditions properly.
When you treat the hydrophobic with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one caustic on the stomach, and another caustic on the liver, and another caustic on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a caustic in the right foot, and another caustic on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the caustic should be proportionate to the severity of the condition.
And therefore, let the caustic be applied moderately so that the arm remains immobile for a long time.
And do not evacuate the harmful effects of treatment near the caustic with water that is needed to be mixed with two intentions, and it should be prepared quickly with the help of healing aids.
The shape of the caustic with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clove-shaped as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its form as previously described.
Chapter xxxii.
On cauterization of the penis and other matters.
When the penis becomes inflamed and is filled with clear water, it is necessary to cauterize the penis above the joint that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand slightly, but do not withdraw it completely, so that the accumulated fluid can drain.
The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauterizations to both areas, and on each area, make the cauterization at the tip of the cautery. The cautery should be performed according to the length of the area: one below the root and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each area, two cauterizations.
And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that fluid can drain from it.
Then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter xxxiii.
On cauterization of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is affected by irritation and excessive moisture causing weakness of the functions, particularly digestion and retention, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated according to the methods described without hesitation. Sometimes the patient suffers from a need for cauterization to remove harmful substances; therefore, cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described in the stomach cauterization method, using the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, or a subtle cautery shaped like a nail. Additionally, apply two or three large cauteries over the pubis.
And if you remove the excessive humidities and the pain with water tolerates, then cauterize that above the navel and over the bowels, and lightly place two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure by which you will not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupted humidities, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division but do not confer the proper cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus near the small vertebrae below, making them small and triangular, and place two of these above the navel.
And if you find that the stomach of the patient is irritated and the food is not digested, and the face appears inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cauterization as previously mentioned; place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the spleen with a nail-like cautery, leave this treatment for some time, and subsequently treat to ensure they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Cauterization of Atheyl Near Its Removal.
When you remove the atheyl, then use a cautery that resembles a ray. After removing that atheyl, apply the cautery to it, and ensure that the treatment reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
In that water one time or two, for if it aches too much, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterwards cure those with that water mixed with the ingredients within until it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over aluminum, it is better for healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cautery treatment of fistulas that occur in the nature of the rectum in those parts there.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, let it be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the rectum that is old and discharges unhealthy pus and moisture, what should be done first is to attempt it with subtlety, and then immediately determine the depth of the fistula using the previously mentioned probe.
Then apply the cautery, which is similar to a ray. Then place the ignited cautery in this fistula according to the amount determined by the probe.
And repeat the application of the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burnt away completely in one instance or two or three, depending on your need.
And guard against burning the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then be cautious in those areas; and do not proceed with this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
Then care for the area so that it heals.
And if the area is sealed and the substances are no longer discharged from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the substances do not stop discharging from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of corrupted bone, or it falls under those causes about which there will be a reminder later.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the cautery of hemorrhoids.
When pain in the hemorrhoids occurs due to rubbing or from excessive gas, and because of this the patient's condition is aggravated, then you should cauterize them with a cautery on each individual hemorrhoid using a nail-sized piece of which one remembers [the specifics].
And it is best to cauterize with a small interval between each, so that there will be three cauterizations in total, and thus they will be more beneficial for recovery.
Chapter xxxviii.
On the cautery of the bladder.
When weakness and softness occur in the bladder due to rubbing and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize there slightly above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sweat; and cauterize there with one cautery in the lower part of both sides, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be nail-sized as remembered [from previous instructions].
Chapter xxxix.
On the cautery of the uterus.
When rubbing and humidity occur in the uterus, and because of this conception is prohibited, and menstruation is corrupted and delayed, and pain occurs due to their occurrence, then it is necessary for that area to be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery should be applied slightly above both sides, or two cauteries, and let each cautery be nail-sized.
Chapter XL.
On the cautery for the dislocation of the joint.
When moisture and swelling are spread around the joint, and such causes lead to the displacement of its location, and the sign is that one part lies stretched over the other when they are compared. And the location of the dislocation is recognized where it pains.
Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint in a circular manner, after you have marked it with a probe around the displaced part as it is rotated, so that the part falls into its proper place within the circle.
And let the cautery be in the shape that precedes the form used in cauterizing the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three small olive-shaped cauteries.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the tension of the entire ligament; and then treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter XLII.
On the cautery for the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the joint area, and its cause is friction and moisture, treat it as we have described and do not neglect it; if it becomes chronic, then you should purge the affected area of thick humors with fetid pills or artificial ones or similar remedies; and afterward cauterize it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: And let the spaces which are between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or large.
And in some cases, the cauteries should be on the middle part of the head because there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize also the circle from which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the joint, so that it is a continuous circle and burn the entire length of the bone.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the surrounding tissue.
But if it extends into the surrounding tissue, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the tissue at the location where you will direct the malaise that is the pain; and one cauterization on the navel bone four finger-widths away from the wilderness part.
And if the cautery is knife-like, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the length of the bone.
And if the malaise you direct is that the pain extends to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there where you will direct with one cautery at three points or four or more as needed.
And if the malaise you direct is that the pain is below the shoulder in the tissue, then cauterize there with one knife-like cautery.
And be careful in every cautery that you do not end the cautery at any point where you burn a nerve or large artery, and thus cause harm to the patient maliciously or by mistake.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterize upon the nail and finish in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reaches the flesh, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh. And as a result of a severe abdominal condition, and as a consequence death.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said about the cauterization of an area to be cauterized in this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date stone or somewhat less.
And inside that circle there should be another one a third of its size; and the space between them should be the quantity of a thumb’s width; and those circles should be evenly distributed on both sides; and the length of those bars should be one or two thumbs, and make along those edges an iron border appropriately prepared around the circles; and this is the form of it.
Then place it in the fire until it reddens and sparks, and then apply it to the affected area, placing the cauterizing instrument on the skin. And thus cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then let it rest for three days; then apply an external plaster to that area and leave the wound exposed for more than ten days; and then treat that area with remedies until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, my children, we have used this type of cautery rarely due to the fear of its consequences, and because few have been those who have paid attention to it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if you measure the spaces which are between each finger’s thickness; and let them be raised both below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this form:
And then pause over the part of the vessel where the sick person is seated, and place your hand on the part of the vessel; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let that quantity be heated little by little over a small fire for about one hour, until the patient feels the biting sensation and the buzzing—like when bitten by fire—until the burning sensation ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the hot water from all the vessel with cool water.
And then treat him for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the burning is reduced, and continue treating him for several more days, and he will recover from it; this is beneficial in treatment.
And then treat him with herbs until he is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or stomach, treat him in the way that involves water, as it is done with the vessel similarly.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and cause not extinguished from both parts one, and triturate them and place in a new jar of which the part below is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the treatment.
And pause then at the bottom of one wave and pour over that alkali and use living water of fresh liquid with which it takes those by finger, and when you understand them to be moist let them remain on the ground but through good compression, and leave the hole from which sharp water descends below at the part turning upwards toward another wave.
And then apply all that water and pour it over another living liquid and another renewed alkali, because at those times it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, as this operation does with fire.
And among the medicines with which it is cauterized widely are substances like vinegar and honey mixed with aniseed and water in such a way that they are blended.
And Gaul recounts the operation and the cure with which a person from antiquity was cured of pain in the sciatic nerve and vein, and magnifies much how good it is to do so, saying there is no need for any other treatment, as it heals once done as described, since light that intervention in bath and sweat is already sufficient.
And it should be taken in a bag of green herbs, and if no green is available, take a fresh fig; mix it with a little flour and apply it to the spot where the pain is, either on the thigh, or on the buttock, or on the hip, and bind it.
And let it remain for three hours or for the duration that the patient considers suitable for the adjustment.
And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is relaxed, place them on the ground, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
And know that you should not apply cauterization with these medicines except immediately after the evacuation of the body.
And Celsus says that when there is a goat's horn-shaped incision in the vein, it is cauterized, and takes effect on the patient well; and let the cauterization be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and the bones.
And then take dried goat's horn and ignite it in the fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it be spread out. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called cow cauterization.
Chapter XLII.
On Cauterization for Foot Pain.
Sometimes pain in the foot is caused by various reasons, such as from a fall or blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, by the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
And cauterization is not used for any other condition than this specific one, which is done by the application of corrosive matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful substance with thin pills and similar to them, place three lines of cauterizations on the foot where the pain is, each line being about a finger's width apart. Then apply up to five cauterizations or more in each line, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the treatment.
And let cauterization be performed with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four with a central pointed cautery as follows:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Chilblains.
This disease often affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it appears on their skin, with elevation and movement.
And you will notice on the last thoracic vertebra and on those that are beginning to rise above the others.
And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery as follows: so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And let the points be spaced apart from each other.
And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have described.
But be careful not to administer cauterization on chilblains that are caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When pain in the joints is caused by the friction of humors that flow into each member of the body, at times when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call specifically for a poultice.
And thus, when the gout is cured due to friction by a method of treatment and not by removing the pains, at times the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is when you cauterize that particular area of evacuation near the joint of the foot with burning.
And this is an olive-shaped cautery, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then use a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you often find this necessary, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need to use these cauteries, then cauterize but do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; only apply it around the circumference of the area.
And if the pains rise into the second toe, then administer the cauteries as we have described in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the sole of the foot and it is called podagra, then puncture around the toes as they are arranged, puncturing those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said areas, then puncture around the toes on each one and on the ball of the foot.
And if the pains persist near for several days in the joints or in the muscles, then cauterize the affected areas all around.
And if you do not expel the bad humor through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and the harmful substance is expelled by this cautery, it will heal, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Fractures.
When you suspect a fracture in the thighs and intestines are exposed before the towel covering them, and this is beginning to happen nearby, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to stop eating for several days and use laxatives so that the opening from their abdomen closes.
And have the patient lie close to you on their back, and command them to keep their abdomen elevated so that it is projected outward or the towel covering the intestines appears.
And then return to examine it yourself and check for the fracture on the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
so that it is round and emits sparks. And then reduce the intestines or towel to their proper position, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestines do not slip.
And you have already applied padding between the patient's bones and leave one bone supported by a pad, another on the chest of the patient, and another on their feet, so that they lie comfortably.
After the pause of the cautery on that mark, hold the cautery straight with your hand, and enter into it where you can reach the bone of the thumbnail within the joint; and do this again another time if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
Observe carefully the condition of the bowel during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest death or another great harm come to the patient.
And know that when you do not have the bone with the cautery, do not proceed with your operation.
And it is appropriate that the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
And afterwards, take care of the site of the cautery for three days with a dressing until the burn scar has healed.
And afterwards, treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the site is sealed and the condition healed.
And it is appropriate to restrict the patient's diet according to the duration of the healing period during which the intestines are weakened, so that the bowel does not protrude due to excessive effort.
And afterwards, when you want to remove it after forty days, administer it carefully and properly, and keep that for another forty days.
And let them be restricted from work and from overeating food and drink, and from speaking loudly, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
Here is the translation:
And if someone were to say that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, for it is marked with the hand:
and it is marked with a line that you follow along the latitude in the groin above the rupture, and another line below; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is quicker and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Cauterization of Torticollis.
When pain occurs in any members due to falling or striking and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, and its nature and condition, and the location of the torticollis and the pain in it.
If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in the member closest to where the pain is, so you should achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cauterization, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is commissary and treat it with what we have said in the division and do not cease until this is done, and you fear over the patient that the corruption comprehend the whole body of him and all the constitution of him; then cauterize that person on the head with a cauterizing iron: one at the mid location of the head, and another further down from it, near the forehead to the end of the hair; and both above two horns; and one behind, over the nape or back of the neck.
And finally, your work is to press the cautery a little inside so that it impresses upon the bone a small impression, and thereby displace the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors may be facilitated; and cauterize over the membrane as is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize those places with the cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large cautery on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttocks, and two on the thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet; and cauterize that person over all the joints of the aforementioned arms and legs, and on each heel of his feet, and on the hollows of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves which lie above the heel so that you do not burn them.
In some cases, it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the bystanders do, because the body of the patient has already been numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, as dictated by the properties of the tools.
And immediately apply the cautery with flour of barley mixed with honey, and continue the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On Cauterization for Stupor.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb, whether large or small.
And let the heat of the cautery penetrate into the tissue slightly. And then treat that area with an ointment until it is healed.
And in some cases, numbness is cauterized which extends to the muscles and bones, and along the vertebrae of the back, as well as the course of the nerves that move that limb, and the numbness is alleviated.
But do not proceed with this except by one who is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the course of nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterizing the parts that are discolored.
When the discolored area is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it. Apply the cautery for a short period, according to the quantity needed until the whiteness and color return to normal, and the color changes accordingly.
And for the treatment, apply a paste made of flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and add pigeon blood or swallow blood, using an equal part of each and mixing them together. Then place a cloth on it until it is healed.
Chapter L.
On cauterizing a cancer.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize around it using a circular cautery as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with a hot iron in the exact spot; but I have not seen this done, for I fear it will become ulcerated, and I have observed this happening several times.
And it is safer to cauterize around it in a circular manner as we have said, using either a circular or a moxa cautery.
Chapter LI.
On cauterizing of abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturing due to excessive moisture in that area, the poor condition of the patient's health, their advanced age and debility, lack of blood, or because of the time; if you wish to hasten its maturation, then cauterize around it with small moxa cauteries. After this, leave it as it will now mature more quickly.
If you want the perforation of the place to be cauterized, then at that time use fire for the cautery which has this shape; and place it in the middle location until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cautery is applied to that place where there is pus, so that the arm may be relieved; and then take care that it heals inside.
Chapter LII.
On Cauterization for Corrosive Agents.
A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see the corrosive in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then use fire to cauterize small and large nails as is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
And then let it rest for three days, and apply thrice a day with oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
However, if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicine, for that is the method in place of cautery. However, a cautery from fire is of little use for healing pus.
And here I have described the cure of acute diseases in the division, and therefore take that one when you feel an onset of illness.
Chapter LIII.
On Cauterization of Joints and Other Similar Areas.
In many cases, near the lower parts below the foot, there is a severe illness called a joint, which is caused by thick and hard substances that affect the foot; and in these cases cauterization is done in two ways: one with fire and the other with hot water.
However, the cautery with fire is made by heating the concave cautery, similar to a lentil in shape, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the joint from all sides, and it should be very thin.
And then place that heated iron on the joint, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And leave that for three days until it begins to discharge pus. And then apply a poultice made of crushed wild mugwort and salt to it, and leave the poultice on for one night, as this will help eradicate it from its roots.
And then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and in many cases this happens on the surface of the body, especially on the thighs and legs, then you should administer cauterization with hot water. Take a tube made of iron or brass or lentil-shaped metal, and place it on the joint; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube, hold your hand around it, and rotate it thoroughly using the compression of your hand from all sides, ensuring that the edge of the tube reaches the root of the joint. Allow the hot water to act for a short period due to its scalding effect for about an hour, then remove it, as this will eradicate the joint along with its roots.
And thus place them one near the other until you come upon all of those that are naturally in the body.
And near them, treat those abscesses whose roots are to be eradicated with the applications that cause flesh to grow.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery for trembling.
When you encounter trembling due to irritation of the nerves or from a fever that causes irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then appropriate for you to cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one caustic; and at the feet of the patient, and over the stomach, use an olive-shaped caustic.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the recovery from the illness that causes irritation.
Chapter LV.
On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
When there appear on the body accidental swellings and pus-filled wounds that are formed from thick, corrupted matter; then at the beginning when they appear, it is appropriate to cauterize over the entire fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended over fire; or with the root of long erestologia; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes it is appropriate to cauterize additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and those that are not thus treated, their excesses are disrupted, making them heal from these.
However, it is necessary that this be done immediately after evacuation and phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
If the blood flow from an artery that has been cut is due to a plague that began before the cutting, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, then it is difficult to remedy this.
When such a situation occurs, immediately apply your hand to the opening of the artery, and press on it with enough strength to stop the blood flow from continuing beyond your hand.
Then place the olive-coated cautery irons, both small and large, in the fire, blowing on them until they are ignited.
Then take one of those cautery irons, either small or large depending on the location and the condition in which the artery is severed, and apply it quickly after you have pressed your hand, to constrict and stop the bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you press your hand and apply the cautery, then take another iron immediately from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and make sure it does not cause other harm.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible at those times to constrict the blood, especially when the artery is large, unless one uses one of four methods: either use cauterization as mentioned before, or perform ligation whenever it cannot be extracted because when it is extracted the extremities are burnt and the blood is constricted, or bind with a strong ligature or place over them medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be strengthened with a cushion and moderate constriction.
And let him who administers moderate restriction with ligatures and bandages made of cloth or by the position of burning materials and similar methods not remove them except gradually.
And if any person is to be treated and no physician or medicine is present, then gently apply the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood remains at the upper part of the wound, and above the artery do not press; and sprinkle with cold water over the artery until the blood coagulates and thickens; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
On incision and puncture and wound care and phlebotomy and on wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters on the supremacy of the head among the parts.
In this process in this chapter in that manner, so that the seeker may be praised for it, at the time concerning what he has asked.
And before I begin this, take note, son, that you should learn that in this chapter it is by fear what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And for what it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is evacuation of blood or pus, in which the life may be lost due to the application of cautery on a vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an exit or purging of the plague or extraction of a foreign body or cutting stones and similar procedures. And with all of those things accompany fear and trembling, and in the most of their cases death.
And I warn you that this does not fall upon you in which there is danger, for some times such cases may be beyond your skills regarding the methods of many illnesses. And among them are some who become angry about their illness and are distant from understanding it, and this because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of the illness, and the illness itself brings fear which signifies death.
And among them is one who gives you all his possessions and says, "I hope for health from you," but his illness is fatal.
And therefore it is not fitting that you consent to one who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not assume any cause about it without proper knowledge which confirms what concerns you, and for which a reputable outcome follows.
In the treatment of all your patients, make a prognosis and indication of the cure to which their health is converted, for in that you will have help above all in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your minds and not take from you direction and protection, for these are in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other parts, so that what you seek and need from it may be clear to you.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often affects children shortly after birth when the nurse presses the child's head too hard.
And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those whom I treated, death followed, and thus it seemed to me that there was no cure for them.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the size of their head was so greatly enlarged that they could not move because of the size of their head, and the moisture inside increased to such an extent that it led to death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates below the bone on the skull.
For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the swelling but is only slight, it is necessary that you should cut in the middle of the head a cleft along its breadth, and let this extend about two nights' distance where the moisture flows; and this is the shape of the spatum:
And if the moisture has increased more and the swelling is greater, then there are here two clefts made in this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head covered on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the top but not in the parts within, and it is not hidden from you. It is necessary that you should cut in the middle of the head with three clefts made in this manner:
and then the incision extracts all the moisture; and then pack the clefts with bandages and poultices; and then anoint it above with oil and vinegar from the fifth day, and then loosen the ligature and treat the wound with lint and herbs, and bind the head with equality; and eat the food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to where the size of the swelling and the collection of water appear, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the swelling and the fullness of the water appear, and do this according to what seems best to you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and stop the flow of blood, or else the patient will suffer harm from that loss of blood and evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When you encounter catarrh or rheum in the legs or feet, and if it is chronic, and do not treat it with medicines, then the last resort treatment should be at the beginning of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you wish to cut those that the patient uses to feel their own head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; and then secure the neck of the patient with a cloth. And then observe where the vein can be pressed; and the locations of each near the areas below the ears, and they are hidden in some people.
And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then cut each one with a sharp instrument at an angle of incision penetrating into the bone, and do this across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the instrument below the artery and cut it where the incisions are made above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when a vein is cut, the blood flows out in pulsating spurts, which come out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then press with your thumb, and make an incision into the bone.
With what one should wash out the wound is a quantity of two ounces, and it is best to use wheat or barley water, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the condition of the artery.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of suppuration on the bone, now wash that with something that does not lead to an abscess from cauterization.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterwards care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
About the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When someone suffers from migraines or acute headaches due to excessive moisture in the brain and similar qualities in the veins of the temples, or if such conditions are severe and do not respond to medicinal treatment, then we resort to extracting arteries in the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those arteries is that the patient shaves the hair in the temples; then identify the artery visible in the temple as it is indicated by its pulse, which is hidden only in a few people due to excessive hardness.
And if it is hidden from you, then tie the head of the patient with some cloth; and afterwards rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And now take the spatula, which has this form: And then peel the membrane from where it is attached until you reach the artery; and there remove it to the places indicated until you extract it from the membrane and reveal those of the tunics that lie beneath it, from all sides.
But if the artery is fine, now wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut off a part according to the amount by which the ends of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they were not thus divided, the blood would not rise up.
And then remove one ounce of blood, or up to three ounces, from the vein.
And if the artery is large, now make sure to tie it in two places with a double thread of fine silk or with thin cords at a distance, and do not cut it before the healing of the wound, lest there be a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligatures; do this at that hour or another soon after.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or with a knife-shaped cautery until the ends of it are divided, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
And it is better to perform this procedure when the patient does not have a fever or is of heated complexion; for cautery is among those causes that help in finishing off moisture, and thus it is better to do so during improvement.
Regarding the extraction of arteries, ensure that the place is clean beforehand, and let them lie on a properly prepared powder, and nearby have dry medicines ready to make the flesh grow and warm applications so that it may be healed.
And if at any other time during the procedure bleeding occurs from the artery, then you should act to constrict that blood, either by cauterization or by filling the place with cloth, and press your hand in so that the blood may be constricted. And if none of those means is available to you at that moment, then press your hand on the place until the blood is congealed, and wrap the area with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and bind it as needed.
And what is more important in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cloths, after you have marked both places with a needle, and then place some combustible material, ignited, until it reaches the bone and divides the vein into two places, so that what is between the extremities may be extended, as they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two cloths should be noted. However, if you use less sharpness than two cloths, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two cloths, they may approach each other too quickly and cut the flesh too rapidly.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire should be maintained and the flesh should be cut through relatively easily.
And this work is better than every other work and more concise.
And let the spaces which are between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
About the treatment of sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
When such acidic tears occur, and the cause is of those veins that are above the head, and if you do not find any reason for treatment in medicine, sometimes the face of the sick person turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were moving there, and the eyes from which these tears come appear weakened, so much so that even the hair around them can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the acidity of the tears. The ancient practitioners performed this operation in treating such cases, and they did not consider such treatment to be without benefit.
And you command the sick person to shave the hair that is on their forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead equidistantly according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equidistant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tears which flow through the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers apart.
And if you have a piece of prepared lint or dry cloth with which you squeeze out the blood.
And then insert the speculum with two sharp points, which has this shape for the incision: which is from the part of the membrane into the second incision. Remove all the tissue that is between two incisions on the crest, which is above the bone, and then proceed with this incision from the middle to the second incision. And then stretch this speculum and insert into the first incision another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And cut with the sharp side away from the adjacent flesh and towards the bone, and move it inside until you reach the middle fissure, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But continue the incision until it appears in the bone, and then proceed with this in the middle fissure to the other fissure.
And when the blood flow is equal in quantity, press the places where the collected blood is contained.
And then apply dry old wood chips to each fissure, and sprinkle them with powder mixed in vinegar and oil and sweet wine, so that no abscess forms.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a generous infusion of hot water or herbal tea, and then treat it with ointment made of basil and rose oil until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 4
On the treatment of abscesses by catharsis and the expulsion of ascending vapors from the internal parts of the head.
When there is acute and continuous bleeding from catharsis, and the humors of the patient are weakened and small, and their condition indicates debility, with the eyelids ulcerated and hair loss, and in the forehead there is sharp pain and consequent emaciation, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come but from veins originating in the internal parts.
And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make a small incision in the middle of the forehead (beginning at the midpoint between the left temple and proceed towards the right temple; this incision should go through the bone until it exposes the bone), extending your hand from the crests of the temples which are near the mastication area.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then apply between the two edges of the incision some thickened liquid or moist cloths. And then apply above dry powder mixed with wine and oil so that it does not lead to an unhealed cauterization abscess.
And when you have done this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then scrape the bone starting where new flesh begins, and afterward treat it with a drying regimen that promotes new flesh growth. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from it to be applied to these wounds until new flesh forms.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone such as iron or charcoal, or it is from a plant such as thorns or beans, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine or their equivalents, or some animal.
And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or clot in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then administer some substance like violet oil or cumin, and close to it, make them sneeze with certain conditions, and plug the nose upon the occurrence of sneezing. And then place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards to the sides, as movement several times helps to expel these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer an extraction with the instrument called a small epistome, which has the following form:
And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer an extraction with a small piece of linen folded several times.
And if it is not expelled by any of the above methods, then make a tube of reed and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing enters except through the tube. From a foreign extract of the vein with strong attraction, for troops accustomed as we have recounted.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, now take a small lamp or prepare an apparatus with which birds are usually caught, and place that at the end of a rod, and then wrap that container decently around it. And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and thus dry the ear of moisture.
And so if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should proceed to incise that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of incising it is that you first puncture the malady of the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a small cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a slight fissure at the edge of the ear near the most prominent part. And let the fissure be in a lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the fissure quickly at that moment, and take care of it until it heals.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the gruels that grow and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction; but if you do not proceed accordingly, now take fine spatha according to this form: and administer the removal of that gruel which is lodged in the ear.
If you do not want to use water when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor from the ear, place it in many parts, and apply extracts there with onions or fine dust, or as we have said with incision, for the extraction is easier.
In the water that has entered into the ear, it is well for the patient to use sneezing with certain preparations at the beginning, and fill his sieved ear with some old cotton, and then press on the affected ear. If this discharges the water by itself, it is good; but if not, take small pebbles or stones according to the length of a finger, heat them in the fire for a while, and have the patient insert one of these into his ear canal and jump over that part of his body with another stone hitting the stone inside the ear. Do not remove the stone until all the water has been discharged.
Do not remove the stone until all the water has been discharged. And the water will be discharged in this way: take paper or cotton, and place one end of it in the ear while holding the other end over the fire until it burns slightly.
And place another piece of cotton in it and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is discharged, and strain it with a cannula as was said about removing the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, handle it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with dust and onions, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the tractate on distillations and do not confound your treatment, then you ought to expose the ear to the sun.
And if there appears any cause of the worms, then extract it with your finger or with fine forceps; but if no such cause appears, then take a cannula below narrow and above wide, which is of this shape: And insert the slender end into the ear according to the quantity that suffices for the patient; and then suck it out with strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey this instruction, then apply and plug around the circumference of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find these described in the treatise on distillations.
And let your application be such that you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which has the following shape: And make it of silver or ivory, below narrow, in which there is a small groove, and with a flat top.
And thus it should fit like a plug at the constriction of the cannula where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with cloth above and press it with your hand moderately to expel the oil into the cavity of hearing so that the patient feels the oil inside.
Take what is to be inserted into the ear and heat it a little over fire. And be careful that the substance you will apply to the ear is not too irritating, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of blocked ears.
Sometimes infants are born from their mother's wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing inside it; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance to the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is located further out.
And when it occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, it is in the most difficult positions for treatment.
And when you can see it clearly, have the patient expose their ear to the sun and observe it. And if you see a clear blockage, open it with a fine spatula, which has the following form:
If the tip of it is narrow, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be of two thin edges so as not to injure the ear.
And if the blockage is due to flesh growing inside the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine forceps and carefully cut away all the excess tissue.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then at this time take a thin reed and heat that in fire for a short while, and then place that into the ear canal.
And thus if you find an obstruction with what the patient can reach by ease, due to difficulty in hearing, force the obstruction out with what the patient can reach by ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take something and dip it in vinegar and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see that the ear is becoming inflamed, then you should remove what was placed there and replace it with another wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil, until the inflammation subsides; and then treat it until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the blood flow, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of boils that occur on the eyelids.
Boils that occur on the eyelids sometimes become moist, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you should hold those with tweezers or scissors, and then incise them along their natural fissures, and then apply finely ground powder to the sites.
If pain and bleeding come from a vein, then at that hour you should cauterize those parts with a fine cautery near the navel.
And the best cauterization is near incisions and trophic areas that return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a severe condition that affects the eyelids.
Trophic areas appear on the eyelids due to some cause that resembles severity in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called severe.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid both above and below.
Therefore, the operation to be performed is that you should consider at this hour whether the severity is present in what appears on the eyelid and is spread throughout; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, apply over that area along the length, and gently remove it from all parts with ease until you have evacuated it, and then suspend it with an ointment and close it.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
And if it is small, it will not cause harm for you because the warmth of it restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then you should press the surface inside; thus, suspend the swelling with a lancet if necessary, and press it all around, and if the eyelid due to incision has become elongated, this does not matter for any cause.
And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be cured.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment of injuries above the eye on the eyelid.
Injuries are often caused in the gray area that is generated in the layers of the eyelid above, and mostly affect children, worsening their eyesight due to this condition; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears collect in them.
And because of this, you see them pressing their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces pressed down; and above their eyelids are moist eyebrows, which have been covered by inflammation, and the likelihood of injury is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel pain within.
And one method of treatment is for the patient to place their head in your lap, and then place a cloth on them and make a circle according to the quantity that contains earth from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that pus aggregates at the center of the circle, and subsequently introduce moisture into the opening using a spatula along the length, ensuring the incision is no larger than that made in phlebotomy.
In the main incision you shall cut through the cartilage completely until you reach the membrane, for in major operations you expose the membrane by a split according to the form of the white gristle.
Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloth between your fingers to the parts behind, and roll it between your right and left hand until it is spread out.
And be careful not to press into the split so that the spatum does not reach the wound and damage it.
But if the cartilage does not appear at the beginning of the split, adjust in the split a small piece with ease until the cartilage processes; and then extract it as we have said; and then dip cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the site and sprinkle them with powders.
And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the concavity of the split so that what remains is dried by this humidity.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, now treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of examining the wound.
When in the eyelids of the wounds there grow hairs beneath the natural lashes and when they become old, these cause trouble to the wound and bring about ways of diseases such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue, which is called examining the wound, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done through incision and suturing; or by canulas as I will explain.
And so cut off the edge of the wound in the area; then turn up the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part below the eyelid where there is pus, and make the needle penetrate to the root above, near the margin of the eyelid where hair grows, and draw out the pus from the parts above the eyelid, and turn up that part with force.
And then make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid below the hair near the lacrimal bone and extend it to the lower lacrimal bone; and then extract the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and afterwards bandage over the eyelid as shown, like a leaf of myrtle.
However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among people; some require that a considerable amount be incised from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid is swollen.
And then make an incision on the two lines that you have marked, starting from the upper lacrimal bone to the lower lacrimal bone. And if the incision is near the natural hair line as thick as the king's hair.
And then place the incision at one of the two angles of the jaw, and then excoriate that area completely, and afterwards bring together the two edges of the wound with fine thread or wool, and clean the blood, and make adhere whatever you find superfluous from the pus onto two eyebrows using some adhesive substance, if you wish to do this, and if not, do not worry.
About four days after sewing up the wound, begin treatment with this.
And if you choose to treat the wound without sewing it up, use something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; however, sewing it up is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
But rather than being anxious about the outcome, act with good practice and do not be afraid.
And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small, separated and gathered incisions made according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do that, hold the incisions, and this is not equalized; now take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the larger tear duct, and the second thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between these threads equally, and then lift your hand evenly to lift the entire marked area as we have recommended.
And then align the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
And sometimes when the eyelid needs to have its hair direction changed, then you should use what we have said about incision; however, sewing it up is more artificial.
Make flutes according to this form: And so you convert the eyelid and separate the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then make two flutes or two slender sticks, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be small compared to the width of the eye socket. And you have already cut into the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the upper eyelid, and bind the flutes of each section tightly together, and leave it for several days, because the skin will die due to the constriction and will fall off so that by itself it will drop away.
But if it is delayed, now break it with the threads, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Then when it has hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two flutes that you will make according to this form: and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On Removing Stinging Hairs from the Eye with a Needle When the Hair is Embedded.
When there are unnatural hairs that are hard and rough and sting the eyes, the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it at the base of each hair in a delicate manner, and then adjust the ends carefully so that each one is handled subtly. And let the length of the wounds be as much as the quantity of one palm.
And then compose another subtle dressing below it briefly, and use the edges of that one if you wish.
And then place the malady beneath your eye in the proper time, and let it be close to sunlight so that your work may be clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you extract it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into the slit, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand gently so that the hair is pulled out along with the slit in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the slit is pulled and the hair is not removed, pull the slit away from the area below toward the dressing that you have prepared for it, so that the slit may be pulled out along with the surrounding tissue.
And look at that with the vision of the eye, for now you will pull the slit and the dressing, and then clamp the eye, and leave the clamps for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, now attach a long hair from among the natural hairs to it, or leave it for some time until it grows longer in place, and then lift that one.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of a swelling that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When a swelling appears in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cautery, it is called leporine. This kind of swelling can be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, incisions, or cauteries, or similar malpractice.
The method for the operation is that you should cut into that contraction and separate its edges, and place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it so that it may heal.
And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry out or constrain it, because if you do this, the swelling will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek, and boil the leaves and seeds in water or use juice from the plant, which should be dissolved in some oil. Soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it for treatment.
The key to your treatment is that you should ensure it is not allowed to heal in a constricted form but rather returns to its original shape.
And this operation that we have described is simply a correction for a swelling that does not return to its original form.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment of ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid.
This ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid, which is properly called ectropion; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
The accidental one is caused by trauma or by a wound or by cautery or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and let it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and hold it with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take the rod and place it in the cut, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two cuts on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two cuts be at two corners of the incision, which you have made where they meet, and let them form an angle so that when they come together, they make a proper shape.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh there in the amount of the width below it, which stiffens the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and afterwards treat those as we have said about softening medicines and plasters until it is healed.
And if there is a need to open through a crack or suture or cauterization, then you should make an incision with a shallow cut above the eyelashes as has been described previously. And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as has been prepared for the form of the incision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way within themselves to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that malady according to the needs of the operation and the instruments in their proper disposition.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in some people such that the eyelid is adhered above the albuginea of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should insert a probe below the eyelid, raise it with it, or extend it to the root.
And then you should incise the adherence with a fine spatula, which is not sharp, keeping it blunt so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula gently so as not to scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
And then you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in the place of rose dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a clean cloth, and place on the wound wool infused in egg white, and after the third day use healing remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the swelling of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that an eyelid swelling occurs in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard, fine lump; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with a needle takes hold of it and does not release it, thus it can be excised and the needle is not inserted into it.
And both types do not begin except from the larger tear duct, gradually covering the eye and prohibiting light and movement of the eyelid.
But the method of working on the swelling is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then opens their eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the swelling with a needle by slight repetition and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or oxhair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong thread, and slightly double the tip of the needle, place it in the middle of the swelling, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the swelling with glue; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off with the hair the edge of the swelling so that the pupil is not harmed. And so you should follow it with the skin inside out.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by this incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail should be removed with the sun on it extended or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's spatula, which has this shape:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue so as not to cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
And after the incision, place a little crushed salt or a piece made of cerement in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with whatever is needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor is it placed in such a way that you can reach it, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and it heals as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the patient and take a fine spatula made of steel with sharpness according to this form: with fineness. And if it happens that it is rarefied and congealed and applied to the root, then distill from your mouth onto the wound a cerement made of sinew or rag or crushed salt, and bandage the wound for another day.
Then proceed with the operation by removing everything that is inside it, unless the opposite abscess is inflamed, for if you leave that one, treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
Then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
If the lacrimal flesh swells and becomes painful in the eye due to great harm, suspend it for a time; and incise part of that, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
Then apply a distilled rose water and sinah preparation to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of styes and what is born from flesh tightly attached to the eye.
In some cases on the eyes of certain individuals, soft flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches closely to the eyelids and strongly pulls the eyelids inward and is assembled like a railing.
The operation there is that the patient rests his head in your lap; then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh at convenient times, and with a forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
And your incision should be made with the scalpel we have recommended for nail removal, or with small forceps with which hair is collected, depending on the form it will take as described in this chapter.
Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it has been scraped clean, now fill the wound with powdered salt or sprinkle in red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and cover it with a white cloth so that it is protected from swelling and abscess.
And if any cause arises to guard against infection and the wound is very bloody, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever heals such an abscess, and subsequently proceed with this operation once it has healed, and similarly do for the flesh around the wound of this kind.
However, you must ensure that the healing of the wound proceeds naturally or accidentally, using tools, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can endure such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes from red veins that are hard to see on the wound and prohibit its operation, and the wound heals over the course of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two, according to your discretion; and let that pressing be done gently and gradually as follows:
or press for two ounces gradually in one go according to this method:
And then bind those veins with fine ligatures, and gently clear the blood from them little by little until you see them become pale and turn white.
And be careful not to lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning under the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then apply a distilled vinegar or red wine to the blood because of its acidity to dissolve what has become pale from fear.
But if it is not possible for you to do this at that hour, then apply a plaster that relieves the pain and leave it alone for several days until the pain subsides and there is no danger of an abscess forming.
And then repeat the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of fractures to the nose.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute medicinal remedies as described and they have not healed, then do not allow them to become infected but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the humidity within it and the pus until the bone is revealed.
And when the bone is revealed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with a tool whose form is as follows:
He is named the rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this one which is made with punctures by lime or al-Iskāfah through fine puncturing (as in the following form).
Place it over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it among the said pieces, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with drying and styptic agents.
When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and it remains for forty days without being renewed and without becoming abscessed and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, now there is no engendering but reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: that you expose the bone either with forceps or with an acute instrument, and when the bone becomes exposed, then you proceed as follows:
Let the tip of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it be gradually tapered towards the tip as you see here.
And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all of the bone, and you will feel the discomfort as you find air escaping.
Now treat the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Thus when the flesh and the place become hardened, at that moment the matter which was dispersed to the parts returns to the nose, therefore this is easier upon the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Prominence of the Eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs upon viewing it, then you should instruct the patient, and afterwards follow up by applying windy poultices to the head without incision and use good suction; and then apply a liniment made of aloes, seeds, and sarcocolla around the eye; and afterwards strengthen the plaster over the eye with powdered ingredients.
And the method for the powder is that you take linen cloth and each piece be folded in four layers; then make the powder from these pieces.
And then apply those one over the other according to the amount that the eye requires. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth tightly applied; and repeat the windy applications with suction without incision; and then remove the poultices and let the eye rest day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament becomes softened, then it should be tightly applied.
And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
And if you see the eye already reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and tight application and the poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal layer.
When you detect disruption in the uveal layer, and it protrudes prominently beyond the eyelids like a raisin seed, and its shape resembles that of a person's figure due to this condition, and if you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as we have described: insert the needle at the root of the uveal layer from below and above; subsequently, place another needle where the double thread is located near the lacrimal area, and allow both needles to penetrate and position them according to their disposition. Then, incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uveal layer around the needle, and strengthen this movement.
Then remove the needle and place it on the boiled woolen thread infused in egg white, and let it remain until the thread adheres to the uvea.
Then treat the wound with what will comfort it until the injury is healed.
And in some cases, apply from all sides a circular piece of cloth around the wound to fit the prominent area, and then puncture it with a fine probe to reach the base of the wound, allowing the albuminous moisture to flow, and the wound will soon descend.
Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of contusions.
This illness, called contusion, is not simply a swelling that resembles water descending but is different from that.
Here is the translation:
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
But if the drainage is not prepared as we have said with water, now make the patient sit and take a thin spatula and apply it on the conjunctiva over the panicle slightly away from the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea at the edge (entering the place gently), until the pus is discharged.
Once it is discharged, now you should instill warm water in which honey has been mixed, or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then treat it for other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending into the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which is suitable to be used for treatment as explained, now use it according to the health condition.
Now it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and hold their eye gently with your fingers.
And then place your left hand near the patient's eyelid if the affected eye is the left one; or use your right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the instrument, if the affected eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the affected eye is the right one.
And then place the tip of the instrument near the edge of the eye along the thickness of the white part of the eye from the inner corner, and then apply the instrument gently while rotating your hand.
And so penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the almond is already reached due to wear.
And it is necessary to measure the path from the almond to the pupil the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the circumference of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And so place the almond in the place where the fluid is, and then pull it down a channel nearby, and thus if the fluid flows immediately, you will see the defect upon which his sight depends immediately, and the almond in its eye.
And then rest for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now you pause that other channel until the almond is not expelled.
And when it has stopped and no longer descends, now you extract the almond with ease, and rotate it with your finger little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear rock salt in the fluid and wash the eye thoroughly with that solution; and then cover the eye with a piece of cloth or stopper or lint infused in warm oil and egg white.
But we and those of our time rest the eye with that poultice made of egg white.
And if you are unable to insert the almond into the eye due to its hardness — for there are some people whose eyes are hard —, then it is necessary to use the instrument called alberid, which has this form:
And so perforate with that instrument the affected area, and do not stop your hand in the groove, until you make a place for the almond to move into.
And so he proceeds with the almond as we have said.
And you should advise the patient to prepare a dark room properly for sleeping on their back in a house with little light, and they should be prohibited from all movements.
And pause in the nature of water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandaging be according to its condition on the third day.
And then remove it in that dark room and expose it to fresh air, show it some causes, and then re-bandage it on the seventh day.
And it is not appropriate to do this during the hour of care or immediately after infusion. Handle it in such a way that the water can flow freely and quickly, with great and vigorous care.
But if an abscess occurs, you should then remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water that helps to drain the abscess.
Now you can free the sight from it and pause over the surface for several days, through which the vision is regulated below it, in a dark room.
And then move them gradually out of that room and converse with them about their concerns.
And know that in alchemy, the student is not exempt from observing several times, and now you should be bold about the operation.
And you have come to us from some of those who came after Artaz, and some said that they make fire in the Airag cup through which water is sucked.
But for my part I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of cups through which one can work on those who are unaware of them:
And they are made of clay or iron properly, and their extremities are made with this subtlety, triangular-shaped, the sharp end just as that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
When on the nose there arise various flesh growths that adhere, some of which have causes similar to a spider's web or a sea squirt; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles such a sea creature. And it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and there is also flesh that resembles a lion's, not of dark color.
Therefore, for the one who has these flesh growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, place the patient between your hands and expose them to the sunlight, and starve the nose of it, and apply poultices at intervals to those areas. And then extract it from the surrounding parts, and then cut out what you have identified of those areas with a sharp, fine spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason by which excision is possible, then remove it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that it does not remain for any reason. If the master has hemorrhage or abscess that requires cautery, then proceed with what is necessary; if it is one of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that which needs to have blood vessels severed and all cavities drained.
And it should be placed near the nose, next to the incision, with water or wine. If the nose is swollen and the process of moisture spreads to the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside there is flesh that has grown on the superfluous bones of the nose to which the incision did not reach.
Then you should introduce some thick substance faithfully to the one who has an enlargement, and place it in walnut shells, and put between each shell the quantity of a finger or less, and apply the remedy and insert one end of the substance into the nose with a reed or for another possible cause.
And after this has been done, let the smell of it be drawn into the nostrils so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it be placed on their greasy part, for those who carefully observe the appearance of this action do as children in schools, and it is a swift cause for one who wants to perform it.
And then place the two ends of the substance, one end extending out over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a flesh clamp to the walnuts that hold the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is holding onto the walnuts of the substance.
From the root extract the juice, and place in the nose near the extraction of blood a small tube, and do this for three days or more until it corrodes all that is around the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon with a curved end, like a small bowl, and the tube similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for making enemas should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or water what you want from juices and suctionable causes.
Chapter XXV.
About the veins in the extremities of the nose.
Most bruises occur in the extremities of the nose, and they are treated and bandaged within a few days during which one must take care of it.
And for this reason, you should treat it at the beginning of its appearance, and continue treating it entirely. And then pause on the place where you cauterized or applied a burning medicine, which was in that location.
But if treatment is delayed until it has become inflamed, hard, dark in color, and insensitive, then do not touch it with an iron instrument as it may be a chronic abscess; for many times the person treating this abscess improperly causes great harm to the patient.
And if the abscess is soft to touch and not dark in color, and if treatment is possible at all times, then evacuate the pus without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On suturing the nose and lips and the ear when continuity is lost due to plague or similar causes.
Know that when the continuity is lost in one of these cartilages, few would undertake such an operation except in some cases.
Therefore, when dealing with any of these causes, you must consider whether it is a fresh wound or due to the natural course of healing, and then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches, and afterwards treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of a wound of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, now you must excise each part of its visible edge until it bleeds. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle over them powder of dragon's blood and thrisse, and place upon the powder a piece of mastic plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that wound for two days or three, and then untie it and change the plaster and leave it until the pus has ceased to flow, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
The method of the suture is that you join the wound of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for the suture of the abdomen, or join the wound of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in their inner parts.
Many times in some men in the inner parts of their lips there appear abscesses that are hard like the gristle of birds, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lips and split each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you excise them, fill the place with thrisse-dressed cloth until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar water and treat the area with astringents until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the incision of flesh adjusted to the gums.
Great care must be taken when dealing with flesh attached to the gum. The ancients called this condition albulus. Then you should suspend the affected area for about an ounce or hold it between your forceps and incise along its root, allowing the pus to drain or the blood to flow.
And afterwards apply powder that is soothing or other styptic powders or excitants to the area.
And if the flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after cauterization it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the extraction of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the inner parts and those from outside, and between the gums to which they are attached, there are rough spots, ulcers, and some areas are blackened and appear yellowish or greenish, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth decayed.
And therefore you should make the patient sit between your hands and place his head in a warm towel, and extract the teeth on which these rough spots appear along with any grit inside them so that none of it remains, and this will remove the blackness and yellowish color and other issues until they are cleansed.
If this can be done at the beginning of the extraction, it is good; but if not, then you should repeat the extraction on those teeth another day and on the second and third days until it reaches the final step as you desire.
And know that teeth have need of various instruments of different forms and shapes according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore, the razors which are used to remove the tooth that is to be extracted are different from those used to rasp between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
When you wish to cure the tooth of its pain by completely extracting it and delaying in the total extraction of it, know that there is no reason to postpone the removal when it needs to be extracted, since it is a substance that requires promptness in its extraction.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain can deceive the patient and lead them to believe it is in a healthy tooth. If you extract the wrong one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen through the experience of many operations.
Therefore, when you need to be certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with an instrument that has some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum completely. Then, using your fingers or fine forceps, begin gently at first, little by little, until you can loosen it.
And then use strong forceps for good leverage or a firm hold, and place the patient's head between your hands in such a way that they feel comfortable and secure. Then pull the tooth straight so as not to break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And thus if it is not dislocated, now take one of those instruments and place it there from all sides with ease and strive for the removal of it as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or decayed, now cover it with cloth that you have prepared and bind it tightly at the end with a thin thread so that it does not become dislodged during your compression upon that tooth holding it.
And it is necessary that you work extremely carefully around the incision in a circle all around the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear that which should remain intact, and return to the diseased area for the malice that it may be better than the initial pain.
And be careful that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity during the removal of teeth; for they often fail to administer what we have recommended. Many times this brings upon sick people great evils which are much harder to cure, and the roots of those teeth become badly damaged, or some of them, or you may extract it along with some bones of the jaw as many times we have witnessed.
And after the removal of it, the mouth should be washed with warm water or salt water.
And if there is bleeding for this reason, as often happens, now take some quantity of wax and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, use cauterization.
The shape of the forceps and the delicate handles with which the tooth is held at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
And so they should be as if made of thick material so that when stranguries are applied to them, they not be folded but rather have short extremities.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight in their extremities. And at the extremities of those there are teeth among which some enter into others and constrict with great force, and sometimes the extremities of those should have the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, that is a heron, and they are very strong in constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from locked jaws.
When you must perform the extraction of a tooth that is locked due to some cause, it is necessary for you to apply poultices around the area for one day or two until the area becomes softened. Then proceed with instruments or forceps whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird called ciconia or heron, in the shape of the forceps:
The extremities of those should be made like teeth, similar to a file or rasp.
And if it does not obey you when using these forceps or tenals, then you should apply to the root and expose all the flesh, and proceed with an instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
And it should have a short thick end, and it should not be enclosed such that it becomes locked.
Then if by this the root is dislodged, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a very fine tip.
And here is how you use this instrument, which has two ends, and this is its shape near the following: and with other instruments which I will describe for scraping teeth; because it is made with this instrument that resembles a small spoon, and this is its shape:
of the twisted or bent triangular tip, which should have some thickness, and it should not be hollow so that it does not rattle.
And another skill is to know the instruments for the teeth and to make them similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or make a proper instrument, due to the forms of different kinds.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth rattles, or if it is loose, now carefully treat it there in its place with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help with the action whose form is as follows:
And it should have some thickness gradually, and be held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is extracted; and then restore the place with suitable medicines.
But if there is a small hole in the bone, now treat that for its decay and its blackness, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over other teeth.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is lax, especially when this affects women, and more so those who are venerable; then you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and it is impossible to extract or apply medication, at that time remove its root. But ensure that it is not attached to another tooth; then you cut it with this instrument which has the following form; it resembles a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And ensure your incision with which you cut it is not made too deep due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not communicate with other teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth that can be filed down, then file it with an Indian steel file which has the following form:
And it should be entirely made of Indian steel and should be sharp; it should have very fine points as with a file used to make needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that it does not communicate with another tooth and cause damage. And smooth it at the end, and polish it with some razors.
And if it is a tooth where part of it is broken and you run your tongue over it, then you should file down the inside until the roughness of that fracture is smoothed and filled so that your tongue does not get hurt and the speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of bad teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are loose or dislocated due to impact or accident, and the patient cannot bear what they eat because of this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that do not heal, you should proceed by restoring them with gold filling and not silver, because silver changes color and may cause issues after some days, whereas gold never changes.
And the filling should be in such subtlety and fineness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the method of restoration is that you take the filling and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then shape it with two tortuosities of the filling between one or multiple bad teeth, so that it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then continue the restoration from the part where you began, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not defective.
And when you are restoring the filling, be careful not to expose the roots of the teeth.
And then trim the excess filling with forceps or scissors, and place it in each location by hand, and shape it to conceal it between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth so that it does not injure the tongue. And then shape it as finely as a ribbon.
But if it becomes loose or broken, reinforce that part with additional filling in such a way throughout its duration.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and of two misaligned teeth, as you will see these diagrams:
And when it happens that I return one tooth or two near the placement of each in their places, and they grow back as we have recounted, and they become aligned.
And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
And sometimes a similar piece of cowbone is used for some reason in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fixed as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
This membrane that is under the tongue sometimes is natural and one is born with it, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, and lifts their tongue; then one cuts that membrane along the nerve according to its length, ensuring the tongue is sufficiently exposed.
But if there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you should cut carefully and divide it along its length until the knot dissolves.
And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the flesh so that you do not sever the arteries and cause bleeding.
After washing the remnants of the incision with water or vinegar or clean water, put a piece of linen under the tongue; this is done so that the bad taste does not remain under the tongue each night so that it does not become consolidated elsewhere.
If bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is appropriate for this condition. And subsequently treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes, an abscess appears under the tongue, resembling a small swelling that prevents the tongue from performing its normal function; and it grows so much that it fills the mouth.
The operation to be performed is to open the mouth wide in front of the light and examine the abscess.
And if you see it as dark or black in color, hard, and without any sensation, then do not touch what appears to be gangrenous.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness and moisture, then you should proceed with the operation, incising it with a fine scalpel, and cut it entirely; and if blood flows during your procedure, then place over it powdered zinc sulfate, which is vitriol, to stop the bleeding.
And then return to your work once you have completed the procedure, washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other appropriate treatments until it is healed.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the extraction of abscesses from both armpits and those that occur in the groin and other abscesses.
When you find an abscess in the groin area, these are glands that are assembled there, which appear outside and are called armpits. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at this point, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Instead, leave it inside to mature, and either you will remove it later, or it may rupture on its own.
And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is delicate, then that should be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already begun to mature after being cauterized or if it has decreased in some way. Then have the patient sit facing the sunlight, and his head towards your side, and expose the opening of the abscess, and the assistant holding firmly with their hands the instrument mentioned below:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and should be as thin as a knife.
When you press with that instrument and the abscess is revealed to you, place your finger over it firmly, then take some of it and insert it into the opening, and pull it outwards as much as you can. Here is another illustration of cutting through one cause of the tunics, and appropriately proceed with this instrument which has this form:
Here is another illustration of cutting through one cause of the tunics, and appropriately proceed with this instrument which has this form: and it is similar to forceps, but the extremities of its are curved, thus the opening of each of those is in line with the other, sharp points, which are made of iron.
If this instrument is not available to you, then proceed with this spatula which has the following form: It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have made one incision, make the other following this method of cutting, and then wash the wound with clean water for healing.
But if there is bleeding, treat it with water from the decoction of lemon peel or mint leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then proceed to heal it once it is stabilized.
And sometimes there arise in the throat other abscesses or those affecting both ears, and cut these according to what I have said about cutting two incisions equally.
And I had treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her throat, which abscess tended to have a dark color and little sensation, and it had already closed the throat of hers, and she breathed only through a narrow passage, and I had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if not for treatment within one day or two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that it had formed two paths through which it could drain by two tracts.
Then I cut it surgically and placed it in one of their pieces, and pulled that, and from there the larger portion was detached, and then I incised that so as to understand the other part, and then I closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the piece in that abscess.
And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood came from it. Then the fever of that woman subsided, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she ate food. Therefore, I did not cease to incise that abscess for several long periods, and an abscess succeeded in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Then I applied something and cauterized the fever of it, then there was an addition to it; and afterward I wandered about and did not know what God would do next with that.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of the breast when it is abscessed.
When one observes catarr in the breast, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, then it is called a buba.
But when it is cured as we have said in the division and you do not confirm your treatment, and similarly often times an abscess cauterized remains stubborn and subtle, then it is necessary that you incise the one that is aggregated roundly; and if it reaches a certain length and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not in the center, then it is necessary that you attempt its incision, because there is fear of malady in that.
And when you see it according to the method that I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which the form is appropriate, and place the incision in the new area, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the cutting of two membranes.
And you should not cut it unless it is adjusted to the natural limit without excess, for if you cut too much, you will impair their speech.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and treat it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you should use something to cauterize it without causing fear, and the method of cauterization is nothing but with sharp water. Place the head of the patient in your lap, then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and afterward take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it there as a hot cautery, and place it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is as follows:
Let the extremity of the cautery on which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not flow out from it for any reason onto the wound and thus injure it.
And then take the instrument with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for about half an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the vein, then dip the cloth in the medicine, and insert the vein along with the cloth into a cannula so that the cloth adheres to that cannula, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and afterwards let it dry until it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after that cauterize around the grape with a cloth soaked in the medicine, and modify what is around it according to what is prescribed by the medicine, and let it be washed with soap water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and attend to it internally with medications until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is safer than incision and more enduring without fear.
In some cases, the grape is cured with something that cauterizes more gently than incision, for it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take plasters, hyssop, mint, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs, and mix all these ingredients or some of them in a vessel, and let them be immersed in sour grape juice and boiled; then the vessel should be heated moderately over low heat, and at one end of the vessel place a tube made of straw in this manner; it can be made of silver or straw.
And insert the end into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
Regarding those superficial swellings that are dry, be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would be too early for the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather wait for the formation of pus.
If this instrument is not available to you, now take a reed and attach to it a cover made of cloth, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the covering of cloth prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of spines and what adheres to the wound, and of other causes.
Superficial swellings that adhere to the wound or spine or any other cause.
Then you should remove what is apparent from those elements, upon which your eye rests, and press the tongue with an instrument in sunlight, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the wound.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the wound, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the wound will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce seed or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and bind it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow that, as when it reaches the place where spines are lodged, they will be easily expelled. Take a eel and boil it in vinegar, and let the inside be removed and the poultice be extracted; or take a rod and apply the poultice to it and with the rod treat [the patient].
If you do not forget the causes which we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it let there be a hook which you insert into its throat with ease.
And as you proceed, keep his head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that it does not harm him or cause injury to the bone or spine, or that it harms the patient in any way.
However, the patient should gently insert it, due to his knowledge of the location of the cause and its nature, and pull his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared within him until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of a leech attached to the throat.
When the leech is treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and compresses, consider now the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you have protruded his tongue with the instrument which we recommended to you.
Then if you see the leech, gently remove it carefully with your fingertips or with small forceps.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it, now take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a heated iron on the concavity of the tube, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and falls off), and keep the patient from water for the entire day.
Take a clean cloth soaked in water and wipe the mouth with it; then wash the mouth with that water. Do not let any of that water be wasted for any reason; change the water every hour with its like, because as soon as the leech feels the water, it will attach itself.
If it is not possible to perform what we have recommended with this, then fumigate the area with cimetz or asafetida using the instrument we described for fumigating the uvula.
Do this, and it will fall on its own.
And here is another method of fumigation during this procedure: take an owl in which there are burning coals and cover it with a cloth that has a hole in the middle; attach one end of the instrument to this hole. Then perform the fumigation from above, and have the patient place their mouth at the end of the tube so that no smoke escapes before you know that the fumigation has reached the leeches, for they will fall as soon as they encounter it.
And if it does not work, then repeat the fumigation several times, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and give them salty and dry foods to eat, and they should not drink water. It is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument used to remove bloodsucking leeches from the throat when they are seen; it resembles forceps as well, but with some curvature. which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it holds something, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In this chapter is the summary of the speech on the preparation for the incision and division of abscesses.
Abscesses are of various types and methods, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
And they differ in the puncturing and division of them by two methods, one of which is based on the nature of the abscess itself; and by what it contains of humidity.
And the second method is according to the locations in which they occur in the body, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that appears in fleshy areas is different from one that occurs at joints; and each has its treatment by operation.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but left until the pus has matured or they have reached completion.
There are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are crosswise and have not matured according to their completion, such as those near joints, because when an abscess is close to a joint, its nature prolongs itself until you can drain what is around it, and if the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, it becomes a cause for contraction of that limb; or if it is near a principal member, and if you delay puncturing it before it has matured, it may affect the principal member negatively; or if it is close to the buttocks, then puncture it while it is not yet fully matured; but do not pierce it when it is raw from incomplete digestion, except for one that is near the buttocks, so that you do not leave behind a prepuce that extends into the depths of the buttocks and causes a fistula, or create an opening that does not heal. May it be known that you know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when there is relief from the pain and cessation of the fever, and soon after a decrease in inflammation and pulse, and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you should know that the piercing should be done at the place where the pus is deepest in the abscess and coming from the highest part of its elevation.
And the piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in parts such as the limbs and joints, and in places near tendons, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all locations equally where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use piercing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is best to delay the piercing until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce before this, it prolongs the illness of the patient and increases foulness, and hardens the lips of the wound and its depth.
But some abscesses should be pierced across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the member requires.
And you should administer a small piercing, and in large abscesses, a larger piercing or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses in which the treatment should be incised and opened, when it is done as said before and is performed at a time when it can already heal, such as those that occur with excessive boils and buboes.
And of those which are incised with a three-angled section; and of those in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
But in the case where there is none of the above, such as superficial lion abscesses, you should puncture it with a superficial incision or simply open it up.
And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; after extracting a portion from it, on another day scrape the abscess internally, and then extract a larger portion, and repeat this several times according to its severity.
And especially if the patient is a young man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in poor health, for in such cases the vital spirit quickly resolves through the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you should proceed with this treatment.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you make the incision in which you puncture these abscesses, clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or a flat section; at that time, administer some of them or of oak bark. And if the abscess is large and the fissures of the incision are many, then it is necessary to place wool in each part until they heal.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been severed or you have concaved it around the circumference, then you should fill it with old wood shavings or threads made from linen cloth, as when you have treated bandages or dressings, without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and thereafter proceed to treat it and care for it with what is necessary of ointments until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then give water to wash and prepare some vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the spot where the blood is flowing for several times.
If the flow of blood continues, then you should administer treatment and care according to the powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is on various nerves, then you should mix powders in vinegar and heated oil, and apply those to the affected areas.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should apply powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and do this washing every day for three days as we have said. Then you should lance the abscess, clean it, and administer whatever is appropriate for its treatment until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in which manner the cure of it should be carried out separately by chapters.
Chapter 41.
On the Section of Abscesses That Occur in the Neck of the Head.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses occur, and these are of various types of nodes that contain tunics within them; and the types of their contents vary.
And they are soft, and what they contain is a moisture similar to jelly. Of those among which I contain humidity similar to flour, and resembling them; and of those that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not contradict surgery.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entremes, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a section according to its length by making a superficial section according to this form:
And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then, as the humidity is evacuated, you should excise that skin which contains the humidity, and do not leave any part of it behind, for if any part remains, it may cause trouble later.
And then immerse the piece in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and apply this to the wound and leave it for another day, as this will dissolve everything that remains of that skin.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that piece again for a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining part of that skin; now treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains hard nodules, then you should incise that according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and insert hooks between both lips of the section and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If there is opposition to what I have said about surgery, then at that time do what I have recounted first.
And similarly, treat the mature abscess with regard to its section and cure as we have told you; and the section of a mature abscess is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are abscesses on the head in some people where there is not much moisture; the cause of this is that I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were to strike it, it would injure them.
However, in other abscesses on the head, this is not the case of this chapter; likewise, for abscesses that occur on children's heads and behind the ears, the section of all these should be a superficial incision.
And pause the puncture of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain to the lower parts.
And treat those accordingly as is suitable for that cure.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
These abscesses often occur in the neck and armpits, and sometimes they also appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck often develop between them, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are motes, for only some of them are lithic, and of those only some contain moisture, and of those only the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Then in that one which you find to be well disposed by examination, of which the color of what is manifest is appropriate to the color of the gland, and it is swollen all over, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pressed, so that you incise it at dry superficially from above the part below the body line G. between the line B., and peel it off entirely, and extend two lips of the gland an inch or inches if you need those, as we have said regarding the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is safer not to cut the vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut unnecessarily or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you should cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then pause with a vitriol paste or other powders which promote blood flow, and bandage the wound, and leave that inside where the acuteness of the abscess subsides and the swelling becomes mollified and begins to suppurate. When the blood is absorbed.
Then return to your operation once you have completed it.
And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, so you can incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the region of the scrofula, avoid cutting into that area around the scrofula. And be careful to tie a very firm ligature above it and let the rest of it fall out by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old lint that you have already soaked in Egyptian pepper decoction, and then dress it.
And if you incise the entire scrofula, then make sure to approximate the two edges of the wound and sew them together immediately so that there is no room for any excess fluid.
But if you see that there is excess fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to incise its root, and drain it and administer sutures as mentioned.
And for the scrofulas that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture where it appears to you is the site of maturation, and pause before making further punctures deep into the base of the swelling as we have said.
And then administer punctures, cover them with appropriate applications and similar treatments, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then dress it with a healing flesh-generating poultice until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the pustule of an accidental swelling in the groin.
The ancients call this section in the epitome, and I have not seen any man in our land who has performed that incision.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In men who have a squint, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as by doing this there would be no benefit since all the veins and the main ones of the malady are here.
In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or in both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four for a smaller section along the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood there are few.
And if the surgeon is afraid, it is advisable to stretch out the throat skin by one inch, and then cut the skin until he reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any reason for that.
And then incise the ciphac as we have recommended; and it is significant for the section of the canal by the flap which is from that tissue and by the separation of the voice.
And let the wound be left open for some time.
Thus, when the hour is chosen for which the puncture is feared, add two lips of the wound's edge, and cut through that single layer to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed.
And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recounted is to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the patient's throat, and the patient has come close to death, and the air passage is cut off, and some would incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And by this commandment allow the wound to remain open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; therefore, at that hour command to treat the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and cut into her throat and severed part of the windpipe there. I was called to treat her, and I found the wound as if it were that of a dead person, and uncovered the wound and saw the blood that had come out of the wound in small amounts.
Thus, I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was fully healed.
And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
About the section on abscess which occurs in the groin area, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is large according to the size of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental case happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is fear. And it is not appropriate to attempt treatment with iron except in the case where it is small. And you should be cautious about that and investigate it as described. If you find it similar to fatty knots and it is not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would with knots and extract it using water that contains substances from the peel and bursiclam; if not, thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is appropriate for internal treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
About the section on types of knots.
There are various types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
Here is the translation:
Therefore I say that an abscess is caused by heat and fever and very intense pains until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and it completes putrefaction when at that time the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it resembles that of the lion's paw which is in its proper place.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a pustule and it forms in such a way whether greater or lesser, and they are of two kinds, those that are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are speckled, as I say in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of an abscess, express that and inquire about its beginning, which is called intrusion, as its form will come in the chapter which is near this one.
And this is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this intrusion and insert it in the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers there little by little until you know that the intrusion has already penetrated the tissue.
And then gently remove it according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intrusion and observe what has come out in its wake.
And if the moisture comes out freely, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in regard to other abscesses.
And if from the wake of the intrusion you do not find moisture, then you know that it is fatty.
And draw upon the dried skin in a cross shape according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend that piece and scrape off the fat from all sides with ease, and if possible, keep the skin or sack, and extract the pus from the node.
But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and in such cases, work on it gradually until you can extract it in portions so that none remains for any reason.
For if any of it remains for any reason, whether little or much, the abscess will return accordingly.
And if you see that any part of it remains, then apply the wound with some caustic powders and clean the wound, and place over it something suitable for a poultice, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
And if the abscess is large, then you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is in opposition, then you should cut it and fill the place with green vitriol, letting that remain open for two days or three until the wound becomes clean and the blood ebullition subsides; then return to incising what was torn from the abscess.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for surgery and puncture.
Of those, there are forms of probes, which come in three types: some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small.
The form of inserting is as follows:
The form of small insertion is as follows:
Make sharp, of iron, of steel, with well-sharpened ends, so that it may easily enter the abscess.
And these are the forms of the experienced, and they are named albered, and one of them is called berid.
And there are three kinds, for among them one is large, intermediate, and small.
The form of the large experienced, its shape is as follows:
The form of the intermediate experienced, its shape is as follows:
The form of the small experienced, its shape is as follows:
It is appropriate that they be used for abscesses, excisions, and fistulas and buboes because they enter those that are among the bones and from other causes.
And they make probes, thick, lions, as well as large needles with which saddles are sewn, and they are made of citron wood, or wood, or iron, or silver, and the best are when they are made of citron wood.
And the probes are made of black goose feather, which they agree should be used to probe fistulas in the curvature of which there are reflections, as they are reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
And there are three kinds, for some of them are long, and others intermediate, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of the large lead plate:
Form of the medium lead plate:
Form of the small lead plate:
The forms of the hooks are of two kinds, one of which is of various special types, and four of which are simple ones, to which there is only a single curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And their forms of hooks are of three kinds.
And those among them that have two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And those among them that have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And all these forms are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, its form:
Form of a large hook having two curvatures: Form of a medium hook having two curvatures: Form of a small hook having two curvatures:
Form of an incision having three curves:
Form of a medium-sized incision having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and pared, and they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor are they used in such a manner that there would be fear of incising a vein or nerve during the paring of nodes. This is so that the patient may be healed and find some tranquility due to the adjustment that follows the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
They are made of iron and resemble reeds from which alcohol is made.
And it is on the side with the punctured end where the spoon is hidden, and in that one you can reach both internal and external parts as needed, as you see.
The forms of spatulae, which are hidden among the said fingers for the puncture of abscesses and which I do not perceive by their defects, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these are:
They should be made of fine silk, round with some length, and they should be slender.
And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be large, medium, and small, so that with them you can interrupt the blood flow quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other medicine available.
However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as on the tendons of the hands and feet, and on the tendons of the arms, and on the breasts and abdomen and similar fleshy parts.
And occasionally, some are made of other small instruments similar to fish scales in this form; with which the blood is interrupted when performed for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to those of women.
Some wounds cause the breasts of some men to swell as they begin to heal, and when the breasts are swollen, and when the breasts of women are assembled and rounded, leave them alone.
And for that which you desire to treat, cut it in a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then scrape off all roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-forming medicine, and then sew together the two lips of the wound tightly, and care for it until it is healed.
If the breast inclines to the sides and is soft due to its size, similar to how it might be in women, then cut it into two parts so that each pus can exit separately, in sections resembling a lunar shape, of which each should fit within the other except at their ends, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line .B. and the line .G. And then scrape off the edge between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have mentioned about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then you should fill the wound with cloth submerged in a corrosive liquid and leave it until that corrodes what is hard in the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Piercing of Abscesses that Come from Below the Armpit.
Cut open abscesses that I see deeper with a lancet for the species of scrofula, hard ones, which have a cover that is thick.
And of those only a few contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent section as shown in this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all the fluid that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with thick wool and leave it for another day.
And after the wool is removed and the area is treated with an appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of glands or scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula similarly.
And if the inflammation has spread to where it becomes gangrenous, then administer cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the incision of abscesses that occur due to arterial or venous causes.
When an artery is ruptured and the vein that is above it becomes consolidated, then abscesses may occur. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it tends to aggregate in the upper part of the body; and when you probe the abscess with your fingers, you feel a hissing sound.
And an abscess due to a vein is located closer to the surface of the body.
And to treat an abscess in these areas is a mistake, especially those on the armpits, and at the elbows, and on the neck, and in many places on the body; for it is serious, therefore care should be taken to avoid its treatment with iron, and those that are in the extremities or on the head should be avoided.
For one who is due to it from the inflammation of the artery opening, divide in the longitudinal section lengthwise; and then carefully make the incision with hooks and near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed.
And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and secure the artery with double thread in two places, — which I explain in detail in the extraction of two arteries which are in the thighs.
And then apply to the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood stops there completely, and the abscess dissolves.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess with the proper tools, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie this thread doubly so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligature the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you about the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread's extremities.
If you fear that you will remove the thread, then now insert the needle with some wax below the abscess; should the point of the needle be first inserted, and strengthen the threads at four places.
When the abscess has become dry in its middle part so that what is inside it can come out, then you incise the excess of the skin, and leave what is attached to it.
And then apply to the wound the powder which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, and then administer the treatment made with cords and herbs until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and by analogy.
And it is done with the thread in the areas of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually painful.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it is among the major conditions without fever, and when it is pressed with force, the patient seems to be in a stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated at the front of the body, and therefore it is below the skin, and it hurts all around and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, when it is in the joints, there is no need for it to be treated with iron, as it will likely lead to contraction.
Make a cut in the head or forehead with a spatum (a type of surgical instrument). If it is a small abscess, incise it with forceps and then drain it by scraping.
And if it is large, then suspend drainage with an incision, and excise it; then apply a poultice. And close the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek as it occurs on the abdomen.
Therefore, for some people, there are visible swellings in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called funguses by similarity to mushrooms, whose cause is subtle but the appearance is large; and often the edges of these are smooth, and they can be small or greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one such case where in his abdomen there were two parts that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine texture.
And the edges of those were turned inward and would split open, and moisture would constantly run from them.
Therefore, I incised them and found within one about eighteen ounces and the other about ten ounces.
And the procedure in incising them is that you should consider whether the condition is humid, and if the color of the swelling is white, humid, with a fine texture; then you incise it with a broad spatum, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, because in such cases the incision expels much blood; and if there is bleeding, cauterize that.
And if the wound is small and fearful, guard against cutting with iron; but now take fine lead recently made, and bind it to that part, the method of which we have described; and leave it there for two days.
And attach it to the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop binding more lead as needed until it is separated and falls off on its own.
But if the part to be cut is of thick tissue, now in cutting it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially when it is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you can cut half of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then treat it until the wound is healed.
And be careful that you do not presume to cut a part that is dark in color, has little sensation, and is easily movable, for such a part is often cancerous.
And this will come to mind as a reminder of that advice.
Chapter LII.
On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the abdomen, and for this, a patch or intestine segment is used depending on other ruptures; or it can be due to inflammation from a vein or artery that bleeds, or due to trapped air.
But if it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of a patch, now the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; it is painless, and then appears in various situations. And if it is due to the exit of the bowel, then at that moment the situation of that thing differs greatly from what we have recounted, and when you press that spot with your fingers, it is hidden, and immediately returns; and it is very light there, and it is magnified when you introduce bath water and vigorous labor.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is loose and not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
And if it is due to blood, then at this sign the abscess appears as a declining black color.
And if it is due to flesh without moisture, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it is embedded in proportion to a quantity.
And if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation in this case is that you consider now whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or gas; now be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have discussed abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the membrane, then you should order the patient to take their clothing off and stand extended; then examine around the entire navel with your hand, and then instruct them to lie on their back; then encircle with a splint around the circumference of the navel over the spot where you have marked with your hand; then extend half of the abscess above with about an inch; then tie it around the circumference tightly or loosely in a proper manner.
From the side of the abscess, lift up the membrane spread over the ligament and insert your finger into that pus to seek the sac; and if you have found or secured it by the ligament, then immediately extract it and push the sac to the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the membrane, then grasp it with a probe; and incise the excess tissue around it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong points and insert two needles around the circle you made around the abscess in a cross shape, which should penetrate; and then divide the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off on its own; or incise it when it has become thin and will drain, and then treat the membrane with a lotion appropriate for healing until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh that has become hard or due to moisture, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with a lotion appropriate for healing and consolidating the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
We have already said in the division about the types of wounds and in what manner they should be treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to avoid instruments so that the wound does not become ulcerated; and we have described wounds generated in the first place and the caution in their treatment.
And the ancients say that in some cases it is necessary to remove [the tumor] in a place where its eradication is possible, just as they do with crabs that are in the breasts or armpits and similar parts of the body, especially when they start small.
But when it is old and hard, do not attempt to remove it yourself, for I cannot heal anyone from that nor have I seen another who could achieve this.
And the operation on it should be performed when it is appropriate, as we have said, by proceeding and leaving the patient to purge from black bile for some days, and then lance that [tumor] if there is a clearly evident swelling.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which the procedure is to be performed, and afterward apply the hooked instruments that are needed for it; and then thoroughly clean all around with a good scalpel to ensure proper excision so that no cause remains for the recurrence of that [condition]. And let the blood flow freely, and do not apply bandages too tightly, and press the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among those available to you.
But if it is contrary to have thick blood flowing and you need to stop the bleeding from a vein or artery, then cauterize that point until the flow of blood has stopped, and afterward treat that with another method until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
On the treatment of hydrops (edema or dropsy).
We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops related to water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment of it with medicines.
In the case where iron is used for treatment, it applies only to the type of fracture known as "althitas," and not to approximating with iron in the types of fractures called "timpanistres" or "yposarcha," for that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of hydrops called "timpanistres" with medicines and do not feel confident in your treatment, consider whether the patient has become weakened or suffers from another illness similar to this hydrops, as if they were suffering from coughs or conditions affecting the chest or belly and similar to those, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
But if you see the patient with abundant vigor and there is no other illness except this hydrops alone, and neither child nor elderly person, then the method of the operation for them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and the assistant presses the abdomen of the patient with their hand, expelling the water from below the ribcage, and then take a sharp spoon in this way:
it should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp tip like a spoon; however, there should be some gradual narrowing little by little, so that in the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thereby harm the patient.
And then consider whether the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for if it is, you should distance yourself from the navel by three fingers' width at the lower parts, on the right side above the ribcage.
But if the origin of the hydrops is from a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers' width.
And if the generation of it is from the gallbladder, then let your incision be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient lies, so that the superfluities do not run to that place by reason of the pressure.
And then pierce completely with the instrument the gallbladder, and then insert into that incision, and raise your hand between the gallbladder and the sphincter, and you shall extract it; and if its quantity is one ounce or thereabouts.
And then pierce the sphincter so that the pus reaches the empty place, which is the site of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument whose form is as follows: and it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's leather, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is cut like the tip of a feather, as you see.
And at the upper end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately the patient should sit upon the instrument, thus evacuating an appropriate amount of water in that moment, for if you evacuate too much beyond what is necessary within an hour, the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it will hasten death which is near.
But evacuate that according to the quantity of the strength of the patient and according to how their condition, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health indicate to you.
Here is the translation:
Then leave the instrument in for another day if the patient tolerates it well, and extract a small amount of water from it, and use this water for several days out of fear, and guard yourself against error so that you do not remove too much water but only a little.
If you fear for the patient and release a large amount of water, now bury him in fine sand, pour sweat-inducing substances over him, and let him lie in the sun for a long time; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the chest and abdomen after the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what preceded.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their urethra not pierced (or it is blocked or not in its place).
Therefore, you should perform the piercing as soon as the child is born using a fine instrument according to this form:
And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and leave it there for three days or four.
And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterward.
And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over that area will not remove this obstruction.
Let him whose wound is narrow be treated with a lead nail as we have said, for so many days until it is enlarged.
Let those in whom the wound is not in its proper place be treated as mentioned, the cause of which is that one who is born with the urethra below the tip of the penis cannot urinate normally because he must raise his penis upwards; and it is not for sexual activity, so the semen cannot reach the larger second passage correctly, and this is a serious condition.
And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you grasp the tip of the penis with your left hand firmly, and incise the head of the penis in the location of the urethra with a sharp knife, like an incision for plucking feathers, or shave some part without cutting, so that the middle of the urethra resembles the tip of the penis and that the wound falls in its proper place as required.
And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as this often happens; and pause at the point where you need to stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the inflammation that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
This inflammation often occurs in the penis and is characterized by a prominent swelling of the flesh.
And one of these conditions is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For benign cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle medicine and excise that which contains all the tumors; then apply to that part a poultice made with Egyptian onion; afterwards treat it with decoctions until it is healed.
And if it is malignant and of a dark color, now you should administer cauterization around the incision of it and the ratio of it.
But if the tumor is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the tumor is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, now you should excise the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat them together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be injured.
And if similar conditions occur in the genitals and on the foreskin, such as discoloration and corruption, then you should excise everything that is discolored or will likely become corrupted; then apply a bandage over it using honey, which has been mixed with ground fennel seeds and finely crushed wheat bran.
And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, now administer lunar cauterization according to this method:
because cauterization is beneficial in two situations together: for bleeding and for a wound when it becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, now you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and on whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to a plague or abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the ligament dissolves and the head of the penis is released entirely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, now you must scrape with the spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a very thin thread, which has already been moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat with styptic juice so that it becomes firm.
Chapter LVIΙ.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs due to circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution that causes continuity as other plagues do: but since it is part of our procedure and our will, and since it properly affects children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the most gentle way to ensure their well-being.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use circumcision and purification with a razor and scissors; and they use ligatures made of silk and incision with the fingernail.
This is how I have described all these methods and did not find a better modification with scissors, thread, or needle in the modification with the nail, because most times you avoid cutting above it, because the foreskin has two layers, and remove the layer below first, and further incision and certain pain are necessary. And in the modification which is done with a scalpel, which surgeons use, there is no guarantee of incision at the extremity of the male member, because it easily enters into the groove.
But in the operation with the nail, be careful not to press too hard and corrupt your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen that.
But regarding the modification that is done with scissors and thread with a needle, the goodness of this method was revealed to me through experience. The scissors are proportionally suitable for incision because the sharpness above is as precise as the sharpness below; thus, when you press your hand in accordance with these two sharp points simultaneously and make an incision accordingly at once, it ensures that the needle compresses the thread into a shape that fits the foreskin all around without error.
And the method of the first operation is that you should position the child, especially if it is a small one, so that you only tie the thread around his penis and leave it for another day.
And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him regarding what he can understand. Let him stand between you so that he is well prepared, and let there not be any jesting then; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them behind, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
Then put your hand on his chin and blow into the ear, and pull that in until the tip of the forceps comes out, and then clean it of what adheres to it from dirt.
The shape of the scissors for cleaning is as follows:
Let one set of blades be unsharpened and the other sharpened, so that the tip of the joint does not come out, and let the length of both blade tips be equal to the length of two finger joints.
But the mistake in cleaning is that you might gently avoid the inner ear too much, or you may leave the incision uncovered.
Therefore, you should apply that from your hour [time] with your finger in front of the swelling of the area and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, now extract it with a lancet and incise it.
And if three days have passed and the inflammation remains below the testicle after an abscess has formed, now you should lay open what is inside until the abscess discharges, and cleanse that which is infected, and incise it as soon as you are prepared.
And be careful of the head of the testicle, for it should not suffer from this.
And therefore, treat that wound with the plasters which we have recommended in the chapter on plasters.
And if it is incised too much from the tendon, and you follow the instructions given above, this will not harm it.
And also treat that wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned and the cause of the illness is severe, then you should administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a quill pen, about the subtlety of a ray one palm and a half long, to which there should be a fine tube at its end.
And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a strip of wax and tie it at the end of the thread or cotton with a good knot; and insert the ends of the wax into the lower part of the siringua, and cut off any superfluous parts of the thread with scissors. Then insert the siringua gently but firmly into the tube and bring it up near the patient’s body.
And treat the illness by placing a poultice on the bladder, and insert the urethra with olive oil and rose water.
And then insert the siringua gently until it reaches the entrance of the urethra; and then bend the urethra above the part where it is swollen; and then push the siringua into that; and then push that until it reaches the bladder, so that the treatment reaches the empty cause. And if this is not done in this order, but rather through a path that is tortuous.
And then slowly pull out the wax with the thread little by little, as the urine will soak the thread.
Here is the translation:
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enema administration to the bladder with an enema bag and similar instruments, which should be appropriate for this purpose.
When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or a constricted fistula, and you wish to instill liquids and medicines into it, then an instrument called a clampcedra should be used, and this is its form:
but at the end of it is blunt, that is where it is closed. And at that same place, there are three parts: two from one side, similarly on the other side.
At the beginning, it is concave, where what is to be inserted should fit according to its quantity without addition, until when some cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this water it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled far, as a clampcedra has naphtha applied in naval battles.
When you wish to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is inserted in the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
Then insert the end of the clampcedra into the tube as we have recommended in the previous section; then you should instill moisture with water that you are inserting, for this moisture will reach the bladder immediately, and it will alleviate its condition.
The form of the enema that is used to administer treatment to the bladder is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or of lead, the head of which is like a small feather, and below let there be a hollow for holding lint.
And take a bladder of an animal, and put in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the tube.
And then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity until it reaches the appropriate consistency, so that the patient feels that the humidity has now reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not available, now take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes, both ways; and then add the circle as it would be added in such cases, so that you put into it what you want of humidities, oils, and waters.
And then tie that to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of Stones.
We have already stated in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of each.
And we have described the stone in which the operation is performed and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And this short narration clearly and briefly explains it.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is discharged from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, but contains sand; and the patient scratches his penis frequently, and has frequent urges to urinate, and soon afterwards it is raised; and with these words you have been forewarned.
And it is easy to treat children with that condition until they have reached fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older patients. But in young people it is moderate compared to those cases.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment is longer; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, to reach the treatment of that condition, it is necessary at the beginning to clean the patient with a catheter which extracts all the passage that is in their bladder; for that passage sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation.
And then have the patient lie on their back and apply pressure and massage to help the stone descend to the neck of the bladder or jump to another location.
And then prepare a mustard plaster between the thighs, and place it on the affected area, so that the bladder is inclined towards the side where it is placed.
And there I inquired about that and all of that beyond.
So if you feel the stone in the space, now you must cut it out immediately.
And if you do not catch it right away with your touch, now it is necessary for you to anoint your index finger of the left hand, if female, or the middle finger if male, with oil, and insert it into their anus. And inquire about the stone until you feel it with your finger. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your finger, and expel it outward towards the place where the section was made.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs outward with one hand, and with the other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, at the place where the section is made.
And then insert a probe of this shape into it: and cut in it what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but to the left side; and let the section be over that stone and your finger be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much you need to extract the stone as much as possible, but not more, because your finger easily compresses the stone beyond the incision when it is expelled without difficulty.
And know that there are some stones which have angles and margins, because of which it is difficult to pass them.
And one of them resembles a lion's tooth in shape, it is round, and it passes easily.
Then adjust that which has angles and margins into the fissure.
And if it is not inserted properly, now consider placing something over it, or attach something to it gently, the end of which should be like a file with which you can work on the stone without avoiding it; or insert an delicate curved instrument between them.
But if you cannot do that, now enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, staunch it with iron filings dissolved in vitriol.
But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise around it; and then press slightly near there; and similarly do so if they are in greater numbers.
And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance to incise it in a large section, because this will cause one of two harmful consequences: either death or that it leads to continuous dripping of urine, because the area does not heal completely.
But administer expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a fracture with forceps so that you can extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with aloe fibers and dragon's blood, and staunch it. And place it on that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixture, so that the abscess may soften.
And apply the poultice to the affected area on the side of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, then apply a poultice of camphor and clove ointment until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the wound that is adhesively corroded and resembles something like blood congealed in a bladder, and because of this urine is blocked (and this is known by the mixing of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and with whatever spices are appropriate, using what is convenient for healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you should keep both the dressings and adjust the medicines that are placed on the wound.
And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and it is lodged there, and urination is blocked, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, for those treated by this method are often accused of undergoing section; and indeed, I suggest this, which is that you take a blunt metal probe, whose shape is as follows:
with a triangular tip, sharp, fitted to a handle.
Take some wax, and tie it to the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the needle into the thread, piercing with ease until it reaches the stone. And rotate the needle with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will pierce it so that one end can penetrate as the other enters; for the urine is quickly absorbed.
And then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the side before the thread, for that part is broken and released into the urine, and thus the ailment is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then tie a wax piece below the stone and another above the stone. And then cut into the stone on that thread between the two ties. And then extract it. And then untie the bandage and clean the collected blood, which was caused by the condition.
And it is not necessary to tie wax below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above unless, because when the wax near the swelling of the stone is untied, the wound will return to its place and the condition will recur.
And for this reason, it is necessary for you to raise the wound above the parts when you tie the wax above, or return the effort, and the condition will recur as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman is too weak.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is willing to clearly describe whether she has told the physician when she was chaste, or if she is one of those women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation without a man.
And the fourth is that the location for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, thus requiring a distant incision, which is dangerous.
However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to find a competent female assistant, but few are found.
However, if you lack such an assistant, then seek a man who is cautious and subtle, or present a midwife who is skilled in the matters of women, or a woman who is well-versed in this art.
Therefore, present that person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to ensure that the woman is modest, so they should place their finger in her back passage to feel for the stone.
Then if you find that one, cut that below the joint, and now order them to incise upon that.
But if it is not soft, now order the midwife to insert the joint into the patient’s vagina and inquire about the stone, for she should place her left hand on the bladder, and compress that with good pressure.
Then if you find that, now proceed to gradually extract that from the bladder’s orifice towards the parts below as far as the top of its strength until it reaches the root of the matter.
And then incise upon that position at the midpoint of the vagina where the root of the matter is, and place the stone in that part, and ensure that the said joint is not separated from the stone when cutting below it.
And let the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the section according to the quantity you know the stone will pass through.
And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and round, and have ridges.
Then you should know the types of stones as you signify regarding what you wish to convey.
And if you wish for blood to flow, apply crushed vitriol to that area for one hour until the blood is drawn, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And make sure you prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that they may assist you in your operation.
And if you see bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that was cut, then you sprinkle powder on the wound and bind it with bandages and compression, and do not repeat this; and leave the clot and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die quickly. And then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days, and the area has become pale, then you return to your operation until the clot is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
About the section on hernia surgery.
A hernia that protrudes moist tissue is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the tendon of the groin muscles, which is called a sac.
And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer that nature has prepared near the groin, such that one can see that it is not another tendon; and the tendon of the groin muscle lies between the white membrane we have mentioned, and this is how it appears.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin muscles.
And this moisture can have various colors, as its color may lean toward yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and thick, or be watery and white, and these are the most common types.
And the signs by which you can determine where this accumulation of water is as follows: if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, then the swelling will be round, slightly elongated like a fig shape, and the tendon of the groin will appear, since the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the inflammation is in the proper parotid gland, then at that time the swelling appears round and is part of the jaw, and for this reason it is considered to be another jaw.
And if the inflammation is between the tendon of the thigh and the white hip bone, then at that time it is below the navel.
And when you want to know the color of the inflammation, then you should observe the color of the inflammation in the swelling at its beginning stage; and according to what is seen in the traces of the intermediate stage, judge about what is inside it.
When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and times the body of the swelling.
And let him be laid flat on his back on some raised surface, and place under the swelling some padding.
And you should stand on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his hand from one of the two sides to the tendon of the thigh and to the part near the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and cut the tendon of the thigh at a suitable place along its length near the insertion.
And let the incision be made according to the right distance from the line that you should follow on the skin of the thigh, so that it reaches the white hip bone, including.
And dissect that area, and observe carefully so that you do not incise it incorrectly; and your dissection should be such that you proceed gently according to the quantity possible, examining the dissection carefully.
Then pierce the bladder with a wide incision and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the chain that holds the genitalia together, and incise the bladder in such a way as is possible for you. Then divide it entirely or into pieces, especially the thin lining, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
But if the patient undergoes this procedure outside of the chain that holds the genitalia together during your operation, when you have completed the sectioning of the bladder, return inside, and then adjust the two lips of the chain of the genitalia with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the patient afflicted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels that are above the suspensory, remove the organ, and then treat it as we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other similarly; and if it is clear to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
Then cleanse the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or refined oil; place over that another layer of wool which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and spread this over the genitalia and the abdomen; then cover with folded cloths and powders, and bind these with a bandage as follows:
Take two cloths and fill them with carded wool according to this pattern; make the edges such that cotton or wet wool is pressed on them, and attach them to the structure at the bottom of the breeches, one edge taken from the buttocks into the second, and the second taken to the part of the pantanel, and two edges above two thighs and two other edges above two flanks, and all of the structure should be adjusted to the waistband of the breeches.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with iron; you take a thin knife-shaped cautery and incise along the ridge of the groin, and it is ignited as we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the fluid becomes visible, and then you take a cautery in this shape: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce with that cautery, and it is ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the cautery with hooks, and excise with the hooks, and cauterize with a thin ignited cautery; and incise as much as is possible for you until all of it is eradicated; and be careful that your hand does not touch the fire.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting in terms of blood flow, and better than an operation involving cutting.
But if any adverse condition such as an abscess occurs during the time of cutting or during cautery, or if there is excessive bleeding, then you should treat whatever adverse condition affects you accordingly, with treatment appropriate to it as mentioned.
If the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation because of its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend; and this is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
Now you should have the patient sit on some raised cushion, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, and make the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough so that all the water can flow out.
And then apply pressure on the spot and ligate it there, so that the rest of the water can come out. And then take care of it until the illness is healed.
But if there is resistance to the escape of the water at that time, you should puncture it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the opening of the hernia resists and prevents the exit of the water. Now you should place in the hernia a probe or instrument with which the water from hydrothorax is extracted, as previously described; or apply pressure to the hernia with something small.
And know that the water will return, and it should be punctured again after about six months or so; and when it accumulates, then it should be punctured in the same manner, for the patient will thus spend his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the treatment of a fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of death in the worse dispositions; therefore, it seems to me better to leave it and be saved by that.
And I am recalling the operation on that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those bodies where the kidneys are improperly arranged and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute and sharp excess which is discharged into the kidneys, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not alleviated by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And quickly it becomes a stone-like abscess, the color of which is dark, and there is no remedy for it.
And sometimes it is caused by the knotting of arteries, and by the swelling of those as has already been perceived in the recall of it, or by the swelling of veins.
But what is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers in that area; and it does not need to be touched.
But that which is caused by the swelling of a vein does not disperse because of any cause even with pressure from the fingers.
And it is possible to perform a section over this type and on other parts; cut the skin over the kidneys, and nearby stretch the area above the incision, extract the white fat, free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and then cut the suspensory ligaments after freeing them entirely from all sides.
Therefore, if the wound has already healed in those parts that are consolidated, now you should extract the foreign body and incise that area.
And if there is adhesion between any part of the cavity or between what is between the vessels, now you should release all that adhesion and incise that area with a round incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, now you should incise all that is there, and extract the foreign body as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and subsequently treat that wound with the other methods until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that involve the belly.
Vit is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering similar to the membrane around the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult due to the affliction.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is out of fear of what precedes and what might follow that one must be cautious.
However, the operation should be performed as was done in the first instance.
And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised chair; then apply pressure to the suspensory ligaments of the testicles from below; and then grasp the groin muscles with your hands, along with the vessels that you feel near the penis; and have another assistant do this while you extend them forcefully.
And in this way make an incision about one finger's width across the straight line between the vessels so that the vessels are exposed.
And carefully remove it completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which are usually found in the tissues.
And place a needle with double fine thread in it, and tie one end at the first location where you will act, and tie the other end at the last of those locations. And then make an incision in the middle of that area with a straight cut along the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound as you would any other wounds where you want healing to occur, because it is not harmful for one of two vessels to be ligated if they are causing issues.
But if you need to act on all the vessels, then it is necessary either to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be affected by this, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and become atrophied, or for them to be treated in such a way that they do not receive any benefit from this.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the cleft extended over the abdomen near the edges of the abdominal wall, so that parts of the bowels protrude through that rupture.
And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of dislocation of the joint, and it happens in these two species for various causes: by blow, by jump, by shout, by lifting some heavy thing, by similar circumstances.
And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the ciphac, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it forms an abscess equal within as between the flesh because the ciphac compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is by section of the ciphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it forms an abscess different in appearance from the usual one near the joint, and this is because of the displacement of the bowel, and the mass of it is towards the parts outside the ciphac.
And sometimes the membrane is pushed out with the bowel, and this type of hernia is called intestinal zirbal.
And sometimes it is due to gas, and sometimes the bowel enters through a fissure and remains there, causing great pain to the patient, and at times it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the types of this illness with iron there is fear, for it must be avoided that any contact with that occurs.
And the method of the operation for this condition is that you instruct the patient to push back the bowel with his hand to the parts inside his abdomen if it obeys its return, and then place him lying on his back between your hands, and lift the affected area.
And then join the wound where you cut the scrotum above the testicles, and incise the scrotum completely along its length; and then insert hooks into both sides of the section as it seems necessary to open the section with them.
And if you make the section according to the amount that it is possible for that part to heal from.
And then remove the reddish skin that covers the scrotum until the white hard skin of each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger into the cut around the testicle, between the white skin that covers the scrotum and the underlying skin, and release any adhesions that are behind the testicle.
And then pull apart the wound of the scrotum towards the sides, and with this stretch the white skin upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the skin to the area of the incision; and instruct an assistant to raise it above while you dissolve any adhesions behind completely.
And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for the bowel being wrapped in the white hard skin. But if you find any cause for concern, then place that back into the abdomen.
And then cut into the part below the scrotum in such a way that blood and pus flow out as we have recommended regarding what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it there; and tie on the ligature that we have recommended (and sometimes the white thread is cauterized, as mentioned regarding the cutting to prevent blood flow, for this happens at times) and leave the ligature on so that it does not fall off.
But if the operation is delayed, then hot water should be applied, and place it on that so that it does not fall off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventous Hernia.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
And the earlier ones said that it should be treated as we have recommended for the hernia involving a vessel; which is to ligate the vessels near the section with ease; and then dry up in the appropriate place around the abscess caused by this, until the vessels fall off.
Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said, it enters that it be healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the incision that is made in the hemorrhoids.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the hemorrhoids as we have said, and examine the area.
And they do not assign to the genitals any cause for the bags on the genitals; and if they do assign one, it is rare; and it returns to this in all cases.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there is an adjusted fissure in the rectum through which the bag descends into the rectum; and it happens that because of the extension of the rectum, which is near the hemorrhoids as we have said, the cause being that the rectum is stretched and thus becomes soft and swollen, and it needs to be examined.
And the treatment for this is with cautery as has been described in the preceding narrative.
And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between two chairs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by cutting across its width as needed.
And then stretch the white rectum below the cord until it is revealed.
And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent area of the rectum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then sew the two prominent points on the edges of the rectum together with stitches.
From this extract the extremity of the vein should be tied off, and you should not incise the circumference completely, nor extend the opening, nor any other such cause as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And in the treatment of this condition with the treatment of wounds, when you incise the abscesses, clean that area and restore the wound until it is healed; for the circumference is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is best in this place, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Then it is necessary for the one who treats this condition to have the patient lie according to his side, and incise the entire cord that is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with suturing.
And if you wish, remove the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and with a firm suture.
And then incise between the sutures; and afterward treat as you would for other wounds until it is healed and the abscesses subside.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but it is read to me that I must remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, one of which is so that when asked about it, the physician may know how to cure those who suffer from it; and the other way is that we have sometimes a need for castration in other animals for our use by them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by excision or by cutting and division.
But in the one that is performed by excision, the method of the operation is that we should bathe the animal in warm water until the testicles become soft and relaxed and hang down. And then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are softened and do not appear to be hurt by the touch.
But in castration performed by cutting and division, make sure you hold the animal and press the root of the testicles with your left hand.
And then grasp the spermatic cords, and make an incision on each side so that two halves are separated.
And then cut those parts after you have peeled each one away. And do not leave any cause for infection on those parts, but make the incision subtle so that it is above the veins.
And this method of castration, which is performed by excision, is better because it leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
Here is the translation:
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodozia in men is recognized in two ways: the first occurs when there appears a space between the testicles where female characteristics are present, such as hair in that area.
And sometimes in those cases, urine is discharged from the area between the testicles.
In women, it is recognized in this way: the part of the woman above the pubis appears as if there are two testicles of a man slightly below and forward, like the scrotum of a man, containing two testicles.
The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. It is necessary that you incise the tightened flesh to allow the discharge of the harmful substance, and then treat it as you would other illnesses.
And in the second kind for men, where urine is discharged from the area between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for it.
Chapter XXI.
On cutting and raising flesh due to causes in women.
Cutting should be done lightly according to natural causes, ensuring it is done carefully and with proper regard; sometimes in women, it may need to be more extensive, like in men, so that it does not interfere during intercourse.
Then you should hold the excess flesh with your hand or with forceps and cut it.
In making an incision, especially at the root of the nail, so that there is no flow of blood.
And for the treatment of those wounds until they are healed.
Malignant flesh is the flesh that arises from the corruption within the mother before it fills out those parts outside according to the appearance of hair (and for this reason some first called this "tail disease"); therefore we should incise it just as we would incise a tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Ingrown Toenails.
Ingrown toenail is when the nail of the woman has not pierced through, or the passage is too small. And it is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to a disease that has preceded it, and that condition is caused either by flesh that is not properly fitted or by thin or thick skin.
And it occurs either at the root of the uterus, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and it prohibits menstruation and conception and pregnancy, and rather lightly also menstrual periods.
And the diagnosis of that condition is made by palpation with a speculum, if the obstruction is apparent; but if it is not apparent, then seek it using your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is due to thin tissue and is located between the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that obstruction.
And you should apply plasters to both lips, and also place the fingers of both hands on them.
And the woman should lie on her back, with her thighs spread apart, and then stretch both lips forcefully until that subtle suture is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and apply that to the area, and keep a man there for three days so that the cut site does not become consolidated.
But if the suture is thick and dense, now it is necessary for you to cut that with a lancet or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, now suspend that for one inch, and then incise it.
And with you are the medicines that stop blood flow without bleeding, such as hystaceae, dragon's blood, and oak galls, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not consolidate too quickly.
And keep that for several days and administer dry lint.
And then treat it with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the major formation of other tissues, and now it is necessary to incise according to this method. But if this is due to a chronic abscess, then with the chronic abscess that is in the main part, do not cause any opposition or hindrance with iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tumors that occur in the female genital area.
Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the veins inside the anus, from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form thrombi.
And now I have described the types of these conditions and their symptoms, and I will also describe which of them can be treated and which cannot be treated.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and thrombi that occur internally and do not appear to the senses should not be treated with instruments.
But those that occur at the opening of the anus and which can be felt by touch are those that can be treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a comfortable position and then grasp those hemorrhoids with forceps or rough cloth, and cut them with scissors.
And then powder should be applied to stop the bleeding from one of the hemostatic powders that do not cause irritation, such as acacia and similar substances.
And then press the area with cold compresses for one hour, and afterwards apply it to cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then have the patient sit in a decoction of sumac and lemon rinds and pomegranate peels and similar substances.
And then take flour of barley and apply it with honey and sour grape juice to make a plaster on the affected area.
And if the blood is clotting, that is good; and otherwise, bring together both wound edges, and on the nipples make incisions.
And then take lint and apply it with the juice of cilantro or the juice of coriander or the juice of hyssop mixed with wine to that area, and make it adhere to the place; and afterwards treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the piercing of the uterus in accidental injury to the abdomen.
Various types of abscesses occur in the abdomen, such as boil, stone abscess, ulcerous abscess, matted abscess, scrotal abscess, hemorrhoids, and fistulas, and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the types of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in detail.
And when I say in this treatise about abscesses that occur in the abdomen, it is regarding those abscesses that can be treated successfully, and if you want to know how the procedure is performed using tools.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it appears red and feels hot to the touch, then do not proceed with perforation, and treat it with what helps in maturation until the severity of the symptoms subsides.
During the operation, place the woman on a chair that has two arms; and recline her on her side and arrange her legs at the part below the stomach, and spread out her thighs, and let her hands rest above her knees, and bind some of it with bandages as is appropriate.
And then the midwife should follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is prepared, the form of which will be described in the relevant cases that will follow.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the line of the opening of the birth canal of the woman, and what is inserted into the birth canal from the instrument should not exceed the length of the opening itself, and guide it carefully. If the instrument is longer than the opening of the birth canal, then place cushions over the tissue of the birth canal's opening to prevent any instrument from being inserted beyond that length.
And it is necessary to place the spiral that runs along the instrument on the lower side and for the practitioner to hold the instrument and rotate the spiral so that the opening of the birth canal is prepared.
And when the protrusion appears and is touched with the hand and is loose and moist, then it is necessary to dry that part with a dry cloth.
And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary to place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and place the poultice in the area around the opening of the birth canal.
Place the dressing over the wound and apply a clean wool cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated appropriately for two days until the moment comes when it is convenient to do so, until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the swelling are washed with this so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which rue or wormwood has been boiled, and then returned to treatment.
And if the swelling is deep in the wounded area, it is now necessary to prohibit treatment with iron, instead treating it as we have described in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to properly treat pregnancies when there is an abnormal condition as shown in the figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman strain at her lower parts and desire to smell the air, and she is illuminated by what is above her for childbirth, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the delivery over her head, and the second one either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the fetus descends gently, for when it descends over its head, then the second one will descend, and they should be cleaned of those superfluities with proper cleansing.
He who lies in another position is unnatural and unsuitable, for when the patient is placed on his back, his head is positioned in front of him and his feet behind, or one hand or foot is placed under his head or pelvis, and he is easily converted onto his side, but this resembles the unsuitable positions.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all such matters, and to guard against error and deception.
And showing all the figures of those things, and which organ is in those according to what it signifies by that and stands upon that.
When the seed is placed on its side due to natural inclination, and it is vigorous in the woman but difficult at the part, and sometimes the virtue of it has already been weakened, then use that practice, or let women have it, and evaporate the essence with fenugreek juice and aromatic oils.
And then the midwife should insert her little finger and split it with the second one, or dry it with her fingernail until the moisture within it runs out. And press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with meal of feathers and meal of fenugreek mixed together.
And then command him, after the cleansing, to be sneezed upon with certain conditions; and at his mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will be expelled shortly.
And if both hands of the patient are tied up at the beginning, then you should gradually bring them to ease little by little. If you do not obey the instrument, then make the woman lie on a cushion and lift her off it, and then lower the cushion to the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall from this lowering.
And if the hands are not turned inside and remain tied, then cut them and extract the remains of the patient or tie the body with a cloth and extract it in such a way that it is completely removed.
When the patient is on their legs, then you should push them upward, and subsequently turn the patient slightly, and then even out that position, and then take hold of one part and extend it little by little.
But when it is removed into the things inside, then you command him to expel it, and make that person sneeze as needed, for it will be completely removed if God wills it.
And if it is not completely removed as we have recommended, then you return the patient little by little until you place them in their natural position again, for it will be completely removed at that point.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hart's flesh and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply it to the woman's vagina, at the base of her abdomen. And if you find that the hair is in white water, proceed until you reach the hypochondria.
And when the upper parts above it are inflamed, then apply a fumigation of myrtle and let that be applied to it. And when the sub-fumigation has been applied for an hour, then place it on a cushion, and afterwards let her sniff something to make her sneeze and open her mouth wide, and remove that, and press the part below the belly lightly, because the stool will soon be expelled.
Have her hold her breath while straining latitudinally with one of her muscles. Here is the translation:
And if it cannot be removed, then at this time place it on the linen, and crush the substances with strong pounding, and afterwards apply dressings which I have recommended made of mucilages.
And if childbirth has come, then place the child in that position, and afterwards study the reduction of the hand, and align the delivery according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to push so that it is expelled.
Lift the delivery upon the back expanded with its thighs and wrap the bandage around it, two below the larger part. Let the midwife hold the hand of the delivery and then gradually turn that child little by little, so that it becomes easier.
And when it is in place and properly aligned, then pause on the part where we have recommended applying oil and mucilages.
And then command her to bear down little by little, and when you have done this, place the child on a cloth and instruct her to lean on her right side, and then command her to push; and make her sneeze under certain conditions. The delivery of the fetus prepared on the side.
When you lift the larger part according to this method, consider it, and then you incise the second part with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the delivery is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that part of the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
Here is the translation:
Outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born at once, but some women give birth to three or four, though this is rare and difficult; however, such occurrences are due to nature, not the mother's condition.
And among those, whether they are few or many, there is a second separation by the navel string, distinguishing them entirely along the ligament at the umbilicus of each. And some women give birth to them as one fetus would be born naturally quickly, while others give birth to them separately in an undesirable manner, as we have recounted.
And if some of them make childbirth difficult and they reach the state we have described regarding unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she should for ease and skillfulness, whether it be promptly or gradually, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared by the birth-giver to ensure health.
Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Some women are pregnant with one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten fetuses, and it has been verified that a woman may miscarry six, while another carries all of them to term, the cause of which has been determined by careful measurement of the wise scholars.
And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is important to recognize the similarities and differences in such cases, and thus she can act accordingly as needed.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you are treating a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it does not come out by itself, and you must then use an operation, at this time it is necessary to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not subject to any of those accidents for which her loss is feared.
At this time the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
And the minister should hold her by both hands or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oils and honey, and with mucus made from henna, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucus, and then insert it gently into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the hooks are in the fetus.
And these are the appropriate places: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned so that it will descend with its head down, and at this time you place the hooks in its hands, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or in its clavicle, or in the proper parts of its sides, or under its armpits.
But if the descent is with its feet down, then in the navel or in the middle of its back.
Take the needle with the right hand and place its curve at that point which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert it easily into one of those places we have mentioned until it reaches the diseased area.
And place and fix it in such a position that another needle, or a third if necessary, can be inserted equally without stretching the straightness of the tissue.
And let it be fixed in all parts so that the extraction of it may be eased as is done with the removal of teeth.
And it is necessary in that place where the stretching should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of those places with oil and insert them carefully and rotate what is retained.
Therefore, if a part of the fetus is delivered, then the needles should be moved to a place that is further along; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
But if the hand comes out before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of the tissue, then wrap a cloth around that one; and afterwards extract it until all of it is delivered, and cut it off either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is contraction during delivery, or if it is in the tight water bag, then insert between the fingers and cut open the head to extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," the form of which will be among the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And it should be done as if it were a large root by nature: and now it is necessary either to cut that which is bound up or to take away that which has grown, as we have said; and then extract them from the bones with the forceps.
And if the root is twisted and compressed by the furcula, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the tissues may be released.
But if it is not complicated and does not twist, then you should cut the root as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is in a state of edema, then it is necessary for you to puncture that which contains the moisture that is there.
But if the growth is on the upper teeth, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is also slight.
But if it is compressed by the abdomen and the tissues, then it is necessary for you to extract that which you have wrapped in a cloth with your hand, and to cut open the abdomen and the tissues so that the fluid that is there may run out.
But if the other parts remain still and only the root returns, then place your left hand between them; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert your hand into the pelvis, and search for the root, and pull it along with the others into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull it along with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is compressed by an abscess that occurs on it, then it should not be troubled further; instead, it is necessary to administer moist and fatty applications. Administer plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the condition is on their side, then immediately if possible puncture it; and administer the liquid that we have mentioned in the case of a live abscess.
And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
And make sure that you do not leave any cause for a second occurrence.
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have mentioned for the treatment of abscesses that are similar to those just discussed.
And if there is bleeding, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and above the other focus the fetus was also dead. It happened to someone who had an abscess near their navel for a long time; it became internally filled with pus, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the condition did not heal.
Then I applied to them several causes of strong attraction in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
And then I thought that they were bones from the dead fetus.
Therefore, when treating the wound, remove the bones that are present in its depths and which have already been exposed for some time, and correct it with a little force.
And do not be surprised if it seems strange, for in this lies the science and assistance to what the surgeon uses his hand to administer in treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of a spiral in which the main one is used:
This is the form of a stretcher on which the leaves are equalized, to this equalization there are two spirals at the two extremities of two rods. However, this spiral should be finer than the others, and it should be made of wire or the wood of trees.
And the width of each rod should be two fingers, and the margin on each side should be one finger, and the length of each is half a palm plus a bit more; and in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments made of that same wood which are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the main one so that it can be opened by them when you revolve the two prescribed spirals.
Another similar form that is finer and lighter:
It should be made of wire or wood similar to that of forceps. However, at the extremity of the bone to which the addition is made as many times, and the length of each of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two of the aforementioned.
And when you want to open one of those, then you should cut the woman on the bed with her feet hanging down, because that is what is between the parts. And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with scissors equally according to the quantity that you want of the size of the mouth of the membrane until the metron (measuring tool) does what you want.
The form of whirlpool which the ancients described:
Form of that which propels, with which the deed is propelled:
Form of association in which the great head is contained
And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity as many times, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, as many times, with teeth like comb teeth in which is cut and contained. Form of association for few:
Form of one having a spine:
Form of one having two spines:
Form of a spatum having two extremities in which the head is divided:
Shape of two flat spatulas:
With those instruments such exercises are performed, and when the various types of them have been multiplied and prepared, the artisans should do so more quickly for their operation and accordingly provide them for people according to their quantity.
And you should not work with those instruments whatever they may be without preparing them, for the necessity of those is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the second [incisor].
When the second [tooth] is retained during childbirth, you should command the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out this way, it is good.
And if not, then take a cloth and pierce it with a hole, and place it over the mouth of the mother along with herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla, Arabic saffron, cinnamon, and sage. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity inside the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second [tooth] will be quickly expelled.
But if this treatment is delayed and it does not come out, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or masticated almonds, and then insert it into the woman's vagina and search for the second [tooth] with it. When you find it, take it out little by little. If it is attached to the mother’s flesh, then proceed as we have recommended, and when you find the second [tooth], extract it gradually so that the mother does not suffer from excessive pulling. Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to overexert in repetitive attempts at evacuation. Instead, ensure that what has been discharged from inside reaches the mouth of the mother and then apply to the woman a combination of enema and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to solidify within her for several days and then it will dissolve and be expelled.
But when it solidifies, it rises to the head and to the stomach, causing illness; then it is necessary to administer appropriate fumigations and treatments suitable for this condition.
But some of the Ancients already recommended fumigation with nard and dried figs.
Form of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated due to the retention of menstruation and for her recovery:
It should be made of wood or ivory.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
And keep it inside until the fumigation is consumed and repeat it with another one.
On the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which must be carefully and skillfully opened. Then it should be the midwife's task to puncture that said closure with her finger; and if not, she must do so using a sharp probe, taking care not to touch the membrane.
And then apply a poultice made of boiled lint and oil; and subsequently treat that area until it is healed.
But if you fear that it may close up again, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And it often happens that the anus becomes obstructed due to the healing of an injury or abscess; then it must be necessary to cut into that hardening, and afterwards it should be treated as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part near the anus are usually hard and thick, which appear close to the anus or in the area nearby.
And it is one fistula or multiple.
And as that hardening becomes old and emits watery white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate further.
And these penetrating ones are known by what is discharged from them during defecation and due to flatulence; and sometimes there is a bad discharge during defecation, which clearly indicates their presence.
And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space entering the bladder, and entering the urethra of the penis; and some of them penetrating into the joint of the buttock and into the root of the thigh.
And in that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating one, it is that you place your finger inside the anus, and insert a fine probe of hair or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert the fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of this nor proceed with the probe to find any cause of evacuation such as pus, worm, or air, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and at that time, treat it accordingly.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then the significance of that is it discharges urine from there and prohibits it from doing so to allow the affected area to heal.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the buttock or into the bone and there is pain around the area, then the sign of that is that the probe passes through here if in the fistula there is no tortuosity leading to the bone, and there is pain around the affected area; and you will have continuous pus discharge; and medication does not help in that case, nor does it heal easily.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these is laborious and futile for many physicians, upon which such certainty rests.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this which I have experienced and proved.
And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with their buttocks raised and their legs bent towards their stomach, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in a tortuous fistula, until you know where the probe passes.
And if you feel the patient's pain around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated by itself, or what you feel between your finger and that tissue or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and at that moment do not work on it, because there is no healing in such cases, as we have said.
But perhaps some may say that it heals in some men slowly.
And for the treatment by which help is hoped for in them, you should ignite a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues around the fistula are now constricted like the quill of a bird.
And then treat that with bandages soaked in butter until all those constricted tissues heal, and afterwards treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate further inside; you say to which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a membrane of flesh or skin, and times the fistula is in what appears on the surface of the buttocks, then dries up the area from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying up both the probe, and it should be inside the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
And then cleanse those fleshy parts affected by the fistula, which are assembled like a quill pen tube and do not tear any of them for lack of cause.
But if a flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when dissecting those fleshes, then the moment it happens, quickly use an acute instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is adjusting those flesh parts that are adhered, and the other is stopping the blood by drying out the moisture.
And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth or soft leaves until the area gets better, and afterwards cure the wound with hard flesh-producing remedies that generate and consolidate.
And medicines in which there is astringency and drying; when these are restored, it is healed, and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula already penetrates into the inner part of the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a membrane of skin or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then at that moment there is no operation to be done but rather proceed by faith and with hope.
The cause is to treat it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to introduce certain instruments and the proper treatment; and do not proceed with drying if it might injure the muscle containing the vein, and ensure that this procedure does not cause pain to the patient against their will; then cure it as we have said because it will be easily healed; or lengthen that membrane and clean that pus which you dry inside near the anus, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument; then purify those ulcerated flesh around where you can proceed with incision; and then strive to perform the restoration of all the wound by drying, and if the upper opening is not consolidated, leave the fistula open in the part of the anus, and it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this way: when you introduce the tent into the fistula, and it is near the left side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cords and at the margin of the anus, then take a perforated tip, which is like a needle prepared according to this form:
and introduce it wrapped in three fibers or around them; then insert the tent with the fiber into the fistula until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to proceed.
But if it penetrates the margin of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the fiber from that tract as though you were introducing your finger into the anus; and pull out the tip of the fiber and tie both ends securely, and leave it like this for one or two days, and when you incise the fiber in the flesh, tighten it well so that those parts of the flesh between the two ends of the fiber may heal.
Regarding the treatment of the internal injury until it is healed and consolidated.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrable in whatever way you have prepared, but do not force it into the front, for it is not up to you to do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
The shape of the spatum with spines with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp and the other part not sharp, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which pus flows during the incision of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus resembling coal lumps, or they are like grape clusters. And they can be small and large, and the pus flows from them continuously and is constant, and they are multiple, and some are near the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are due to less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little blood mixed continuously flows, and their appearance depends on the color of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and apply pressure until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you proceed carefully and use hooks or what you have to grasp them with your fingernail, and then incise those along their roots.
If the hooks do not hold in them because of their humidity and softness, then take a rough cloth or basket or wool flax, and extract them with these tools mentioned. Then cut them open and sprinkle some powder appropriate to the incision on them, as a substitute for cauterization; or cauterize them as previously described in the chapter on cauterizing. And afterwards, treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the pus does not yield to evacuation, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and wash it with the water in which it has been soaking until the pus evacuates quickly when pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easily treated. You should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and afterwards treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for one who requires an incision, you should administer suturing according to this method: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and make it penetrate with the needle into the opposite side opening, and tie both ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the silk and withdraw the needle.
And do this for all of them, leaving one unstitched so that the excess blood can flow from it.
And afterwards, place on the anus a cloth infused in rose oil or wax; and place that over it and instruct the patient to rest. This is from inside that which enters the cavity; and when it is enclosed, treat those things with whatever cure is within so that it may be healed.
And when they become old and do not respond to that medicine, now you should shave those parts with the edge of a spatula or with your nail so that they become moist and are covered by the scab pus above, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them so that they may consolidate.
Now you should scrape away the pus more vigorously than at first until blood appears and the area is excoriated; and then treat them so that they may heal.
Know that alamermar, which is a key ingredient, and it is nothing but red spots similar to the head of a nail in color on the body, and it is found throughout the body but more so below the waist and in the said areas, and from these pains you should treat the ailment.
Then you should incise what is around the key area, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the following area as described in its chapter.
A wart is a small, rough, fistulated round elevation on the surface of the body, and they often appear in most children.
Of the treatment of wounds that are extended and incised, one should clean them thoroughly with fine or animal hair that lies flat. And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
A boil is a small fluffy or large hollow swelling on the surface of the body that hurts to touch, and when it becomes hard like an ant bite, it forms around the body.
The treatment for this is to take a needle of eagle feather or vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that on the boil so that it contains the circle of the needle around the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the needle so that you incise what is in the circuit of the boil, and place it in the pain of the flesh, and ensure that you eradicate the boil from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of wood or iron according to this method:
Let the tip above the needle be sharp, smooth (that is, unperforated), wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger it feels blunt and the rotation of it is smooth.
And if you wish to cauterize the boil as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the forms of the instruments that you administer to patients.
Some cups are made of silver or lead or soft and malleable metal; and some cups are made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of little children should be small; and of those whose anus is narrow or painful, the cups of those should be small.
The form of the large and few cup:
The top of the cannula of leather above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the extremity of the tube below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two flanges, and on the other side one flange, and the width of the flange should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the size of it should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong thread of raw honey, or around them; and adjust the bag accordingly; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the top of the cup between two distinct strong constrictions, and immediately apply the cup to each thread. However, the quality of applying the cup in this manner is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something under them, such as a cushion or a small pillow; then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; then gently insert it into the anus with ease; and let the assistant take the bag and squeeze it vigorously inside until everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the catheter from the rectum, and the patient lowers his buttocks to the bed.
And if the medicine causes him to vomit, let it do so as much as possible; and if he sleeps with it all night, it is better for his recovery.
But if you treat him for diarrhea and vomiting due to abdominal issues with the cathartic, then continue using the catheter until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a catheter that is fine and soft, like those used for children's enemas.
On the treatment of plagues.
I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with plague using medicines according to the regimen.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse depending on how the plagues are caused and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
And the causes by which such plagues are caused are things like the penetration of a stone, or the cutting by a sword or knife, or the striking with a lance, or a staff, or an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Here are the plagues that occur in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the back, and similar ones affecting the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, at this moment consider: if it is due to an impact from a stone or similar object, and if the bone has only been cracked but it is a large wound and you fear there might be a dangerous abscess, then immediately treat yourself and perform trepanation on the cephalic area without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibitive cause for avoiding trepanation, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is minimal.
And let the trepanation be on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from swelling and rich foods and heavy meals.
But if some minor cause prohibits it, then reduce the amount of food and do not approach meat or rich foods.
And pause concerning the plague, if an abscess forms, and then apply it only to rose oil or in a mixture that is styptic.
But if you are sure of a dangerous abscess, then pause concerning the wound, if it is fresh and the blood has not yet clotted and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply slightly.
And if the air has already changed that, then wait until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or caused by a sword cut and the lips of it are not suitable to be stitched together, then stitch those as I will describe regarding the stitching of such wounds.
And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and sinew, and there is no need for it to be held back but only a small suspensorium, then cut that and promptly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the sutures, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are easy to digest: broth and similar liquids, until they recover.
And if you find that the sutures are putrefied and do not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of it and remove it, and subsequently treat the area.
And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then press on the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor. Therefore, you can powder them with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them all together thoroughly and sieve it. Use this to fill the wound, and bind it tightly with good bandaging so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And apply bandages tightly over the poultices and leave them on without removing them while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not reach it to heal it until it becomes healthy.
And sometimes this cure is used alone when it is not at hand to use the gall and blood of a dragon.
And this method of operation is used for large wounds when it is necessary to place them open and make them narrow, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then there is no intention to apply this powder, but then treat those with what we have said, namely placing over them some cold digestive drinks, or placing over them flour of barley with water and honey until they begin to rot; and afterward treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone and it is small, then you extract that with a probe.
And I shall speak about the treatment of fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
Of wounds to the neck.
But if the wound happens on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no wet treatment but rather avoid treatment with what has strong styptic properties, such as zinc oxide and similar substances that do not adhere to the nerves and contract it. Do not pause on any cause of trembling, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if this is the case where one is treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rosin or non-resin oil, and then rubbed with water after washing and other mineral stones are used according to this method, and humidity is found.
But if the wound is severe, then administer stitches, or bind its edges tightly, and subsequently treat it with powders until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or reaches to its lowest part with decay, then pierce it at the deepest location.
But if an artery is already cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then tie off or clamp it, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; instead, equalize it and reduce it to its natural position, and subsequently strengthen it with proper structure, and leave it for several days; then treat it with powders that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already caused inflammation in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not appropriate for you to do, leave until the wound decays and separates, and the swelling subsides.
And if the wound is recent, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will be found later in its chapter.
If it is a thrust wound from a lance or dagger, and if you feel the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; now you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then in the first hour apply powder to it, but do not press it so that the blood does not remain trapped within its depth and return to the heart and injure the patient; rather, use a drawing agent on it twice a day.
And if the drawing agent is not available to you, then place a cloth on the wound opening so that it absorbs any moisture; and have the patient lie down with the wound lower to allow the fluid collected there to drain.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound was sustained and no spasms, trembling of the heart, or tightness in the breath has occurred to the patient, and you see other good signs from it, then you will know that the wound is safe; and thus treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is prevented and a long time has passed, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as with sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already penetrated to the bone and some of the cut pieces are in it, then you should twist the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal is difficult.
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is as we have said.
Of the wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
And a small disruption is difficult to fix by another method, and it should be noted that reducing them is more difficult if you do not return them to their proper place immediately, as they will swell and become enlarged, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike in the two previous cases mentioned.
And you should know that suturing of the abdomen is done in four methods, but two of these sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds of the body.
Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the belly.
Here is the translation:
Therefore, I say that when the swelling is small and it has been caused by some reason in the intestine for that purpose, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when inflammation has come upon the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary to warm it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in lukewarm water alone, or steeped in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply this to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes you will do this with something that has styptic properties, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which chamomile and mallows have been steeped, for by this the instrument is soothed for a short time.
But if the instrument is spared near this treatment, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are excised.
And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and there is no need to dry out due to necessity and deficiency.
Regarding the instrument, this is its form:
One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part is not sharp, with a delicate tip, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be slightly blunted.
Therefore, when the plague has spread and is outside the abdomen, it now must be that its reduction should follow the form of nature, in its proper place, if possible over that, for better is.
But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it must be that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their arms further away from their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place their head and feet further apart than the middle parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consideration constantly so that the part where the plague is shall be further away than the other.
And so you must administer this in both large and medium-sized ailments.
And in small ailments, prepare what is needed, and then have the most skilled minister do it, who holds the disruption entirely with their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then disclose that to whoever will perform the suture at an appropriate time.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a quantity of needles according to the extent of the wound; then hold from the end of the disrupted area with your ring finger, and pull the needle once, making sure not to place thread at both ends of the suture, between both ends of the tissue that is inside the edges of the wound, until you make it penetrate that part; and when you have attached both ends of the suture and both ends of the tissue, this makes four stitches.
Take a needle with double thread and pass it through the wound from both sides, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing them properly; then lay the thickness of your finger on top and put another needle there, and tie that thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until you have completely sewn up the entire length of the wound.
And the needles should be medium-sized between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles penetrate the flesh quickly; but thick ones have difficulty entering the tissue, and thus it is convenient that they be medium in both subtlety and size.
And it is not convenient for the needle to be placed at both ends of the wound simultaneously, so that the flesh is not cut quickly and the wound does not heal before proper consolidation.
And do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not hindered from proper consolidation.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient during sleep; and place powdered substances around the sutures, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
And this type of suture using needles is most convenient for small wounds, as it often suffices to use one or two needles or around that number.
But the second type of suture is common: it involves passing the needle through four points—the edges of the wound and both ends of the tissue—once, with a thread that is appropriately sized in subtlety and thickness.
When you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that part where you began, so that the thread can be drawn out from the most prominent part of the wound, so that the suture may be a taut suture like the one on cloth in which the threads are tight.
And pause between each suture by the amount of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is for the abdomen.
And in such a suture, I closed the wound that had injured a man's abdomen with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was larger than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the middle gut and the disruption was in the middle part; then I reduced it after the gut had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and he was cured and became well; afterward he spoke with difficulty for some words, and then returned to his normal state.
And the other doctors had judged that he could not be cured; but by a miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine, since it was in a place where no remedy or medicine was available, I merely placed a knife twice daily on the wound and washed it continuously with honeyed water until it healed.
But I will describe two types of suture according to the narration of the Text.
And it is that you begin the suture from the outside part and then insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place tie knots according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that same end of the wound from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part.
And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the end of the incision, which is in the part inside, all of it penetrates.
And then start from this side and bring it to the other side at the end where the suture is, and withdraw the needle from the bone that it penetrates, and then return it to that bone and attach the end of the suture that is on the other side to this end of the incision; and withdraw it from the bone that is on this side.
And do this one side and then the other, and do this alternately until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the purpose of this suture method is that you sew with a suture of membranes as if you were sewing skins; thus, you sew the suture once from the side of the bone end, and leave it on the other side until it is complete.
Here is the translation:
Place the needle at the end of the opening on your side, and make it penetrate inside to the opposite part in one motion, and cut off both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it exit from the inside to the outside at both ends of the suture.
Then turn those sutures and make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer part at both ends of another opening on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common quick suture, and it is the type of suture about which I have previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Gualia
And if someone were to say that the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, it means that you insert a thread into each needle, and begin by interweaving one needle as you should, and make it penetrate into the opposite side according to the suturing technique used for sewing cloth.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
The reason is that when you manage to treat the fresh wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling and clean it properly, then apply powder for healing.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and close the wound, and ensure that the sutures are strong and secure; and afterward treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines at hand, wait for them a little while, because it begins to soften and discharges pus after two days, as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you may not need other medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members, then wrap a piece of linen in oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and place it around the area between the joints, and apply it to them.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, as often happens in such cases, then use black styptic tebra root, and especially if the putridity has reached the bowel and an incision has been made penetrating into the cavity of it.
And know that what affects the large bowel heals more slowly than what affects the small bowels.
And it is difficult to heal what is called the "gegunu" bowel from any wound that affects it completely; and this is because of the great number of veins in it, its large size, the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is the membrane, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way that you would reduce the bowels.
But if it has passed the space and is already turned green or black, then when you apply it over the area that is discolored, to cause a flow of blood, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
From this incision take another piece of cloth, and place the two ends of it hanging from below the part affected by the wound so that above you is alleviated the attraction to it; therefore, you should apply the placement of the fabric and emission of the pus from the wound.
Reminder of the wounds that occur in the bowel.
When disruption occurs in the bowel and is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people; for this reason, I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, with discharge from it and gas.
Then I proceeded with the treatment of it, even though I was not confident in its healing, but rather sought to carefully identify which part would heal and where the area would become firm.
And when I saw the area already consolidated, I watched for any illness that might arise from the unfortunate event in his belly; and no one gets better immediately after such a serious accident without changing their usual food habits by eating and drinking properly, and then taking baths and exercising as advised.
And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has an open mouth, on the two edges of the wound; thus, when it grasps onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And make another stripe beside the first one, and do not stop until you have made stripes next to each other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce it and attach it to the wound; let those pieces remain attached until the bandage is healed, and do no harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the bandage be sewn with fine thread made from animal sinew, which is finer than a needle; take one end of this bandage thread, make it smooth and then tie the end to the thread used for sewing, wrapped around it. Then insert the thread through needles and attach it to the bandage, and reduce it at the point of attachment.
And this method of suturing with stripes is nothing but a matter of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine sinews, then there is only careful treatment, and not complete healing.
On the treatment of boils and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes chronic and old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and stops discharging over time without being cut out, whether in any part of the body, is universally named a fistula, and we call this a boil.
And truly, a fistula is a feathered, hard, white node at which there is no pain but rather a sensation like the pricking of a bird's spur; and for this reason it is called a pierced boil, that is, a painful condition.
In some people who are of a moist nature, this phlegm is discharged from the arm; and in certain hours the moisture is completely removed. At certain times this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have shown all those causes, and the signs of them and their cure with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which are performed through surgical means.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body; among which there are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the ciphac (likely referring to the spinal canal), or the bowels, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and some of these affect the vicinity of the principal member and are similar.
Therefore, of those abscesses which follow this method, it is one of the diseases difficult to heal, and does not receive a cure, and occupies both labor and ignorance.
And if there is any abscess whose depth does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope for and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or a needle and if the abscess follows the right direction, proceed with it.
But if the abscess is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is easily shaped and curved according to the tortuosity.
And if the abscess has openings that are frightening, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate will go from that one to the other openings and flow out.
And then inquire carefully according to the method by which you can know if there is bone or nerve here, and whether the depth of the abscess is far or near, or if it is an abscess whose openings are over all this within your strength, within your thorough examination, with which you thoroughly examine the disease, and the invention of the pain according to your compression on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes to the swelling.
And when you have stood on all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the cure with confidence: that is, consider now whether it is an abscess that is apparent and near or in a salt place, far from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places I have told you about.
Now you dry the fistula as was said about its narration, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh, or of tissue and of appearance, and treat inside until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and follows the rectum, now you should incise it as deeply as possible to reach the preon, and then clean it of all its corrupted flesh; afterwards, apply hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a probe.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal with this treatment, now you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must determine this, now you should examine it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you find any cause to spare a vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed to you and there is corruption or blackness in it, now you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; then treat it with what will make flesh grow until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; at that point, uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it thoroughly with your last effort, and then restore it.
And so if you are healed, that is good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the depth of the body, which has not been reached, and thus in that there is nothing to do but to treat that.
And if the corrupted part is small, or it is possible for you to remove that, then at that time you should remove it with fine forceps, which are suitable for this purpose.
And if some bones are involved, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any of them due to your strength.
But if any cause of the humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those tissues or flesh where necessary, and expose the bones.
But if it is not possible for you to remove the bones at this time, then apply something that can alleviate the condition on the wound, and leave it be until such a time when there is flesh and tissue around those bones, and guard against the wound becoming consolidated, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation does not become constricted.
Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a cloth submerged in warm oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, because when these plasters will be applied, and the tissues and bones are separated by their removal, and from those the attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and what is corrupted on it is only its surface, then scrape that with a scraper only from behind until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then repair the wound.
If what is from the bone has become corrupted and a large part of it is decayed, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and entirely cut within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend to you what happens to a person in his condition, so that you use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
A young man around xxx years old experienced pain in his body, and the part affected inside is near the internal matter of the body that has reached the cavity, and this matter has become a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And then the condition extended over time due to the error of the physicians when the abscess was not properly treated, and it became filled with pus, and his recovery was delayed until the cavity became fistulated, and there were multiple openings through which they discharged pus and the moisture of the body.
And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and none of them had the knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
And I saw the cavity and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; and already the body of that man was completely emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
And then I quickly examined all the openings and found that they reached all parts of the cavity.
Then I cut open and incised around one of the openings through which I could see a part of the bone, and found that portion corrupted; it was already earthy and decayed and blackened, and also a part of the marrow cavity into which it had penetrated was corrupt.
Then I tied up what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
And I cut out that corruption from the bone without harming it, which I had previously exposed and tied up.
And subsequently, I treated the wound with restorative medicine for a long time, but it did not heal.
And then I repeated the procedure and discovered further corruption on the bone beyond the initial exposure.
And I tied up what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I attempted to perform the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
Then I discovered another area and did not stop incising the bone little by little specifically to perform its restoration, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm's width of it, including that part with the marrow, and then I treated it with medicines, and it healed quickly and became healthy.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except due to the condition of its fever and for its poor tolerance and fear of death, because it suffered at all times from excessive syncope and malaise.
And thus, he was completely healed, and there is no soft flesh in place of the bone; his condition improved within his body, and his strength returned; he recovered his disposition and did not experience contrary effects during movement or from any cause.
If there is a protruding bone in the injured area of the body, then you should proceed as follows: take some bandages and secure them at the end of that prominent bone; and order someone to extend it straight; and place another bandage made of thicker wool on top of the first one; and apply this over the flesh below the bone, extending its ends so that you can pull the skin towards the sides; then you will uncover the skin in the area where you want to make a suture so that the needle does not injure the skin.
And place a stick or board under the bone appropriately, for when you do this, it is not forbidden for the needle to cut through the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the suture be placed over the corrupted area little by little, for if corruption occurs in the concavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, forcing the suture from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part continues to the other, with the corruption in the middle or some part of it, then you must uncover the skin entirely from all sides; and place a stick underneath, and then suture the first part where the corruption is until the suture continues from the other side.
And let the suture be placed according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not within reason but is abnormal.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption according to how it appears to you, and you should excise that part, and cleanse that part in whatever manner is possible for you, and each joint should be corrected by you, so long as no veins or nerves are harmed.
And you should know which saws and chisels are suitable for cutting these bones according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument appropriate for each operation.
And you should know that this operation implies the kind of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and knowledge of ways to treat illnesses, then you will already possess yourself what is appropriate for each tool for every illness.
And I inform you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will need as basics, among which you will proceed with your restrictions that you will test on others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a rod: Let the head of this rod be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and let its points be in the form of crescent points.
And it is not sufficient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with them when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw made properly: let it be made with the strongest part as the bow, and the sharpness from iron, and the handle part like a decently made knife. Form of it:
Form of a razor which has a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved tip:
Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Form of another smaller cutter:
Form of another cutter; this resembles a rod, and its tip is like a saw, and it is displayed in suitable words according to the ratio of the bones:
Form of the probe which is suitable for probing through the bones:
And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and apparently it suits all the causes we have mentioned regarding knives, scissors, and saws.
About the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Extremities may need to be amputated either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes; or when you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption spreads from the limb without any cause being perceived, then it is necessary for you to cut off that limb up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may escape either by this lesser death or by malice which is a more severe punishment of the body.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the limb turns black as if it were burnt by fire, or you may see the blackness spreading before the putrefaction reaches that member which is dry and causes the entire body to seize up; therefore, cut off that part for amputation.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by the bite of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and similar ones.
And if the corruption or bite is on the tip of a finger, then you should amputate the finger and not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should amputate at the wrist joint, and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the elbow of the arm.
And if you encounter that, then cut the arm at the joint in the collarbone.
And if corruption spreads around the collarbone and the condition worsens there, then death is imminent for the patient; and applying another treatment in this case requires an appropriate amount of efficacy.
And similarly, when corruption spreads to the foot, then you should cut it at one of the joints.
And if it affects the entire foot, then you should amputate the whole foot. But if it spreads to the toe, then you should cut the joint at the base of the toe.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and letting the patient die.
And the method of cutting off a limb or binding it is that you tie a ligature above the part where you wish to cut, and place another ligature over the area; extend one ligature below the part, and have another extended by an assistant above; then separate the flesh which lies between two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; after this it can be either cut or bound.
And it is necessary to cover the area with a cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected site, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate care and treatment for abscesses.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should immediately cauterize the area, or apply some powder to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Apply bandages to the affected limb appropriately, and take care of it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his house, this year an accident which I and to you recommend, the one that was inflicted on him by burning, similar to combustion from fire.
And that corruption spread initially on his hand and then tended to affect the entire body.
And then that man prepared himself for death because he feared that the limb would not recover due to the intensity of the pain and burning, and he allowed that foot to be amputated at the joint, and it healed with fire.
For a long time, that same corruption affected his finger on the hand.
And then he came to me, and I instructed him to purge that excess with the medicines I prescribed, focusing on cleansing his body from it; but the excess was not purged and began to spread to another finger starting from the hand.
And he asked me to amputate his hand, but I refused to do so, hoping for the purging of that excess, and fearing that the amputation of his hand might lead to death, as the power of the infection was very strong.
And after he left me, he returned to his hometown and it was reported to me that the man prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and he healed.
And I have included this narrative only to assist with understanding this illness and to serve as an example for how such cases should be handled.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is extended inward so as to form a collection of pus, and it bursts and becomes perforated, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the skin that covers it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached such an extent of corruption as to affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space extends inward so that the corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a sinus.
The treatment for it is to incise that skin completely as it is swollen, and especially when it becomes thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not reached an advanced stage, and there is a passage in the skin, then you should treat it with enemas.
And when you consider the sinus, if it is large and the arm with which you are treating it has a foul odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medication consisting of oil, vinegar, and raisin in equal parts, and mix them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
Then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; use this to treat the sinus with an enema, plug the opening of the sinus, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
Take out that which is held in disdain; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is evacuated.
And sometimes it is given as an enema with water of ashes, when that medicine is not at hand; and you should take the ash of wheat, put it over the water; and then strain that, and give that as an enema until you are confident that the sinus is now closed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then give an enema with water and honey mixed thoroughly three times, and give another enema with vinegar and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar causes the sinus to adhere, especially when the vinegar has a preponderance of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this for several times and are confident that the sinus is now cleansed, then give an enema with water that promotes flesh growth.
And you should take of the decoction of dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent vinegar; or give an enema with several medicines and other decoctions that have the properties which I have already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow such that the enema tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and pause in the dilation wrapped in Egyptian medicine or basilicon decoction until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is too large, then you should sew together the edges with a suture and leave it in such a quantity that the enema can be introduced without additional addition.
And if the orifice of the one through which the arm drains is raised to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus-filled place that is there where the arm passes underneath, for when the arm is compressed at the depth of the bend the flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus underneath in the vicinity of the pus as you wish, then perforate so that you prepare the member with preparation by which the arm drains lightly as you are equipped and so that nothing in it impedes the arm.
But that which is over the sinus opening, which you must change at all times so that it dries what is adhering to the arm. And so that you may know whether what drains from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess there.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material which is placed over the sinus opening has adhered or is about to adhere, then on the third day you loosen it, and when you loosen the dressing, then change the cloth and renew the application.
But if the sinus has become empty of subtle pus, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is imminent, since some people take a long time to generate flesh in their dressings, and others are the opposite.
And if from the sinus there has been evacuated for many days thick undigested matter, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to the drying properties of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried as well when applied, adjusting for any excess addition of grease.
And the best medicine for curing it is to take a finely ground powder and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it with something clean that has been used before for this purpose, and use that.
And it appears in this action, when there is no thick matter, to take fine powder and honey that has been cooked until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and fenugreek, mix them all together, and sprinkle over the honey which is on the fire, and then apply this over a cloth and strengthen it onto the sinus; or line with the honey you have cooked to thicken, sprinkle over a cloth, and apply that.
For some wounds, administer the long and sharp-pointed lily (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaury, and use these simples or mixtures, triturate them and sieve, then powder over the honey which is recommended; and thus use it.
And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its root, and it has spread to the bones or other hard members or to the ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment as mentioned above.
On the treatment of paronychia and worn nails, and on cutting an added finger joint and sectioning.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises from under the nail of a toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes prolonged and its treatment is delayed, it can become an abscess of an already inflamed area, or it may corrupt, causing pus to ooze inside which corrodes the root of the nail. It often corrupts the entire nail, and sometimes spreads to the bone inside, producing a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes blackened, and its color turns dark.
And when you have done what we have said in the division and do not see improvement in your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with a scalpel all the superfluous tissue that is rotten from the nail and promptly cauterize the wound thereafter, for prompt cautery is helpful in such cases.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail have already compressed the flesh inwardly, causing pain, then it is necessary that you apply a fine probe under the angle of the nail where the flesh hurts, and push it up and incise that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and thereafter treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, now is the time for you to incise the bone and extract it, because there is never a cure when the bone is corrupted.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, now you should incise it at one of the joints as is prescribed in its treatment, and then cure it until it is healed.
However, if there is an injury such as a puncture or bruise to the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, you should initially bleed the patient at the beginning, and then dry the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse section from above downward, but be careful not to cut into the flesh below the nail, for this would cause the patient severe pain and lead to the formation of excess scar tissue in that location; then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
However, in the case of a finger that is swollen, which often occurs in many people, it is mostly filled with flesh, and there is little bone or nail within.
And some of them arise at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some joints of the fingers. However, what arises in some joints of the finger is not serious, whereas what arises at the joints is more serious.
And for those that are fleshly swellings, the incision is shallow, and you should cut it behind its root with a broad instrument.
However, for what arises at the root of the joint, treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
In that which is called the cutting of the navel string, you should incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and thereafter treat that so that it may heal.
In the consolidation which occurs between their moving bones or due to the birth of a person who is born in this manner, or due to the healing of an injury or burning by fire, or similarly, then you should treat that consolidation until the said bones return to their natural form.
And then place between their edges in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of those at the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fit for the shape of the limb.
Regarding the incision of veins, these are varicose veins.
Veins that are varicose, and veins wrapped thickly filled with melancholic superfluities which flow into the joints of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry loads.
Then you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times for strong expulsion, and thereafter let blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of these with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein is raised and entirely extracted.
The section on this is as follows: at the beginning, pour in warm water so that the thick blood is dissolved, which appears cloudy in the basin, and then lift the patient's limb to the most pus-filled part of the wound below the joint with a bandage, and then cauterize the vein in one place or two, or three with extensive cautery, and then elevate the black blood under the hand at the lower part of the wound upwards, until as much blood is released as you wish and as often as suffices, and which the strength of the patient tolerates.
And then give him that, and order him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
But the elevation is done in this manner: if you see that the patient's skin is covered with hair, then bathe him and pour warm water on his basin so that it reddens and the veins become prominent; or exercise him vigorously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes heated.
And then cauterize the area on the right side of the vein with cautery either above the joint if necessary, or lower down near the heel if needed.
And then pierce the area with hooks and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent, and do this according to how much you need, declining towards blackness.
And thus when you expose it, take the white part that seems like a cord.
And place the patient lying down with their thigh raised and bent at the hip, and suspend it with a cloth sling.
And then cut another section near that one for three reasons, and then expose the thigh above the vein that appears.
And then raise it and incise that in the rear section towards the heel, and then extract it and elevate it until it exits through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or farthest from all the sections, until it has completely exited; and now incise it.
And if you do not follow the method of extracting and elevating it, now insert a strong double-threaded needle and ligate it to extract it, or insert it below the thigh and rotate your hand in all directions until it is dislodged. And be careful not to cut it; for if it is severed, it will become difficult to elevate it, and the patient will suffer harm from that injury.
And when you have completely brought it out, now place on the wound wool submerged in wine and rose oil and unrose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with twists for which there is wrapping in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along those twists and at the places where it is wrapped, and then suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely.
And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not obstruct it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and serve your prudence in this.
Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
It should not be as sharp as the edges of a poultice nor have a pointed end so that it does not obstruct the vein; and it should be of great flexibility, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein because of its thinness; however, it should not be overly thick either, as we have said.
On the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabia and in hot, dry lands of India where no grass or crops grow.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its formation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body, generating between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of this vein is that inflammation happens suddenly in the thigh; and near the area, blisters appear; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the place of those blisters, resembling a plant sprout.
And when the end of it appears, you should then wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one dram to two drams, and attach that area and let the lead hang from the thigh.
And so many times when you find some cause in the parts outside, wrap that with lead and wool. And if a wound is long, then you cut one part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that part too deeply until it has healed outwardly, for if you cut too deeply, it contracts inwardly into the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration.
For it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it and there remains no cause for it in the body.
And this vein is found in some people extending to a length of five palms and I have heard that it has reached up to twenty palms in length.
And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract of it and pierce that one along the length of the body until everything that is in the matter has been evacuated, and treat the area with putrefaction for several days with medicines; and subsequently cure that one according to the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has multiple openings, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, and is branched from each opening.
And therefore treat that one as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is called in some lands bovine illness because often among them there is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and it is shown by sensation beneath the skin from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
Regarding the generation of worms is through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as it happens with worms and serpents and worms and grubs in the belly.
It is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, immediately it burns strongly within and penetrates and destroys the heart, causing multiple dangers.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done except by observing the movement and appearance of it to the sensation, and then you should press what is above it and what is below it tightly with bandages and constriction, and soon it dries up and extracts that.
And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you should pause to cauterize with fire over the area where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head near the heart, then press above the eyebrows with strong constriction, and soon dry up over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of his body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
On the treatment of nasal afflictions.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members of the body, and soon changes from one member to another.
And I have already seen that as I will now recount to you. I went to visit a sick woman in a village and uncovered her arm, where I found a small inflammation in the vena cephalica of the arm. After rinsing it for about an hour, I saw that this inflammation was moving just as a worm moves upwards, but more quickly than one would expect, like live silver flowing from place to place.
Then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of her body until it reached the other arm.
And then she told me that it was moving throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was very amazed by its movement and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another. And I had seen something like this before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never seen pain being transferred from one limb to another so distinctly. But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
And I did not think this was possible except that the woman was of an elderly age, with weak limbs and exposed veins, and in her condition, this airiness or lightness could be perceived to move.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this retrograde movement in those who are robust and have healthy limbs with veins preserved.
And when you want to treat it and the patient feels that pain, immediately apply pressure on that area and let it move quickly until that restricted airiness has passed, and then cauterize the location.
If you do not use it to wash your hands, then treat that with an excursion of the body and with what expels windiness, and apply those against stinking pills and against pills of serape and similar.
Of the extraction of splinters.
Splinters are varied according to their types and the parts of the body where they lodge, for their variety is such that some have large points, others small ones, concave or blunt tips; some are solid. There are those with three angles, and there are those that resemble tongues; and there are those that are like slender sticks.
And the signs of a splinter in the brain are when it lodges in such a way that it penetrates the bone and emerges on the cephalic side, which is above the brain, caused by violent cold, scotoma, vertigo, rigidity in the hands, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and often speech is lost and the voice destroyed. Humid white matter similar to powder exits from the affected area, and the appearance shows swelling of the flesh.
Therefore, if I show you these signs, then you should refrain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mark the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feel there whether it is fixed in hard tissue, not soft; and light the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse movement, and causes black blood to flow, and chills those parts, and cold sweat breaks out, and fainting occurs; therefore you will know that death descends soon.
And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and the complexion of the patient changes, and he breathes out great sighs, and seeks to draw in cold air.
And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the thighs, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no strength left in all the limbs of the muscles.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then very little of the food in the wound is digested.
And if the arrow hits the abdomen, and it is lodged there, with some part of the wound torn, whether it be muscle, membrane, or bowel, which is ruptured, then there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine comes out from it, and some part of it extends outward, and there is pain over the patient, then you will know that it is fatal.
Like other members also as in the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the rib and things similar to these members, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount this to you about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand thereby about their treatment.
The reason for this is that when an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal bone of his eye at the root of the nose, I extracted it from him on the other side, left the granules behind in the ear canal, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded in his eye within the canal, leaving the eyelid intact. The arrow was already concealed and only a small part of it could be reached to which the shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of those used by Turkish warriors, with barbs but no grooves.
And the Jew recovered, and no harmful incident occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which had barbs; then I incised around that between two guidelines, and it was already submerged in his throat; then I carefully removed it, and the Christian man recovered.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised around the arrow and removed it, and he recovered without any harmful incident.
And there was a man in whom an arrow had been embedded at the base of his neck, and the injury had healed around it, but after seven years the arrow came out from the root of the collarbone.
And there was a woman in whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the injury had healed internally around it, and she did not experience any change in her condition, nor did she suffer any difficulties with her natural functions.
And there was another man in whom an arrow struck his face, and the injury healed, but the arrow remained embedded without causing any pain, and similar cases are known.
And the arrow was extracted from the man who was the prince of the king; it had struck near the midpoint of his nose and had slightly deviated to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden inside.
And I was called to treat him after the arrow had been embedded in him for about three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it carefully, but did not feel any sensation there; however, he felt a pain below his right ear, and thus I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the area that had drawing and digestive properties, believing that it would cause the area to swell so that the location of the arrowhead would become apparent.
And no significant reaction occurred in the area where I believed the arrowhead to be; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident; meanwhile, the wound began to heal, and after about three days, he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me of this.
Then I applied an acute corrosive medicine for several days until it penetrated the sore, and when I tried to test this, I found the tip of the arrowhead fine, which adheres to the shaft.
Then I adjusted the opening of the sore with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrowhead became visible to me, and it took me time for this over a period of four months.
And when the sore had become enlarged and I was able to introduce forceps into it, and removed that [foreign object], without any harm occurring, then I ceased trying other methods of removal, until one day I used those specific instruments designed for this purpose, as will be shown in their form at the end of the chapter, to extract that [object]; and afterward I treated that sore.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it, and the sore healed, and the patient was completely healthy without any further cause for concern.
And I advise you regarding the quality of extracting some arrows so that you may apply this rule and its significance to what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of these matters are not comprehensible in narration nor understood from the book.
And skilled artisans compare with few words; and with what is present regarding what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of causes external to the art when such occasions arise.
And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
Of that which is pierced by the place where it entered, or is a dart proceeding in a fleshy place, and is pulled out and extracted.
And if he does not obey the order to vomit at the hour when you catch it, wait some days until the flesh around it heals, and then ease its attraction to it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and he does not obey to vomit, then wait some days and gradually ease its attraction and motion each day, and it will be extracted.
And if he does not obey to vomit even after some days, then you should drill around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl until the place is enlarged enough for the arrow, and then extract it.
If the artery is hidden in the body and is concealed from feeling, then you inquire by touching that area, and if you feel it there, then direct that to some instruments which are suitable for attracting it.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the artery, and here there is neither bone nor vein, then you operate on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the artery.
And if it is adhered to the ears with those parts, then you remove the flesh in which it is embedded entirely as much as you can; and work on that, if you cannot do so by separating the flesh from the fractures of the ears and twisting them until it loosens.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then you use twisting with your hand and forceps in all ways until it obeys; and do so carefully with the utmost care that the arrow does not break and that it is made easier to attract it and extract it.
And if you cannot do this at that time, then you leave it for several days until the parts around it heal, and later attempt it when it is more convenient. But if there is an adverse flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the relevant chapter.
And guard against injuring the vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer treatment in every possible way to avoid disturbing these structures; do this with ease, tranquility, deliberation, and firmness as I advise.
Therefore, you should make the splint curved so that the patient lies according to the figure according to which you should place the splint in it, for it is more helpful. If that is not possible for you, now administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
However, for splints that are removed from the opposite side or where you have already processed some part outwardly, if there is stiffness at the extremity of the splint due to the part beneath the shoulder propelling it up and making it prominent; then you should cut above that; and let the cutting be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold; and immediately pull out that part, for it has been made light enough by this method.
However, if it is retained in the bone, now you should twist the lamina in the opposite direction to which the splint presses against the bone, and enlarge it as you insert, and then extract that part.
And if not, leave that for several days, and then try again when the time is right.
And if the splint shaft is in that position, now you should push it out from there.
However, if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer pressure, now insert and use it; if it is dull, use a concave instrument so that it fits into the cavity of the splint at its base and then push it out from there.
However, if the splint is concave, now you should push it out using a strong instrument by inserting it, for the splint is lightened by this method.
And if the bandage is poisoned, now you must hollow out all the flesh in which the poison lies, as much as it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that with what is appropriate.
And if the bandage sticks to the feet, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to the side, and it is close so that you touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to cut over it, now cut over it and guard against injuring a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then treat the wound as seems necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which bandages are removed:
Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which is made like a clamp when they grasp the bandage so that they do not let it go.
And from these are made various special hooks, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the bandage's size and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Like a rod so that it may ease the instrument into the concave bandage and is pushed with it.
On phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy of which one usually performs bloodletting, there are thirty, of which sixteen are in the head. Of these, two pulsating veins, which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two branches that appear on each temple; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts by the eyes, which are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two tendons which are near the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five. Of these, one is called cephalic, and it resembles the wild thyme; and people call it "the vein of the head," and it is also called sorda, and it is a median vein, composed of a branch from the basilic vein, and another branch from the cephalic vein; and they call this one among the common people "vein of the whole body"; and basilica is the vein that lies on the domestic side, and it is called "little finger," and the common people name this "abdominal vein." And there are tendons in the arm, and it lies over the humerus, and this is where bloodletting is performed, and it appears prominently on the forearm; and salvatella is the vein that lies between the thumb and the little finger, and these are in both sides.
And in the leg and the thigh there are three veins. One of these is behind the curvature of the wild thyme side; and the second is sophena, and its location is behind the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild thigh; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins near the ears is for catarrhs, emigrations, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of opening those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the patient's head and rub it well at the occipital region where the two veins are; press down on the patient’s neck with a bandage so that the two veins appear near each ear in two locations lower on the head; and feel for them with your finger, and if you can sense the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is when to proceed.
Then take the lancet, and use that which is sharp, and then insert it below the vein along the groove until the blood reaches the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and its groove upwards and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width or slightly more; and let as much blood out as you wish.
And then apply pressure with a pad and leave it there until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, I have described the incision and cauterization of those veins.
But for the two arteries near the temples, the treatment of phlebotomy is for old and persistent migraines, acute suppurating conditions in the eyes, and severe accumulations of excess fluids around the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those arteries is as I recommend to you: have the patient press their neck with force until the two veins become visible clearly, and demonstrate the pulse of those veins with your finger; then you may proceed.
Raise the vein above the ligature to the parts above with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy knife below, raising the vein up; and cut it as you did for the two other veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then loosen the compression on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for one hour, then place it over that cut and apply pressure with the palm and fingers firmly around it, and leave it until it is healed.
And the reminder of them has been mentioned before, and their incision and attraction have been described at the beginning of the book.
And thus, the procedure of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the cephalic vein phlebotomy for ancient illnesses of the face and for migraines, rigors, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you; that is, the patient should hold their arm with a cloth until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a trocar, which has this shape:
Place the sharp point of the trocar at the head of the instrument over that vein and press it down on it either tilted or for some other reason as described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then loosen the puncture of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
And in some cases, phlebotomy of the lat (a vein) is performed, but it is not necessary for the phlebotomy to be sharp like other phlebotomies; rather, it should be blunt. Perform this phlebotomy transversely, as the bone is close and strong, and the phlebotomy might easily break it if it were fine.
Here is the English translation:
Of the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck with a bandage, and then you perform phlebotomy on those areas, and you should stand above his head.
And phlebotomy should be performed across the length a bit apart from each phlebotomy, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is delicate, then the extremity of it is easily broken.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those cuts, and strain those for one night, and then remove them.
But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent sweating, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient strains his own neck and then with your left hand hold his nose, take a delicate lancet long and place it in the middle part of the nose cap straight, because the vein does not appear by touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Make sure you end your hand with the small phlebotomy gradually and let the blood flow according to your necessity; and then bind it for one night, because that area is quickly restored.
But the harm of phlebotomy of the two veins leads to constriction of breath and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those veins is that the patient strains each one in his neck with a bandage; and the practitioner should stand above the patient's head, and the patient should sit on a chair.
For in phlebotomy, when opening the long vein, do it gradually with small cuts; and then extract blood according to the season or quantity needed as required by necessity; and afterward make an appearance like the other veins.
And then loosen the bandage and gently stretch the two veins where there is constriction so that the patient is not overstrained, and wait until the ailment is healed.
And for the benefit of phlebotomy of the larger veins, it is also useful for small abscesses and pus-filled boils in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as for bad ulcers that occur on the nose and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy from these veins is that you should have the patient facing you, and tie a bandage around their neck, and then spread out their lips and observe the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each, and this is more evident because in the area around these there are small black veins; and then incise each with a cutting incision.
But if you are in doubt and do not know which one it is, then incise the larger of these veins, and from those that show pus.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the benefit is in phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for fainting that occurs in the throat, for diseases of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that follow the patient among thy more before the sun, and raise the tongue of him, and regard below the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
Then phlebotomize each one; and be careful that you do not use your hand in phlebotomy below those, for below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend where it runs customarily throughout all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, either place next to the phlebotomy a small mirror or an olive pit with subtle gradations; or hold the phlebotomy knife steadily, and feel if it is steady, and this is the form of it:
Let the side of it be as such when times, and befits to open veins that are concave and full proceeding from visible thick vessels, and for those which contain thick coagulated blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and befits the phlebotomy of fine veins which contain thin quick blood.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that are below the jaw and neck, and from what dries the legs and abdomen.
And when performing a venesection, one should be very careful and have great fear of hitting an artery, for if the vein is punctured incorrectly and the incision is made in the artery instead, it will cut that artery and cause a surge of blood to flow out, so it is necessary not to use a sharp instrument for venesection but rather one that is blunt like an onion.
And if the basilica vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to leave that one and switch to another; or to look for some branch vein; or to perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is clear; and make that venesection with a blunt instrument as we have said.
But if you want the venesection of the median vein, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the place between where you know the location of the wrists, and slightly above where it is thin; and lift the arm and make the incision on the concave side with a blunt instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in that area.
And when you press, as you tighten the ligature, if there is swelling in the place that you marked as thin, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
And if the blood flows from the venesection as it does in a child’s urination, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and at that moment, hold your finger on that spot for a long period; and after remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, because several times it has stopped, then tighten the arm and leave that area.
Guard the patient from the blowing of air, and let them be overcautious about it and do not touch that for any days until they are healed.
If the blood does not clot, and if you do not have appropriate medicine available at that time, then incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is severed; or take silk thread and place it there, and take half of it and tightly bind it over the site of the vein with descent and powders inside on the other day.
And if the blood is clotted, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what precedes regarding the memory of the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood.
And the clotting of the blood from it is difficult in many positions due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is helpful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; by this means, which is composed of branches of the basilica and of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is important for the phlebotomist to be extremely cautious during the phlebotomy of that area, as below it lies a nerve; and then if there is an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and the nerve is hit, it will cause numbness, and healing from this is difficult, and rarely can one recover completely. And this nerve appears to many people through sensation; and if it is hidden from some individuals and is subtle and not shown, then it is important that you pause the phlebotomy where you perform it in the region of weakness, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should divide the vein along its length.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
And here it is appropriate, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture either an olive vein or a myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is neither close to arteries nor nerves.
However, it is often the case that an abscess appears in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first attempt, so do not mark that abscess.
The first of these is about knowing that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution against the onset of diseases. It should be performed on one of the veins located in the arm, which are: cephalic, basilic, and fusca; and it should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of fullness appear.
And let phlebotomy be performed when the third hour has passed since the first pus appeared.
And let phlebotomy be administered whenever there is convenience and necessity for it, whether by night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is not proper to perform phlebotomy on a child until they are fourteen years old, and do not perform phlebotomy on a woman who is pregnant unless it is during the fourth month and before the seventh, and do not perform phlebotomy on women who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to undergo phlebotomy by any method, it is necessary for them to clean their bowels before the phlebotomy with a laxative enema if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not carry superfluous substances during the phlebotomy of the purified bowels, and so they do not affect the principal limbs.
And do not perform phlebotomy on patients who are suffering from severe nausea and drunkenness, or who are recovering from illness or intoxication until these effects have subsided, nor on those with dropsy. Also, be cautious about performing phlebotomy near the onset of colic pain and vomiting, and after abdominal issues, and during times of excessive sexual activity, work, exercise, fasting, or wakefulness, and any cause that weakens the body's strength, whether physical or mental.
And before considering phlebotomy, carefully observe the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick, through food and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible.
And before phlebotomy, take a bath if there is no cause prohibiting it, or exercise for some time to make the blood thinner.
And the phlebotomy of that day is performed at about the hour of tierce, as we have said.
And you should perform it when the day is free from all bad animal accidents, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all excessive bodily activities, such as hard work, unnecessary pain, grief, and similar things.
And at his side, have present the causes in the use of which people usually find pleasant aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And the phlebotomist should sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the person who needs to be phlebotomized.
And nearby, draw out their arm, and wash it with his hand by the phlebotomist two or three times; and then bind the ligature with a cord and wrap it around twice.
And the ligature should be applied promptly, for if it is not done at the right time or if it is too tight, it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, it also fails to control the blood properly.
And after the ligature is applied, have the person who needs to be phlebotomized wash their hands together until the veins become swollen and are clearly visible.
And then the phlebotomist anoints their phlebotomy needle with a little proper olive oil; and then places his left hand index finger on that vein, just below the place where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein withdraws slightly, and the percussion is steady because among the veins is one that feels like a fleeing cord for phlebotomy, and in this one there is air; when you apply the phlebotomy, it does not puncture the vein, and if it does puncture, then that vein is narrow.
Therefore, let the phlebotomist be fixed in place and attentive to all these causes.
And immediately after the phlebotomy, if the vein is open in one place, then that is sufficient; and if not, repeat this at another place, leaving that location for a while, or apply some heat to it, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed or the patient becomes worse, then you should leave it for one day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for it will surely cause inflammation, nor should you enter a bath.
And immediately repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows slightly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow as desired, then repeat the phlebotomy at that spot carefully and adjust the incision slightly, and apply some heat before the area becomes inflamed, for the area tends to become inflamed with even a slight incision in most people.
But if you see that the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat it there, for it will not help in any way; and apply some part of the incision with oil, for it aids the flow of blood. And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, administer oil on the incision in every phlebotomy where you open veins that are prohibited by the constitution of the blood, and use either theriac or Syrian wine when paused from one of these, for the blood becomes thinner and less congested.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which happens often, especially to those who have not been bled recently or only slightly upon the vein's opening, then you should treat it, and apply over the area a sponge infused with water and salt, somewhat heated, and hold that there for one hour, because it dissolves.
And do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or from another vein, with caution.
And if after some days a black or greenish discoloration remains in the area, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply to that area a preparation of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or a preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar.
And often there occur abscesses and swellings that require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find softness upon compression there, then that swelling is bad; and then be careful not to apply any of the substances we have mentioned over it, for the blood will easily flow from an artery.
And apply a plaster that has astringent properties to harden the area, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from a person according to the quantity of their vitality and according to the appearance and color of the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until its sharpness is moderated.
For those who are full and strong and have a need for bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and let the bleeding be slow.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite of that, and let it be done in small amounts at different times, and let the incision be shallow.
And the best to be used in venous phlebotomy is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more beneficial and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And for those who are accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, you should treat them before the phlebotomy with a small amount of bread infused in vinegar made from millet or simple oxymel heated; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
And if it is applied as a plaster before phlebotomy, then take bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic honey mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic syrup with good fragrance.
And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of vital blood, then it is necessary to drink water and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with rose water, and apply them to their pulse points.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And for one who wishes to open the vein and dissolve the blood for a second time, it is appropriate to use the feather whose virtue is that of iron, which gradually evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue over continuous days.
And for one who wishes to open the vein and remove their blood for a second time, and whose body is strong, he should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And for one who wishes to draw the blood from their body contrary to the side towards which it inclines, they should be bled on the second or third day.
And for a body in which there is already heated and thickened blood causing fever, it should be drawn out once, and a large quantity of blood should be taken, until fainting occurs, while maintaining all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse to stop when the blood has been sufficiently removed, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, as this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you wish to open the vein and evacuate the blood for a second time, since the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it suddenly, as this is harmful.
Handle the area gently until you are ready for a second phlebotomy; or move this side when the sharpness of the phlebotomy has caused coagulation in the vein's orifice; or pause and apply something of thyraca alfarach, or sage, and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
And if the vein is inflamed, do not touch it then, but wait until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then bleed that person at that site or in another vein on the other arm.
And when the vein called "the cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fusca or the basilica, which are not obscured or hidden, because it is composed of these.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerse his hand in cold water until it turns red and the vein becomes clearly apparent.
And then tightly apply a ligature over that vein at the midpoint of its course; and then perform phlebotomy transversely along the small crosswise line, not latitudinally or longitudinally.
And make the incision wide, and perform your phlebotomy on that vein near the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is restricted, then immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are during the days of summer, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in cold water, and similarly, in winter, pause the process of cooling the body with water.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating vessels or nerves nearby.
And the phlebotomy of the vein on the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand or another person's hand, after placing it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly visible to the onlooker; then cut across that vein transversely; and if you do not incise it entirely, nothing will come of this.
And do not hold onto the hand during the phlebotomy, for afterwards you must treat the exposed nerves of the aforementioned area.
And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow there, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, hindering the flow.
And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then press on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close too quickly; similarly, ensure you do this properly throughout the procedure.
And the use of phlebotomy from the vein on the left hand is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
And perform the phlebotomy in the same manner as you did with the other.
And the use of the cephalic vein in phlebotomy is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the uterus, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar conditions.
Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that the patient plunges his arm into hot water and performs friction thereon until the veins become visible; and he places a cord over the joint of the arm, and the place of the vein appears above the said joints, and from which those branches extend across the face of the arm in various directions.
And so the phlebotomy should be performed on the largest branch below the elbow near the wrist, for it is better and more effective.
And if you perform phlebotomy on that area of the arm's surface, then be careful of the nerves which are below it on the arm's surface, and stop your phlebotomy when you reach a point where you would otherwise cut across, as if you were trying to divide it.
And so the phlebotomy is finished.
But if the letting of blood is prohibited; then you should immerse the arm in hot water again and allow the blood to flow in that area until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy above it slightly, for that location is effective; and do not fear this mistake, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do the phlebotomy of the other arm in the same manner.
And for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the thigh behind the knee.
And the benefit of phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the side when one is suffering from excessive blood.
Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and hasten and strain the body from the width between the thighs up to above the heel in four places with a long slender bandage, for it appears only by this.
And when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each angle as is possible and according to the transverse, which is better; or incise that by incision or section it by cutting, for the place of it is salt.
And it is in the words of a man slightly weakened; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is the one which appears between the two of the hand behind the ring finger and the little finger.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you wish.
And then loosen the bandage and pause over the place of the phlebotomy to strain the place, for it is quickly healed.
Of venotomy and of the qualities of using those.
Venotomies are usually from horns, or arteries, or veins.
And venotomy is done in two ways: one of them is as incision and extraction of blood, and the other is venotomy without incision.
And this venotomy that is without incision is in two ways, for it can be with fire or without fire.
And for the venotomies that are administered with incision and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body, of which one is where a venotomy is usually paused at the back of the head; and another middle location is at both sides of the neck; and venotomies of the chin below the jaw beside the mouth; and venotomies of the two cheeks; and venotomies of alohoster, which is above the earlobe; and venotomies of the two forearms; and venotomies of the two thighs; and venotomies of the two feet.
Of bloodletting we take the blood not from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and thereby we do not capture the virtue through those, just as it happens with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for bloodletting to be done near a fire or without a fire in any disease caused by retention until the entire body is evacuated.
If necessity prompts bloodletting due to illness or continuously, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at whatever interval may be appropriate.
And when you encounter any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that bloodletting be performed after two or three hours have passed from midday.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when it relieves heaviness in the head and also what has settled in the eyes; but it should be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this vein is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
And it is not good to use that which is of full friction, or in which there is a cold, because it gives great harm to the patient.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those veins, and in the heads of which there are usually fresh illnesses.
But for the one who continues above that, forgetfulness is caused by it; and for this reason, you should command the vein-bleeder to pause his hand a little bit behind, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But phlebotomy of the temporal region is in the place of venesection of the dark vein and of the basilic vein: and for this it is beneficial for asthma, and for constriction of breath, and for rupture of the breathing organ, and for coughs, and for excess.
And it is necessary to raise the temporal vein a little, for if it is lowered too much, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the phlebotomy of the occipital region is beneficial for accidental pains in the head and for ophthalmia, headache, coryza, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of venesection of the basilic vein.
And it is necessary to command the vein-bleeder not to press his hand near the incision so that he does not injure the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And phlebotomy below the chin is beneficial for alcohol in the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and for symptoms similar to those illnesses that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of venesection of the alheric vein which is on both lips.
Avoid the windiness that is made between the two spatulas by applying a bandage, which is made by filling it with heat.
And for the windiness between the two parts inside the armpits, apply forcefully the phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, fusca, and cephalic, because they attract blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and these small veins from the other larger veins until the attraction reaches those three veins.
And command the wind operator not to proceed with incisions, because the area is bare of flesh, and leave it as it is with nerves and arteries.
And it is a windlass with which you apply suction over the hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers while leaving them exposed.
And you should command the wind operator to use a large windlass and make it of leather, because the area you are treating requires strong drying; and for severe cases, use gentle suction with subtle windlasses and apply incisions carefully.
Avoid windlasses on minor areas carefully and distinctly, for they draw blood from the entire body, and apply them to old pains in the loins and back, and to the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and apply them to boils and abscesses; and they serve as a substitute for phlebotomy of two saphenas, the alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
However, they weaken the entire body and can cause fainting in some people.
And for the windlasses on the alahorcoben, the force should be proportionate to the force used in windlasses on two cheeks.
Of the quality of the position of the cupping vessels is that you place the vessel at the beginning empty and suck it moderately, and do not prolong the position of the cupping vessels, but pause them gently, and remove them cautiously, so that the humors come to the place by occurrence equal. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and the hardness of the blood appears.
And now you should incise and repeat the suction gradually, and then observe the disposition of the body.
For the person who has tender flesh with few pores should be incised once and not pressed, so that the area is not ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to enlarge the incision slightly and to prolong it a bit, and to moderate the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, now you should incise twice, for in the first incision the way of subtlety to the blood and to its moisture is opened. But in the second for the acquired scrutiny of extracting the thick blood.
And if the blood is muddy, now make a third incision so that it achieves the desired effect.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one incision is sufficient.
And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we make a larger incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, now you should make a prolonged incision.
Regarding the term of incision, in which the depth of the wound is concerned alone.
And if the one whose wound is thick, hard, dark, and has narrow pores, it is necessary that the places for cupping be anointed with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer time, such as oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of rose petals, or oil of chicken grease; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lilies, or oil of chamomile, or blood, and similar things.
And if the excrement is thick and foul, then the oil should be of henna, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar things.
But if the cupping instrument has wide pores and is used on tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and for these, the places of cupping near the application should be washed with rose water or fresh cold water of solatrum, or chicken water, or water of borragan, and similar things.
And for the one whose blood is of thick humidity, wash their cupping sites with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things.
And for the one whose excretions are thick, wash their cupping sites with aged vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
And it is necessary that cupping be administered before bathing; after which it should be given immediately after the bath by an hour or two, and it is necessary for them to rest near the location of the cupping.
What is needed so that bleeding may be regulated either by cupping or phlebotomy before bleeding.
Consider this at the beginning: if the cupper or he who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and bleeding occurs on sharp blood and inflammation, then it should be that he takes cooling causes, such as sour millet, endive with vinegar, lettuce, saffron, and julep, and things similar to these.
And pause on their foods such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with acids, and things similar to these.
And for him whose constitution is cold, he should take to drinking syrup of amber, or syrup of saffron seeds, and sumac, and a mixture of odorant herbs between day and night; and it should be recommended that he use little drink and food, and pause on foods such as poultry and birds and fish and small birds and dove.
And it should be that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, drink should be more than food.
And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac alpharach, or medicine of musk, which is muscardine, before cupping or phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be refined; and they should not take those heating ones.
But let the bleedings that require incision be done by bleeding while pausing over the groin, and on the thigh and gout area, and on the navel, in the places of the hypochondria, and at the side of the abdomen, for these members cannot tolerate incisions upon them.
And this is sought not for any other reason but for the attraction of blood from a limb, just as we apply a cupping vessel to the breast in the disease of excessive flow of blood from the nose; and they use it so that the coagulated inflammation of the limb may be dissolved, just as when applied to the abdomen and navel; for this rarefies the part and heats it, thereby alleviating pain by resolving the flatulence.
And it is applied to the sinuses when they are blocked or weak, for by the power of attraction it raises up obstructions and eradicates weakness from its place.
And similarly when it is applied to the liver and spleen to expel flatulence, for in these it confines the air.
And these cupping vessels are administered only after they have been heated with suction; and some are applied over fire.
And some are administered filled with hot water in diseases of the spleen.
And this is so that the cupping vessel may be full and larger; it is either hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of the cupping vessel administered over fire: the diameter of its opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the pre-on should be half a palm; and at its center, in the place that is in the circuit, there should be half of it, the thickness should be small according to the amount that fits inside, like a needle.
It should be made of earthenware or citrus wood, with thick edges, leather, cushions, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
And let a thread be passed across the bone or iron, upon which a candle is placed near the fire.
And this large suction cup should be larger than the one we have recommended; and its size should be adjusted according to the illness and the condition of the person using it.
And the suction cups for children and those who are weak should be different from those used by young and robust individuals.
And the quality of placing this suction cup over the fire on the limb is that it should extend above the fire made with proper wood for a little while, and place it at the middle of the crossbar in the same location as the suction cup, so that the fire may be kindled around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
And when it is placed on the patient's limb, and the hand is on the area we have mentioned, then when we have the suction cups and do not need to hold the hand so that the vapor rises over that area, the suction cup will dissolve immediately.
And apply the fire according to its method, and repeat it if you need to use it again.
But in the case of a suction cup used for treating pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no crossbar or frame, and it is administered only when it is filled with water and placed on the limb.
And this is the form of it: And the larger this suction cup is, the better, so that it can hold a greater quantity of water.
Chapter xcviij.
Bloodletting should not be administered in movable parts but in those members where it is impossible to apply cupping due to their small size, such as the gums and palate and similar areas; or in bare flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the clear waters near decaying matter.
And then they should be left in clear water day and night until they are hungry, so that no remaining food stays in their stomachs. And then evacuate the body at the beginning of bloodletting and cupping. And then rub the patient's limb until it reddens. And then place them on the affected area.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if suction with cupping is possible in the area, it is better to proceed with it.
And if not, then wash the area with cold water and then with lukewarm water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the blood extends beyond the bite marks of the leeches and there is excess bleeding, then place a cloth in cold water and apply it until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding continues, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or other astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or apply crushed parched fava beans to the area and leave them until they adhere to the skin, at which point the bleeding will stop.
In case it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from attaching, then at that time wash the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the spots to let blood flow; and afterwards they should be paused, because those when feeling any blood will immediately attach.
And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ash on them, and they will cease immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is particularly necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Oh, son, be aware that the foolish doctors and the common folk boast about this chapter, as well as those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of it even for a moment; and I have not adopted what follows, except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted the science.
And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience is based; now I condense it for you and release it from the burden of lengthiness; I abbreviate it to the point of brevity; I demonstrate it at the end of clarity; and I present many forms of instruments used therein, as added by explanation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
A summary and collection of fractures of the bones, from which a preface is necessary before we begin the recollection of the parts of fractured members and their various treatments. Therefore, let us proceed with the prologue of this chapter to summarize the discourse; and let the chapters be such that at the beginning they force the artisans and practitioners to stand on the truth of these matters; so that you and those like you who wish to know or learn this noble art may do so quickly.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone that they suffer a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to consider whether to perform phlebotomy or to bandage them, or both together, if no cause prohibits this, such as weakness of constitution, or the person who has been affected being an infant, elderly and decrepit, or during times of extreme heat or cold.
And let him be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit fatty meats and filling foods, including any food that fills the veins with blood, until he is assured of a safe resolution of abscesses, and unless he fears an effusion of matter into the limb.
And now return the patient to his original regimen, which he was accustomed to before the injury.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, at this point it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beef stomachs, eggs, fresh meat, and similar items. With this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that bones broken in adults, as well as in infants and the elderly, cannot be set or consolidated according to their nature by drying of the limbs.
But nature adjusts and allows you to place on the broken bone from every part some cause similar to glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they are conjoined together, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, from no cause prohibiting it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that the patient abstains from foods that are heavy and viscous and coarse, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other limbs are different among themselves.
And you will find a description of every kind of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Describe the diversity of fractures within themselves. And the types of bone fractures are diverse in themselves; for one type of arch-shaped fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures depend on the length of the bone: thus there are fractures of the shaft, splinters, and complete and incomplete fractures, just as when a pen is prepared to write, there is a fracture due to pressure and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration of it, which will be recalled separately in their respective places.
Describe the signs of a bone fracture. And by this a bone fracture is known: there is a deformity of the limb, and an abnormal prominence and appearance of it to the touch, as well as pain when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent deformity or pain in the area where you touch the bone and move it, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there may be a deformity or small fissure. Therefore, do not neglect to press on it with your hand and by compressing it entirely; wait for the medicine from among those which will be recalled shortly, which is appropriate at the moment when you consider it necessary for the location; and it may be tight due to slight constriction.
And know that when the place is arched and not divided into two or another part from where it did not occur in the swelling, you must begin your work on the correction of the affected area where the abscess has occurred.
And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage it according to each method that you can by lightness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the alignment of it is easier than with the bone in which the swelling has occurred.
And afterward strengthen it according to what will come to mind regarding it.
But if the swelling is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or use two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb in a natural and proper position, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it is necessary for you to return those addictions with skill and according to each method that you can back to their places.
And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes from your operation either by mistake or injury; and strive according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you see any differing cause, correct it and bandage it according to the extent of your skill.
And from the improper stretching and compression, just as false doctors do with their repeated manipulations, they cause an abscess to occur because of their operation, or they cause contraction in the limb just as we have seen this happen due to their repeated manipulations.
And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and magnitude and in the form of those fractures.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the fingers and similar parts, then the wrapping should be of soft, thin cloth.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to use a firm bandage, because the tough wrapping connects and secures the large limb evenly in place, thereby preventing any injury.
And after beginning, after your initial treatment for the fracture, pause conveniently for this, over the place of the fracture with three or four bandages as the limb requires; and apply your hand gently to the bandage.
And apply to it the best-placed poultice at the part above the place of the fracture, and tie a bandage so as not to hinder the swelling with which you have bound the place of the fracture. And then extend the wrapping around the place of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the bandage until you have removed most of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured area with the previous wrapping, and then apply the poultices below the fracture; and let your operation be in tightening the bandages and loosening them as we have said about the first wrapping above.
And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is evened out, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
And then pause on the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time place on what causes the abscess and removes the inflammation; and leave this for some days; and then you tie on the plasters.
And let the plasters be about half a cubit wide and well made; or they may be of willow bark; or of palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be a bit thicker and wider than the others, and the length of the plaster according to how it fits the limb in size; then bind over the plasters with another bandage as per your first binding; and tie above this with fine linen as we have said about binding, and it should be that your binding is tighter near the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use ropes made of animal intestines for their sutures, it is a great mistake, when you see that the tension is unequal.
And similarly, fine threads are not suitable either, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
And if the patient is in pain at the ends of the threads near the sutures in those places, then pause and use silk or carded wool between them so that it does not cause harm.
In some cases, a fracture is caused by trauma, and disruption occurs in the bone, and I will come to the memory of this in the second chapter dedicated to such particularities.
And know that not all broken limbs should be set with sutures on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed in bandages immediately but after about five or seven days or more, according to your certainty of the onset of inflammation.
And this is the method of plasters used by the Ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over such injuries.
Method of making a plaster for the rapid restoration of fractures, suitable for various conditions and especially for women and children, as it does not cause heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine powder that settles on the walls of the mill from the movement of the millstones.
And confine it as it is, but sift it with white wool, and pause the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Another method for plasters to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of litharge, of acacia, of eryngo root, and migraach, which is the rind of wild millet, of each one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one half drachm each; colocynth two drachms; all should be thrice sifted and mixed with water or with white wool if the composition is heated; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and applies to many men.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migraach and the bark of white nettle one drachm each; of myrrh and aloes one half drachm each; of acacia six drachms; of Armenian bole two drachms.
All should be thrice triturated in a mortar with a crushing motion, and then sieved, and compounded with water or white wool, and it should be administered.
Method for a plaster for joints and bones that have come out of their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take pure wool and immerse it in sour wine and warm oil and apply it to the location.
In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for mature abscesses and properly expels pains.
Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take leaves of the wild fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them all and make a plaster from them.
Method of applying a paste for the treatment during the restoration of a bone fracture and when you wish to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take equal parts of plantain, chamomile flowers, violets, and spelt flour; mix all together and apply with water if the limb is not inflamed.
If the limb is inflamed, now prepare it with colander water that has been moistened or with water and use it.
Another method of making a stronger paste for resolving an abscess that is harder than the first one, which occurs during the restoration of a limb: take equal parts of plantain leaves and linseed seeds, hawthorn, clover, marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; mix all together and apply with sage water or warm water or with vinegar, depending on the condition of the limb and according to its color.
However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that a paste should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration but rather wax made of beeswax and oil, and no other cause; he recommends that it should be midway between thickness and fineness.
However, Galen is seen to have applied pastes to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes such as slight drying with heat, such as myrrh, onions, and similar to those causes that we have mentioned.
Method of making a paste to apply for injury and pain: take equal parts of egg whites, linseed, human hair cut or bird feathers, plantain, and salt; mix all together and sieve them, then make into a paste.
The amount according to which it is necessary that the bandage remain on and when it should be loosened, is such that you consider whether pain does not occur or improvement does not take place nor is the bone dislocated from its place; therefore, do not loosen it for several days. And if severe pain or improvement or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen that bandage immediately, and remove the plaster.
And take a piece of linen and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse it in cold water; with this wash the area until the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour; afterwards, place it on wool saturated in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bandage it for one night until you are sure that no abscess has formed, and to allow the swelling of the limb to subside, and to ensure that the pain is reduced.
And then apply that gentle bandaging and small plasters without tightening it as much as the first time, and gently do this until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all other symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandaging, then repeat this as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
And if no cause occurs to the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not loosen it until after three days or four or ten or seven; and in some cases all this is left for twenty days according to what appears suitable for the bandaging of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
In the hours adjust more tightly than in your first stricture altogether, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was preceded by memory.
But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and withering more than is necessary, then you will know that nutrition cannot reach it; therefore, poultice that area with warm water every day until three days have passed; and loosen the bandage a little, and through this operation lead nourishment to the limb, and it will be healed quickly.
But what unskilled restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not set at the beginning as needed and is set according to its curvature, is an error in their procedure and great fear, and if this were correct, the Ancients would have enlarged on this in their books and practiced it accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable to think that they should not do so.
Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by impact with a hard object, where the impact removes all the bone within the circumference, which is behind the bone, just as it happens in wood; thus, this type is called a chisel fracture. Or the object may cut some part of the bone and also cut through the flesh without passing the incision to the back side; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two fractures can be great or slight, and there is also a fracture that is comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is impact with something weak or falling on a stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is either penetrating that approaches the panniculus which is below the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the harm of these two fractures is great or little.
And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like parts, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some plate of bone to enter into its parts, and it is made in the place of concavity just as it happens with the bones of the arm when they occur due to their impact and are broken upon entering into their parts.
And this is mostly made in the bones of children's bodies, just as it happens with the heads of infants.
And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately. And I will return to the reminder of all this in its place.
And you should recognize all these kinds of fractures by detection over them and by inquiry into their attempts and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it is revealed on the bone, and when it is wiped clean, it appears as a black mark on the surface of the bone.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by these symptoms that there is significant danger, such as vomiting with anger, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness of voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar severe conditions, and they appear in their most serious manifestations, then doubt whether healing will occur.
And if for unusual accidents you hope for safety, then you begin the treatment of them.
Which cause is that if it comes to you the plague at the beginning as it is plague and this is in the days of winter, then it is fitting that you study in the condition of the bone before the day xiiii according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is fitting that you wait to remove the bone before the seventh day, since what is above the bone may become corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces and inflamed, then it is fitting that you incise the injured and inflamed part, as I shall recount to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient who is afflicted, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the figure of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need the detection of the bone, bleeding or a cauterized abscess, then you must proceed with what is necessary, and this is that you cover the area with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and allow the injury to rest until the abscess is calmed, and you are sure there will be no more bleeding; then begin the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of narrow form, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the first; and this is the shape of it:
And thus apply the poultice of the incision until the second day.
And it is necessary for you to know about various incisions, some of which are applied for longer periods than others; and some are applied more quickly than the others, and they vary in sharpness at their ends, and they are made of iron or flayed leather.
And use them with ease in tapping on the incisions so that you do not damage the head and cause harm to it.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to perforate around it beforehand when you apply the incisions with the chisels, which are called non-deep chisels.
And they are not called thus only because these do not reach the thickness of the skull bone nearby, for the chisel has a rounded end or margin above it that is near the head like a border or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient for you to take many of these chisels, each of which suits the thickness of each bone, so that in all parts of the skull the tip of which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the thickness of this part.
And this is the form of three types of chisels: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the chisel to another location, and proceed in this manner throughout the entire length according to the thickness of the ray or about so.
Here is the translation:
And see that you keep all caution so that the incisor does not touch any part of the hip joint.
And thus when you have circled the bone to perforate it, and if it is continuous with the hip joint, you will extract it, so that you rasp and equalize its roughness to match that of the one in the bone using a tool similar to an incisor, but make sure it is finer and more delicate than other incisors.
And if any part of the small and delicate bones breaks, now take that with ease using what is appropriate among your tools; and then treat the wound with lint and herbs which we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guillia describes and which she praises highly; and this is what she says: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and paused with the tip of this slow and cheerful incisor whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped part is left intact and no incision is made to it, while the sharp-edged part is divided into two sides along its length, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part fits against the hip joint with the sharp edge of the bone.
And then strike the incisor of one part with a small hammer until you have cut through all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and be sure to protect the panniculus so that no accident happens in any way that you fear might occur; and even if the physician were the most careless of all men and the least knowledgeable among them, or even asleep.
In such a case if any cause is attached to the bone of the abdomen in some places of bone, incise that from where the tip of the scalpel reaches, and deliver it from there where it is easier, for it is delivered without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the abdomen, and that which is abraded or remains of the bone is its surface, and it lies in roughness and small projections, then you should scrape off that roughness and eradicate those projections with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to apply them where they are most appropriate and use them correctly according to how your operation on the broken bone and its figure proceeds.
And you should apply in your ratio with which you scrape the bone at first the roughest of those razors, and gradually use one finer than the other, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach applying the thinnest and finest of all of them.
In each of the other small and fine fractures and subtle fracture, you should administer care according to what is needed for their correction.
And it is the cause that it is not feared by all those who have studied in that art. And regarding what we have written about has been shown in major fractures.
And if the abdomen is rectangular when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in warm oil, and place it over the wound opening; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and soak it in wine and warm oil, and place it on top of the first cloth as lightly as possible so that you do not press on the surrounding tissue; then apply a thick bandage over it, but bind it only enough to cover the wound itself.
If you are certain of this cure within one or two days that there is no danger of an abscess forming; and then loosen that [dressing] and promptly administer medicines with which excessive dryness is harmful, such as lint pads and flour poultices, and powders of endive and arsene, and similar to those.
And it is that you should make these medicines into powder which is finely ground over the wound, just as they are dry; and generally, administer to it any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And guard according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment be clean; and let it not become infected or worse; nor allow its virulence to increase. For when it is situated on the panniculus cerebri, it corrupts that area, and you will have to treat it promptly due to this malicious condition.
And if it affects the scalp, when the bone is cleansed and especially when pressure is applied to treat it, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider at such times if you encounter the accidents we have mentioned, know that it is perilous with all caution.
And if it is not blackness but the medicine that was applied above which causes this discoloration, then take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and use these to moisten a piece of cloth, and then apply it to the scalp; and promptly treat it with the spices suitable for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two main places, or one of those lesser places, because there you have two bones, since the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only inflamed, twisted, and swollen.
If one of the two main parts is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the side of the nose, and adjust that fracture from within with your index finger, and with your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause excessive pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the end of a probe with some thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
And attempt to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
And insert into the end of the nose a pad of linen cloth if the fracture is in one place, or two pads if the fracture is in two places, and let the pad be thick enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be soaked in butter, and changed daily, but I have not seen this done; rather, it is best to soak the pad in albumen of egg mixed with powdered sugar, and then leave it in place until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
In some cases, insert in the nose, instead of a sponge, a piece of cotton wrapped in lion's skin; and let it be that the fracture of the nose is so severe that the patient is not prevented from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do that, and if you wish, use sponges.
And if another swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose made of pitch or honey mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or use myrrh.
But if it does not require cauterization, now you should apply plasters to that area with sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg white; and afterwards place them over the lion's skin, and do not cover the nose with anything.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should cut around them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this; and then close the gap, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
And if there is an abscess inside the nose, now you should treat it with sponges and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no abscess at the fracture site, now observe if the fracture is only outward and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is straightforward.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, then use your right finger; and push in such a way that you bring the bone fragments together from within with ease to the outside parts, using your other hand from the outside part of the bone; act appropriately in this manner.
And if the jaw fracture has already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension from both sides as much as possible to achieve proper alignment.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth with disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately apply wax over the fractured jaw, and then apply a double cloth pad, and place a properly made bandage or a piece of cloth equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above as is appropriate for your binding material and for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food in the form of thick soups.
And if you determine that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you should examine and release it on the third day; and then correct what has already been altered of it and apply a plaster with powdered linseed, egg white, or ground sesame, after you have removed the wax from it, and place a thick wool bandage over the plaster.
And then as you place and adjust the plaster on it, if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it without releasing it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for this fracture typically strengthens in about three weeks.
And if another abscess should occur after cautery, then administer what we have mentioned for other cases in the treatment of the interior until it is healed, and let that abscess be brought to a head.
And if the fracture is a splinter, now consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or shattered, now you must use subtlety to extract those fragments with what is convenient for their removal.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, now enlarge it with a scalpel according to the quantity needed.
And when you have extracted those fragments, and if they do not come to a head by themselves, now close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters that are suitable for this purpose until it becomes inflamed, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
There are various ways the collarbone can be broken at the front part beyond the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three manners.
For it may be broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without fragments; and this is easy for restoration. Or it happens that fragments occur, making its restoration difficult. Or it is such that the fracture involves a splinter.
And the procedure in such a case, when the fracture involves a splinter, is that you have two assistants present; one to hold the splintered collarbone and guide it, and the other to extend the neck towards that part.
For adjusting the fracture with the said instruments, ensure that the shape is made according to what is needed, and not in a slight prominence or depression.
And if you need more extension, now it is necessary to place beneath the tilt of the malaligned bone a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity needed; extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the pad with your hand so that you adjust the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the clavicle's extremity to the outer parts, so that it reaches its proper position, now it is necessary for the patient to be reclined on their neck, and place a pad over the muscle on one side, about half in size.
And the assistant presses the muscle on the lower parts so that the bone of the clavicle is elevated to its proper position, and now you should correct the fracture and adjust it with the said instruments.
But if you feel protrusions of the clavicle and roughness, now it is necessary to cut into those areas and remove those protrusions with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the scalpel blades that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing beneath the clavicle the tool used for drilling; and this tool is made of wood or metal, having the following form:
And it resembles the bottom of a bowl, with this being its concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Make it as long as seems suitable to you for the operation; let it have two ends, just as times require, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you now adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will form an abscess too soon, then now employ the wound with patches and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cleft.
And if an abscess forms soon, then now apply a patch in fresh oil and rose water, and place it over that.
And do not let the splint be loose above the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so that when the bandaging is soft or you see the splint already loosened, then you must correct this and tighten the binding.
And place the patient's pillow at the back of his neck, and place underneath it a small cushion to raise his head during sleep; therefore lift the support under his armpits, so that the shoulder blade fracture is raised according to the muscle elevation; or bind his arm to his neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless it is necessary due to an abscess or swelling, within twelve days.
And then change the plaster if you have seen the face of it, and adjust it in the joint and restore it, and leave it until it is set and the shoulder blade fracture is healed.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The scapula is broken in the middle part and not at its edges.
And when it is broken in that place — and it is broken in the middle part — and it is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
And then apply powdered alum of hauv and lion's fat; and then apply powder made from doubled cloth; and then apply over the plate a thin layer of ladanum according to the quantity of the spoon, all or at least a little.
And if the plate is concave in some places of the spoon, then you fill that concavity with lion's fat, and then spread the plate according to equality.
And then apply strips of linen soaked in hot liquid with proper constriction and with firmness to the plate so that it is not displaced from its place.
And consider the bandaging each day; and every time it is softened, change it another day and tighten the plate if it has been displaced from its place.
And place the dressing on its side as appropriate.
And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
When this number is complete, then you loosen the bandage, and ensure that you know which of these are bones for which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the place of the bone piece and place the bandage below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the furcula or suppuration or cauterization should that occur.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a fractured foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains there; but the ends move apart like the legs of a cicada, becoming separated and comminuted.
And the effects when the middle of it is broken are that it inclines towards the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and a cavity is formed in the broken bone and this is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies supine on their back, and a pillow is placed between the shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and align the ribs with more than two rib pieces, and carefully perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way that suits this case until the figure of the bone returns as needed.
And then place on it a plaster and cotton, and lay thin strips of wood or reeds or similar light materials over them, wrapping all in cloth; then gently bind that around the broken bone without pressing too hard; and apply bandages to the back several times, tightening them appropriately; and afterward, consider the bandage at all times, and when it has loosened, tighten it again.
And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded due to pain, swelling, or abscess that occurred in the area, then you should cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what happened according to this method of treatment; and afterwards apply the plaster again, if it is appropriate for the condition; and adjust the bandaging until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick areas where they join; and at their extremities in front, such contusions do not happen to them because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling, but the examination of it among those mentioned.
And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture among those mentioned according to the possible method, until it is set as needed, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines toward the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing occur, similar to the pain that happens when one weeps, because the bone pierces the membrane; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to treat.
And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful remedies.
And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed outward.
Let us proceed with this by which there will not be reason to cause an inflamed abscess through cauterization, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now help is given for that.
And some of them say it should be placed above the windpipe and near where it draws in strongly; but this is similar to reasoning, yet it is feared that the windpipe might carry the superfluities to the place due to its weakness.
And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandaging follows the shape as when wrapping it according to its roundness; and nearby treat the ailment with the cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the cause of the ailment is violent constraint that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces through the membrane at a point, we fear for the ailment; now it should be that we cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument to hold the incision, the use of which was previously mentioned, and that they saw the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by stitching, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should apply heat and press poultices in rose oil onto the area, and treat the ailment with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And he should lie on his side on the bed until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the thoracic and cervical spine.
In some cases, fractures occur in the cervical vertebrae, and they heal slowly, similarly to the thoracic spine. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that time consider whether their muscles are already softened, numb, and dead; if they cannot move or stretch them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and no pain is felt there, then you know that they will not recover, and in such cases it is fatal.
And if you move those areas and feel constriction with the fingers and pain upon piercing them, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the injury will heal with treatment.
And if the cervical vertebrae show similar symptoms and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that time consider the condition of their legs.
If you see that the legs are already softened and observe similar symptoms in them as those affecting the upper body, and shortly after lying on their back they experience vomiting and involuntary evacuation, and sometimes when lying on their back they want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at that point there is no need for treatment.
But if none of those symptoms occur, the cause is better and more remote.
And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the swelling over the fractured vertebra using raw oil or boiled honey mixed with flour; place this on the affected area until the swelling subsides.
During the hours of rest, apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it over that part; and command the patient to use repose and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where pain is felt until it is healed.
And if it happens that the marrow of the bone is exposed or any cause has separated it from its place, then cover it with a plaster and place that bone; then bring together the two lips of the wound, using sutures if it is large; and thereafter treat it with one of the incarnative ointments until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the tip of the limb, then cover it with the fingers of your left hand in the buttocks, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and thereafter apply a plaster and splint, if you need them, and bind it.
And if you feel exposed fractures in it, then act on that, remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad [structure].
The bones of the broad structures are often broken, and when they break, the fracture in them is not a complete break at their extremities but rather a split along their length and a displacement to the sides; and as a result, the patient experiences pain in the location and puncture sensation, and movement is restricted when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until the fracture assumes the figure of its natural position.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then adjust it as suits you by reduction so that it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in the long bone that inclines toward the lower parts, then make the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture. And when you have adjusted it, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane beside it, and bind it firmly with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any puncture of the fracture or movement of the splint.
And adjust the concavity by filling it so that it conforms to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an acute abscess occurs, then stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is brought to a head, and apply what is appropriate for that condition as it has developed; and then return to the restoration of it, and bind it as is necessary.
And if the bones are displaced or crushed, then you must treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjunct bone.
The adjunct is what is located between the spine and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this form:
Let there be two ends of bandages, and let it be suspended from a high place.
Lay the patient on a chair; then place the broken arm outside onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the stick is attached.
Then suspend something heavy from it, or have the patient extend it downward with their hands; and then the physician should place the fracture along its natural lines until the fracture returns to its proper position.
Another method is to have the patient lie on their back with their neck raised and suspend the hand of the neck with bandages; then instruct two assistants that one should hold what is above the fracture by its ends, and the other should hold below him; and each should pull in their respective directions.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then wrap bandages over the fracture on one side and over it again on the other side, and have each of the two assistants pull in their respective directions.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the knot and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around that joint.
Tie it in this manner with ease and effort, and then when it is tied properly as needed and applied well, secure it tightly unless an abscess occurs.
If pus forms in an abscess and is drained, within seven days there should be no stricture; then pause on placing linen strips soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess rests, and thereafter strengthen it.
And the method to strengthen it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap it with wet cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand over its own muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is the widest and strongest of the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus three fingers in total from all sides.
And then strengthen over the splints with the support which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your support over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And the farther the fracture is from the joint, the smaller the support should be.
And thus, when you position the splints and the support as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear that pus will form in the abscess, then leave the support and the splints for seven days as we have said.
Then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that inflammation or pus does not occur properly or by swelling; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to excess or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
If you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for at least three days or more.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and place their hands on their stomach.
And place a pad filled with wool on the helper, and at all times of the night or day, ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the bandage is too loose; thus, correct this with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at first until healing begins; then it is appropriate to make the diet richer.
For the custom of the splint and cast is to be tight for forty days; then it should be loosened, a bath administered, and treated with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture is healing by rubbing together, then do not loosen the bandage and the splints for one day or even two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of which is small and is that which lies under the little finger, and the other is larger and is placed below the smaller one, towards the lower part.
If only the larger bone or the smaller one is broken, and if they are disjointed.
And when the smaller bone is broken above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the bone below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken at once.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, then it is appropriate for the physician, due to its easy restoration, to allow a small extension with ease until it is aligned.
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to allow a more vigorous extension.
And if both bones are broken at once, then it is necessary to allow the most vigorous extension.
And it is necessary to place the hand in position for its restoration and extension stretched out on a board, with the wrist above all the fingers, except that the thumb should be lower than the other fingers, and the patient should lie on a cushioned bed.
And there should be a board in front of it at the height or directly in line with it, so that the patient does not have to strain.
And the attendant should extend the arm from below with his hand or bandage, and another attendant should extend it similarly from above.
And the physician should align the bone so that it is set in the best position possible.
And if in the setting of the bone you stagger, then at that hour reduce all parts to their place with your skill.
And if it appears in the injury separately that the bone is displaced and it is not to your hope for its restoration, then at that hour you act upon it and remove it according to the method which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with infection, I have already made a separate chapter for that, and so take the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be between thickness and fineness, and place a bandage over it with gentle pressure so that the abscess subsides; and then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from ground powder mixed with egg whites, and afterward place poultices; and let the poultice placed over that fracture be wider and firmer.
And know that the number of poultices for the arm varies in major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one joint or in two joints together.
And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is necessary to loosen the bandaging on the parts above the fracture or on the parts below it, place the bandage a bit looser according to how it was described at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened cloths, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is wrapped should be of a proper medium between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging for some days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as when inflammation occurs in the limb, you should immerse the limb in hot water until that inflammation subsides.
And do not force the limb until it rests, and then return to the bandaging.
And if the dislocation has already been reduced and the bone is already in place and appears to be so, then correct all of this with your skill.
And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen that slightly and leave it for some days until nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen that.
But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage for about twenty days or thereabouts.
And then have the patient's arm suspended by their own skill of agitated movements, and make them lie down to sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or sometimes it may be restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the strength of the patient.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the fingers.
Know that at the base of the thumb and at the joints of the fingers, when there is a fracture, it rarely leads to severe complications.
When it happens that the bone is fractured or dislocated, at once it is necessary that the patient lie still and face up on the bed according to equality, and place the arm on top of that extended.
And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the surgeon should adjust them until they are properly set.
And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess occurs which requires cauterization; and then place a piece of wood above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, and now make it appear as a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it with cloth.
And let the piece of wood be curved with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the curve is applied to the palm; and hold that as necessary.
But if the fracture is in the parts outside, now it is necessary to place a piece of wood above and another piece below on the palm, so that the hand is supported and straight; and then bind it, as you would wrap the fingers with bandages.
And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, now if it is the thumb, adjust it as necessary and then bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not injured.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the ring finger, or in the little finger, now it should be adjusted and wrapped to the adjacent finger; or all of them should be wrapped together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of an abscess cut and opposed — both the cold operation — both with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated the narration of them.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the bone in the forearm.
The bone of the forearm is mostly broken and is evident to the touch according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face.
And the attendant should extend all the bandages to their proper place according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is closer to the elbow of the forearm, then the bandage should be placed toward the back at the part of the elbow, so that the extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the back, then the bandage should be placed toward the back, and the extension should be made at the parts below.
And then the physician should equalize the bone on both sides as much as possible so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good union; now it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the cold abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The binding of the splint should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off the excess; then wrap the limb up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the flesh and the splint near the end towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the upper part of both sections, and then wrap around the splint and the limb whatever excess remains of the bandage.
And then place over the limb at the site of the fracture splints, and lay one strip over the bone of the splint.
And then fill the spaces between the splint and the limb with soft cloths, so that the binding is well padded.
And then begin a strong binding directly over the fracture with three or four turns, and as you move away from the site of the fracture using the bandage, your binding should become looser, lighter, and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the cloth towards the lower parts until it reaches the ankle, and tie both ends of the strips from the other side so that the bandage does not become loose from its place.
And then leave the binding in place as it is, so that no corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions occur on the limb; and if any such cause should arise, cut through the bandage at that point and correct what has occurred as soon as possible, as we have said before.
If there is in the bone pus of the bone which must be evacuated, then you should open it as soon as possible; and if not, place a poultice on it and incise that, and treat with whatever preceded the recall until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by other things that are attached to it, as we have said about auxiliary plates and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of the limb in such a manner made, a bad limp does not occur; and if it is restored alone, or something else applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the person limps forever.
And know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that the fracture of the kneecap often occurs in this manner, but it also happens due to various other causes.
However, if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or bruise in its parts, and this is either one injury or several injuries, and everything about this has been stated concerning the sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts and among the aforementioned should be opened so that it may be joined and conjoined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and fabrication.
Apply the plaster and place it on that round bandage if you need one; then stretch it above tightly to fit appropriately.
And consider all the positions that we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions. Apply these instructions according to what is appropriate until the injury is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a hip fracture.
Know that in the hip there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the hip bone; the other is slender and is called the femur.
And when any of the types of fracture occur to both bones as happens with the two bones of the arm, then the restoration is done in the same way as for the arm, and the operation is the same.
And if you join the two bones together, the hip is stabilized in all directions.
And if the more slender bone is fractured, the hip is stabilized in the forward directions.
And if the thicker bone is fractured, you will find it below, and these are causes that are not within your control.
And then administer extension, alignment, and binding of the fragments accordingly.
However, be careful if the hip fracture is jagged with multiple fragments; then the extension should be gentle and done with great caution.
And when there is any cause for surgery on the arm, and you have aligned the bones and completed all of the necessary operation, then you will take pieces of wood from trees that are peeled below their bases, and those which are made similarly to palm branches; choose among these those with slight grooves, and not those with ridges like fingers, and make their length according to the length of the arm, and insert them deep into the pus beneath.
And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one at the end of the arm on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be inserted deep into the pus at the proper location.
And then bind the two bones in three places at both ends and in the middle, for with this structure the arm is prevented from tilting to either the right or left side, and thus remains in proper position.
And now a wooden brace has been applied according to the length of the arm; and it should be placed such that the arm can still move appropriately.
And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a case of bruising as well.
And then consider each day the arm and study it carefully based on previous observations, and you should guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, then act upon them appropriately until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
To the scalp does not happen a fracture entirely; but to the bones of the foot happens some fractures; and to the said bones of the foot few happens a fracture, and does not happen to them except healing in the manner of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot happens a fracture and times those bones be raised up above themselves between them, then the patient should rest his foot on the ground prepared thusly as mentioned.
And place one foot on what is raised by those bones, and then press on them, and compress them, and bind them until they return to their places.
And then apply a plaster and place it above, and below the arch of the foot place a small board with two padded ends.
And then strengthen that with the foot in a proper position, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other materials as needed.
And as three or four days pass, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones compressed, or broken or dislocated, and the treatment for these conditions is as you know.
But if any of them are broken, then restore those, and compress them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the bones of the hand. And then place the broken bone in a splint according to the length of the finger, and make it somewhat wider; and below the foot place the board as recommended to you, and strengthen that with proper positioning.
But if what is broken are two or three or more of the bones, then you place on each finger a splint of its appropriate length wrapped in soft cloth, and secure the board at the bottom of the foot so that it rests on one end of the board under the arch of the foot for proper support.
It is fitting for you not to forget that you should not disregard all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have spoken about; and pay attention to each incident concerning this as well.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the bone of the female pelvis and of the bone of the penis and of the shaft of the male.
When the bone of the female pelvis is fractured, at that moment perform the caesarean section while she lies flat, and then slightly incline her to the side on one side, and have someone hold her from behind.
And then the midwife fills the pelvis with cotton, and it should be done in the pelvis as if for a regular delivery; and then the woman should be urged to push, elevating the buttocks little by little, because all of this is intended so that she faces the opening of the pelvis as if for a normal delivery and the fractured bone returns.
And then place poultices on her buttocks, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after urination reduce and return that according to the method by which you managed it at the beginning, and then return to her original poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, because it takes that long to restore.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie one end of a reed to it; then insert the entire bladder into her pelvis, and then blow air through the reed until the bladder is inflated inside the pelvis, because this helps the fracture to return.
Let it be filled with cotton and dressed for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, immediately administer for its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the thigh bone.
And what is right is not concealed in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has some study and use of this my book; for such a fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via directness in its restoration and alignment, and thus you understand well.
But in the arm of a man when it is broken, take a sling made of leather, and put the arm in that; then place it on padding of cloth, and wrap it up, and afterwards leave it for three days or about that, until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of bone fractures when there is swelling.
It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with swelling, and especially if the bone is large such as the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you apply cupping and incise it immediately if the conditions for incising indicate this to you as we have said above.
And if the swelling emits blood, then it is necessary that you apply cupping to retain it in such a way that you powder on it powdered eggshell, unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
If an abscess is cauterized, then for seven days you must refrain from the restoration of its interior until it subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth, because you will cause harmful accidents.
If the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should attempt to reduce it and align it with ease and little extension.
If extension is not possible with your hands and the alignment must be done with tools, then you reduce it using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four of these, depending on what is needed for various types of fractures.
And let it be round, and let it have little groove so that it does not bend due to the pressure upon it during the operation.
And let it have sharp ends with margins at its extremities; and let the top of it be thick, and from the middle inward to the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntas atelarem," which means a small palette.
It is necessary for the extremity to be placed at rest with it elevated above the protruding end of the bone.
And press it in one motion until the bone returns to its place and is aligned with some degree of alignment.
Therefore, try to align the ends of the broken bone between them, and if the end of the fractured part is slender, and you do not find that instrument suitable for it, then you should insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then insert that part with one of the saws which we have mentioned; or cut that part with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
And smooth that which remains rough on the bone and small jagged parts.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what will be of great help to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and if it is summer, do not apply cerotic or any other substance that contains oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer poultices during the appropriate time of your bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can insert a probe with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be careful not to touch the wound near the fracture, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, and it has caused death or serious illness to their patients, which is harmful. And if the swelling is soft, flexible, different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the swelling is large or is a bad swelling, and you fear some of the maladies that we have recounted, and you feel pain in the area, then it is not necessary to wait on those splints, but make an envelope of hard cloths instead of splints and bind them there.
And when after one day or two the swelling begins to subside and it is evident that pus has formed, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over the bandage, and promptly apply poultices, such as those we customarily use for treating swellings, such as tetrafarmacum and similar remedies.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the swelling every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus can drain from it downward with ease.
If several days have passed and the swelling has not consolidated nor has pus drained from it, then you should know that here there is a delay due to small particles that need to be removed from the swelling. And of those delays, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. For those from which they cannot be separated and cause pain in the limb, perforate them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
And if the swelling becomes inflamed or infected, which are signs of inflammation, or another form of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those remedies mentioned in the preceding chapter on the treatment of such conditions.
And when the bone must be cut, it protrudes above the limb like the bones of the chest and shoulder and similar to those of larger limbs, and do not attempt traction on it, nor its extraction for fear that this might lead to death after four movements; wait until it softens inside, as it will easily fall out in about twenty or thirty days; and during this time care for the wound if it is visible, and otherwise leave it alone.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of knotting that occurs in the aftermath of some fracture.
This knotting often occurs in the aftermath of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and disfigures the shape of the limb; and it significantly impedes the normal function of the limb.
Then consider whether the knotting is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloes, sesame, myrrh, saffron, and similar ones; take any of these or all of them, and mix them with vinegar to make them styptic, or with egg white, or with vinegar to make them astringent, and apply this over the knotting on cloth, and bind it tightly over it with proper compression.
And keep the compression on without loosening it for several days; then loosen it and reapply it until the knotting is softened; or apply a sheet of lead gently over it, as lead has the property of reducing swelling in limbs.
But if the knotting has already turned to bone and is causing tightness and necessity demands that it be removed quickly, then cut it at its weakest point, and excise the excess or reduce it with some remedies until it softens; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they are set and the limb is restrained without conforming to its natural condition.
When a fracture is restored and the limb is restrained, it is done for various reasons, among which one reason is excessive manipulation of the bandaging and binding not according to what is necessary; or by excess in constriction of the bandages preventing nourishment from reaching the member; or by excessive application of poultices; or by unnecessary movement at an inappropriate time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their body supple so that blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and apply poultices and leeches to them.
And apply plasters to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment, or continue applying poultices with warm water, until nourishment flows and returns it to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prevent proper healing from taking place.
When it happens that a limb, already restored near healing, shows deformity of the broken bone with swelling and nodosity, and this is due to a change in the form of the limb, but the limb is not prevented from its natural function, then you should not heed the words of those who believe that the limb is newly fractured.
Let this be known to all doctors and restorers who have performed this in our land; and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
If lameness and limping are recent, it is appropriate to bathe them in warm water containing certain soft herbs, such as althea roots, linden flowers, and melilot, or similar; and apply a soothing plaster or poultice properly prepared; or take mucilage made from althea root mixed with boiled linseed oil or olive oil, and apply it; or crush fatty figs in dove’s milk or something similar of the medicines known as consolidating remedies.
And in some cases, it is dissolved through frequent gentle friction, which should be applied to the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
But if the tortuosity has already advanced and become hard and turned into bone, and there is a need for treatment with iron, then it must be ensured that the pus above is drained, and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and what is superfluous from the nodules of that part with the bone should be cut using fine instruments, and ease in this should be provided through diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On Dislocation of Joints.
Dislocation is the wrongful displacement of any of the joints from its proper place, which prohibits movement, distorts the figure of the limb, and causes severe pain and great injury.
When a dislocation occurs, it must be immediately reduced without delay, for if reduction is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason it is not good to move or keep the patient standing during the inflammatory stage, as this often causes spasms and pain in the teeth.
But when this happens, you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and then allow them to rest until the inflammation subsides; afterwards, apply warm water and oil to the limb, and then reduce it with ease.
And treat the entire limb with what will help its recovery and return to normal.
And now I will order the chapters on dislocation as they were preceded by fractures; starting from the upper part of the body and moving to the lower part.
Chapter XXIIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
When the two jaws are dislocated, they do not delay in treatment; and the dislocation of both can occur in one of two ways: either they are displaced from their positions by slight movement and slightly relaxed; or they are completely dislocated and fully out of place, to the point where they are relaxed at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and where they cannot close it, and the tongue is wrapped around its position.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its normal position on its own with little cause.
If the dislocation is complete and perfect, it must be reduced immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor’s two fingers into the cavity of the dislocated jaw from inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both thumbs if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers remain outside in a similar manner; and instructs the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax them entirely; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes it back until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer inhalation with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both sides, and do not delay the reduction of both sides at all, as we have said.
And when we return them and they are aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place small pieces of cloth covered in wax on them, and make it from beeswax and oil softened; and afterward bind it with bandages gently.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be positioned between both ears, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food cut up finely until such time as when the pains are relieved and the jaws are healed, then allow them to do what they wish.
And this should be administered with bandages, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they are not returned to their places, fevers often occur frequently, and the patient's belly is easily distended, and he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know it is lost; and most often that person dies from this in ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest inside towards the hands; and sometimes it is dislocated outwardly, and this is apparent by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then apply a plaster and powder to that area.
But the extremity of that which joins the collarbone is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it should be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as you are prepared.
And then apply a plaster, powder, and bandaging to that area, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this happens quickly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
It is most often dislocated outward below the tendon, and more particularly in those whose flesh is thin, it dislocates easily; but in those with thick flesh, it remains outside with difficulty.
It often happens to some people due to a blow or a fall that the muscle becomes swollen and inflamed, and as a result, it is likely to become dislocated.
Then you should understand this before you start treating it, and proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is below the tendon; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there is a clear difference between them; you will find a depression at the head of the muscle below the tendon upon touch, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they make any such movement.
If it is dislocated below the foot or above, you will clearly feel it upon touch, and it is not concealed.
And from this dislocation an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction is that the surgeon lifts the hand of the patient to the upper parts; then he places his fingers below the tip of the finger and elevates the joint forcefully back to its proper place, and the surgeon raises the hand of the patient, and extends it as needed; then he holds it down until it returns easily.
But if it does not return as we have said, and from the time of the initial dislocation for several days, baths in warm water should be given and an ointment should be administered to soften and line as if for rheumatism, using dittany, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and held below the tip of the finger in anticipation of it becoming equally between laxity and tension, and then the physician places his hand under the ball, elevates the muscle upwards, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not injured below, while another assistant holds the head of the patient to prevent injury below, for it will quickly return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side, and insert his arm below the tip of the patient's finger and elevate the tip upwards while the patient hangs in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient’s hand from below their abdomen. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to have something else suspended for them to hang from, so that they can be properly supported, because the dislocation will quickly return.
And it is reduced in this other way: which is that a long pole be stuck into the ground with its top being round like a pestle, neither thick nor thin, and nearby it should be placed below the patient; then when you place over the top of the pole lion’s skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is stretched out behind at the sides; and his body from the other side is extended with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a pole whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and the thickness of it should be proportioned according to the size of the thimble, as follows:
And then over the round top place lion’s skins so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
And then it should be placed below the joint of the patient, and his hand or arm should be stretched over the pole behind at the sides, and the pole should be wrapped around the helper’s arms and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and the hand should be stretched out behind at the sides, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will return quickly.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to each way that is possible for you, then place below the joint a pad of wool of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrrh and egg white over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and then bind tightly below the joint with proper pressure; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and left alone, and do not disturb his hand for seven days.
When the patient's food has been restricted for a short time, so that the limb is strengthened, it is easier for recovery to occur.
And when the food is given more frequently, every seven or five days, and one movement is exercised; and thus if it is fixed and not softened, then it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs because of moisture or for some other reason, then it should be treated with cautery three times, as was stated earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the ligature are reduced several times, but it is not fixed and the hand cannot raise that arm to its usual position, then you will know that the nerves of it, which run alongside the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be set in place again.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs due to the feet and the heel or the rear parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns to place.
And the other ligature should be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if there is stiffness and delay in the movement of the limb as it recovers, then the patient should use baths several times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so towards the front than behind. And this dislocation does not hide from you as it appears below either through vision or touch according to its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated bone, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach the shoulder muscle.
And you should treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes infected, for if it becomes infected, the reduction of the bone is difficult, and even then it may not heal completely; especially when it is in the rear positions, for they are worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many people have died because of them.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand be extended towards the two sides, and the arm be expanded, and the physician's hands should be over the collarbone behind it, and he should push the joint with his fingers together or with the heel of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is towards the front, then it returns as he bends his hand with his other hand, until he strikes the collarbone with the heel of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it firmly by two ministers so that it does not move during the extension.
After you have turned the arm completely around, since it is wrapped in a long doubled cloth over the hand, or bandage.
And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this may be those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint and ease; and then press the joint firmly inward until it returns.
And after the reduction of the shoulder, place it on a plaster which has styptic and protective properties over an egg membrane, and bind it with moderate tightness, and hang the arm from the neck, and leave it like this for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you undo the bandage of it and leave it.
And if you see the joint not properly strengthened, then replace the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for several days until it is healed; and then loosen it.
But if it happens that there is swelling around the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer moistening by bath and gentle friction, and compression until it is calmed; or place cold applications on the joint, which are suitable for excessive motion; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And then remove that and put it in water; when dry, now rub the joint with moderate friction, and then apply cold applications again, which are suitable for excessive motion, once, and the second time, and the third time. Take an instrument for bathing, ensure that it is clean.
And if you wish, place a dressing over that moist and inflamed wound, and apply it several times, since it is moist, and reduce it to its proper condition.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand. Note that there seems to be a minor error or inconsistency in the phrase "between the arm and the hand," as typically the elbow joint is between the upper arm and the forearm. However, I have translated it as closely as possible to the original text.
When the hand is dislocated in some cases, the reduction of this dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it is important that there be speed in reducing it at the moment when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
The reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the joint of the hand of the injured person on a table and having an assistant extend the hand. The surgeon then places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it is important to consider whether the palm is already displaced towards the back of the hand. If this is the case, the injured person should place the back of their hand on a table during extension and reduction. If the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be directly on the table so that the surgeon's hand can press over the vicinity of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then dress it with a bandage to allow for swelling and leave it as such. Do not repeat this, because otherwise, the patient will suffer and you cannot proceed with the reduction until more days have passed.
However, the joint remains stiff according to its curvature; and you find in the patient no other cause, except that the muscle is softened and cannot be strengthened by any means; now you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and now it does not heal there unless it is made firm with cauterization and then some cause is conferred upon it.
Then when the inflammation has subsided, now pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterwards let it be loosened and left, and let the arm be exercised.
However, if the movement of it remains and you encounter any gravity in it, now treat that with warm water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joints.
In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
And when any of them is dislocated towards the thumb or to the palm side, now press the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend it until it is properly healed on its own.
And when it is night, wrap that according to the mentioned narration, and do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
If it appears that the joint is dislocated at the elbow, and he ties it to that part and does with it the first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and the vertebrae are moved from their places, there is no treatment at that moment, for death is expected by the patient.
The sign of this is that the excretion from the patient occurs without their will and they cannot retain it; often some parts of them or both legs or arms, or one of them are weakened; or a vertebra is moved from its place, as sometimes it moves and at other times the displacement goes to four directions.
When it is displaced towards the rear parts, it is called retrolisthesis.
However, the treatment for this is to determine whether the retrolisthesis occurs due to weakness, because in that case there is no cure and it will not heal completely.
But in the case where it occurs due to falling or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, which I have summarized for brevity; however, little excuses the excess with my proximity to understanding and exposition, in which I have laid out this and formed it from various instruments different from those used to demonstrate this and explain that.
And of those, it is not cured except that which occurs in the two properly as I recount.
And it is that the patient lie extended on his face upon a level surface near a wall, and be stretched out below the bed moistened with something so that the feet are not lifted.
And nearby a straight post should be placed, inserted into the ground at the end of the level surface near his head, and another post around his feet at the other end of the level surface.
And the minister hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a firm bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the post which is behind his head, and tie that to it; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with the knees, and behind the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie those to the other post which is behind his feet.
And the minister should extend the bandage to the side of the post, and do not move the two posts and the bandages from their places in which they are fixed, but rather ensure they are not moved as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places upon that a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
If this method does not return the desired result, take a table whose width or length is about three cubits and dig near where we said the patient should be a place into which the end of the table can fit. And then place the middle of the table over the spine, and the surgeon places his feet on the other end, and gently presses until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, open again the one that is wrapped around the hand; and place the patient's head at the end of two poles, the length of which is one arm, and behind his head place another pair of poles in the same manner; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and attach ropes to each pole through which they are firmly secured to the ground so that they do not move.
And place one round pole in which is the rope, and let it be wrapped around the two ropes of the two poles.
And at the end of it is a rope in which the pole is attached, its length being one palm including what is wrapped around; and on the other two poles there is something similar to that.
And then pull the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet at the rope behind his head, and the ropes that you have tied to the patient’s waist at the rope behind his legs.
And then place someone behind each rope who will turn the rope with their hand, and the surgeon will adjust the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned to its place and the area is leveled, it is necessary to apply an excrescent plaster with honey on alum, and then cover it with wool; and afterwards place over the plaster a strip of wood whose width is three fingers or around that size, and the length should be as much as is needed for the diseased area, and on both sides of the spine.
And afterwards apply the bandage we have mentioned, and use a mild diet until he is healed.
And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer medicines that reduce and soothe, along with prolonged application of the board we have recommended; and already a lead plate should be applied to that location.
And at times inflammation occurs in the lower part of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone is one where excessive inflammation can lead to death if too much precaution is not taken with this medicine.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle attachment are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with slight movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways, as it can be dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
And it is more severely displaced towards the interior parts, and somewhat towards the anterior or posterior parts.
The sign of the dislocation towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the limb of the healthy person next to the affected one, it appears longer and the knuckle more prominent than in the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their leg even slightly, as this location where bending occurs is obstructed by inflammation or abscess due to cautery, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the exterior parts is that the symptoms are contrary to those described for this condition.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the anterior parts is that the limb is extended but cannot be bent without pain in the joint, and if they attempt to walk, they are unable to do so towards the front; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is obstructed by an abscess, and they must walk on their heel.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the posterior parts is that they cannot extend the joint, nor can they bend it forward as they would normally bend their neck, and the limb is shorter than the other, and the throat is softened, and the head of the bone is in that location.
However, the reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, in which case it has already settled in its position, so you administer reduction according to its disposition, but at this point it is not a complete cure; therefore, there should be no expectation for an immediate recovery.
In the case of the one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, place your hand so that you turn the joint and extend it to the spaces within and to the spaces without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns and does not require other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the hollow from beneath the part below, or insert your fingers there, or apply a bandage that lies over the hollow above the denol; and another minister should extend the hand from above such that he places his fingers underneath the tubercles of it; and immediately bind with a lion bandage over the root of the joint, and have another minister hold the extremity of the bandage.
And this extension of it or of the part within to the angle of the shoulder blade, or of the posterior part to the part of the back.
And this extension of all those at once within, while the patient is raised upon his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And thus if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species what I shall say about its proper treatment.
In the reduction of it when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner parts, the patient should be reclined on his side; then place the bandages over the root of the joint at the location where the head of the joint and the place behind the angle meet; then extend the bandage from above the part of the angle to the most posterior part of the shoulder blade.
Let another strong minister take the arms of the patient and pull the place around the diseased bone strongly to the sides through extension, for that will return it to its proper place.
And this species is the one that heals most quickly among those to which this member is reduced compared to the others.
But if it swells up on you and does not obey the treatment in this species of healing for a long time, then now it is necessary to bind both sides of the patient together with strong, quick bandages over both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each band be the quantity of four fingers, and let the diseased limb be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And let the patient be suspended at the top of the post, and hold it in their hand; and let the distance from the ground be the length of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the bone, and let another youth hold the patient, while this other youth pulls the limb with great force, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outer part, let the patient lie on a bench as we have recommended for the yellow jaundice; and bind the bandage tightly around the affected limb and the feet.
And then place two posts, one at the foot of the patient and the other at the head; and then place adjusted posts on each side of the pillar on which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the post being between his limbs, to prevent the extension downward from being pulled.
Let each servant extend his part, and the physician apply his skill to reduce it according to art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the limb be extended quickly, and according to this narration mentioned above for the back; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the affected area, and with one hand pulls that tight, and while pulling tightly extends that towards the lower part from the front.
And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended towards the lower part and raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that he be paused on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for the same thing if the hip joint is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the positioning of the body over two supports; and it is on his face with the limbs extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it is necessary to apply compression to the table at the location of the joint.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as necessary — and the sign of hip joint reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient extends his leg freely without discomfort, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place — and now you must adjust two things: apply a bandage and wrap it so that the hip joint is not moved in any direction; and instruct the patient to rest for three or four days.
Then undo the bandage and the dressing, and compare one side with the other.
Now, if you see those marks on the body, now you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of inflammation, now you return and apply a plaster to it, and treat it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
Then undo that [treatment], and have the patient delay in walking on each [limb] for several days, until they are comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the joint.
The joint can be dislocated in three ways, as it can be dislocated outward, inward, and to the rear rather than forward; it cannot be dislocated forward.
And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their hand to the chest; now you know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of dislocation is to instruct the patient to straighten their limb as much as possible; then place your hand against the side of it, and put your feet between his foot; then attach the joint with both your palms, and hold them firmly over the joint with strength, and another assistant should extend the leg until the joint returns to its proper place.
And the sign of successful reduction is that the patient's hand adheres to the chest effortlessly and naturally.
Apply the plaster to it and make the cup adhere to the wound, then bind those with a bandage for three days or four, and afterward loosen them.
And do not use the limb for walking for several days until it is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it to you is unnecessary, now administer a wide extension with bandages, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of talus dislocation.
The talus sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus becomes inflamed towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment for its displacement is gentle reduction, and it should be extended with ease using bandages until it returns to its normal position.
But in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, ensure that the limb is straight, and have a strong and capable assistant hold it behind both of them at the midpoint.
And you should hold with your right hand the most superior part of the foot, and with your left hand the part below the heel at the location of the ankle.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand do it twice, and then extend with your left; and press the toes of the foot with your right hand around the cup with effort.
In this place two incisions as we have counted.
And then press the feet of the patient to the third incision, and you will be at the nail.
Therefore, if it returns in one incision or in two according to this method, and if the foot heals properly, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, for that is what happens.
But if you are prohibited from reducing the deformity as we have recommended, then lay the patient on their back on the ground, and place a board firmly on the ground under them, so that it fits between their thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around them so that they do not displace the injury.
And then the attendant should hold the patient's thighs, and another attendant should extend the injured foot with their hands or with bandages around the neck of the foot; and then each attendant should pull against the extension as instructed by them, and the board should be placed between the patient’s thighs to retain it, so that the body does not be drawn towards parts below the desired extension.
And then the surgeon should heal the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy thigh below, as the dislocation will return with ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you are assured of the successful reduction, now apply a plaster and bind it firmly with bandages, and secure the foot with bandages to the board.
And be careful to avoid the nerves which are located behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
Let it remain like that for two days or three; and if the dressing is softened, remove it.
Then untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if he is forced to move before that time, there is no assurance that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not admit of cure.
And if it happens that the abscess is cauterized, you should now apply what we have previously described concerning the administration of the liquid for treatment and application in another place until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the said limbs.
It is necessary that the one who is dislocated be kept at rest for a short period without work; and what is not difficult is quickly accomplished.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the leg, then you should have the patient lie on his back on a level surface of the ground or on a table, and let him be positioned as if he were sitting.
Then stand on your foot, and place your other foot above the joint you intend to treat, and then step down with force until it returns to its normal position, so that you see it become aligned and no longer protrude in an elevated location.
Then place the bottom of the foot on a board that covers the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it securely with proper bandaging for three days; then untie it and allow the patient to rest from walking for ten days until it is healed and recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Concerning the kinds of dislocations that are made due to plague or fracture or any such conditions.
When any cause of those occurs, and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of it, several times death may succeed.
And because of this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning use medicines that only reduce swellings, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but rather to whom you hope will bring salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, where some hope appears. And then strive to immediately perform the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
And then if the member returns as we want, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the bones that are separated, then you proceed to set them, and do as we have said regarding simple injuries in the places where those bones are located.
And guard and avoid, according to your virtue, the use of instruments in ways that cause fear as my teachings have instructed you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and safer for your true body, which you will experience in your time. Thus finely are the words of Albucasis perfectly translated from which God be blessed. Amen.
