O, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the sciences of medicine, by the completion of its contents and by the exposition of it and by the clarification of it, in my view I have complicated for you to love this treatise, which is part of what I do with my hands, which is surgery.
For the operation with my hands has been abandoned in our region and in our time is entirely deprived, except that barely the science of it remains visible; and there are no more than a few small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have changed many things to errors and hesitation among those who understand it, weakening its force and the art.
And it is clear to me that I should revive this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the work as mentioned by adding explanation and preparation, which cause is necessary.
But the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his hands in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must be trained in the science of anatomy, which reveals knowledge of the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; and understanding of the bones, nerves, and muscles, their number and extension; and of the pulsating veins and stationary ones, and the places where they are found.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that in name there is much, but in the work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
This is what we have already said at the beginning of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy cannot be excused from falling into error by which men are killed, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and get themselves out of that lack of knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had to incise an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, and the woman died as a result.
And I saw another doctor who claimed that he would remove a stone from a man who had been suffering from it, and the stone was large. When he came to do it, he pulled out that stone along with part of the bladder, so that on the third day the man died.
And I had already concluded that it was impossible to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid wages by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he attended to a black castrated man who had a fracture in his skull. Because of the doctor's ignorance, he exposed the fracture over the wound with cotton and splints in a strong structure but did not leave room for drainage.
And he loosened it according to his desires, and soon after he dressed the wound again. He then left it like that for several days and commanded us to remove the bandage; and thus it was that the skull and the flesh became abscessed, and he came to ruin.
Thus he calls to him, and prepares to loosen the bandages, and when calm is achieved he begins to relieve his pains.
But when corruption was confirmed in the member, because he could not restrain it, and it did not cease to spread the corruption within the member until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another surgeon who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the magnitude of its wickedness was evident to him, the lord of it.
The reason is that the melancholic humor in cancer is pure, therefore it does not need to reach every part of the body entirely, but rather remains in the member which suffers from being wholly affected by it.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two aspects: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work where there is risk even in the best conditions.
And I have already mentioned this in every place in this book where an operation occurs with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and avoid that, so that the pages do not find a way to speak ill of you and dishonor you.
And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with skill and firmness.
And use the best path by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible diseases that are hard to cure, and stand firm against what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and reputation does not escape you: for it remains more to your glory, and even more in this world and forever in your sanctity.
Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries: Do not treat illness badly, for then bad doctors are not named.
And thus I have dedicated this book in three parts.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered about the head, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered about the head, and in the forms of the instruments.
I shall speak of the quality of the movements of that cautery and of its ingredients, and in what condition cauterization is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movements of cauterization and its ingredients is long and verbose, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; many wise people have spoken much about it, and they are often at odds with each other. For me, a little of their speeches suffices to avoid prolongation.
And so I say that cauteries conform to all complete structures universally, whether they are made of material or without material, with the exception of two structures, which are tail-like structures without material.
In the dry and material-tail structure, they become dehydrated; for some say that cauterization is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease characterized by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate to treat a tail-like and dry condition with something as hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite of that is wrong, because cauterization can be beneficial in all tail-like and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, for when you compare the condition of a person's body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is cold and moist.
And I say with the words of that person, that I have already discovered this through some experiences myself.
But I do not mean that one should rely solely on what has already been expounded and exercised in the chapter of cauterization through previous practice, without knowing the diversity of human structures and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes of those diseases, as well as their symptoms and the time span involved.
But in other structures, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the benefit of using cauterization in such cases.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its goodness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized without harming other parts of the body except for minor damage.
Here is the translation:
May the fire, by its exalted nature and goodness of substance, do nothing but cause superfluities to overflow. And it is known to us through experience and length of service in studying this art concerning the truth of causes; and for that reason I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it would not be read in my book, at this place I hide from you secrets about the fire, and its quality in operation on bodies and expulsion thereof by which you expel diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would sharpen your wits.
And know, children, that those who disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cauteries pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is attracted through cauterization, and even more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pain, strength and swellings, which cannot tolerate delay due to fear of malice, which is worse than a small harm entering through the time.
And this does not concern your understanding, or, children, what is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors is that for the disease which is cured by cauteries there is no delay at all times, and they pause at that consequence.
And the reason is not thus as they think, because cauteries are nothing but a replacement for medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause of pains.
But may it be that superfluous cauteries are above medicine due to the speed of their validity and the virtue of their operation and the greatness of their power.
It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in him by the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what he has acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cautery was administered is a subtle one involving few superfluities and humidities, such as dental cautery for pain and the like, it may not return, though this applies to minor cases.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because those who understand it think it to be a cure beneficial to medicine or any other cause before applying cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure for certain illnesses, and those remedies do not suffice, and then at the end of the treatment, cautery is administered, and it proves effective. And here in what follows, I mean that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and foolish doctors have.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the location for cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have already experienced and proved that it works differently on different bodies; cautery with gold can be good and better than iron as others claim. However, when you perform cautery using fire with gold, it is not clearly defined to you, because the hardness of gold requires careful adjustment regarding quantity, and it prepares to receive friction. If you apply heat over it by fire, the gold will melt due to the heat, and if you place some thin sheets in the fire, the craftsman can perform the cautery according to that condition.
And thus is made the cautery of iron, which must be applied gently and gradually in accordance with the correctness of the procedure.
And I have arranged this chapter on cauteries according to the chapters, and I have placed those of the head among the parts, so that I alleviate the questioning of him who seeks what he desires.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to the headache caused by cold and moisture, which are the two causes of such an accidental condition. It is also used for a profuse running sore called "corissa" in the head, cheeks, and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, gout, and generally all illnesses that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
The method of this cautery is as follows: First, command the patient to evacuate their bowels with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and their age and usual habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit between two chairs and place his hands on his own feet.
And then place the palm of your hand on the shaved part of the head near the bridge of the nose between the eyebrows. But when the heat of your hand has reached that place, mark it with ink, and then prepare the olive wood cautery, which is made as follows:
And so pause there about the marked spot until it descends, in such a way that the skin may be gradually stretched, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any amount of bone already exposed, like the quantity of grain in a thimble, then raise your hand, and if not turn your hand to that tool, another of those, if it is chilled, until you can see the bone which I have told you about.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and let that remain for three days.
And then pause over the embedded wound on the border and let that remain inside until the burn scar is destroyed. And then treat the spot with a four-component ointment until it is healed.
And they say that when the plague boils burst open, it is better and more beneficial to let them drain.
And some of them say that the cord should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should remain until it adheres to some part of the bone.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that with the cautery it should reach the deepest part, until it presses strongly into the bone until the bone melts, and this is the way to cauterize slightly: And they believe that from that spot emanates the vapor of the head.
And let the wound be treated for some time until it is healed and consolidated.
But I have not seen these two species of cautery used universally, but only on certain individuals out of fear; and leave that, in my opinion, it is better to heal with care, when possible; for the head is delicate due to the solution of continuity as we have testified regarding other members, and especially when the patient's constitution is cold.
And the first species of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that, one can heal and bring about health.
Chapter Second.
Of cauterizing the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this is prolonged in the patient, and if you have used plasters, compresses, decoctions, poultices, ointments, cataplasms, and various other remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which I mentioned but to no avail due to any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is strong in its constitution; and if it is not cold and does not have much moisture, then at that time cauterize with another type of cautery below that one a little. And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved. Cut open the pain and expose the amount of bone that we have described and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas" — which is the location where the vein is situated. And take care in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will thereby discover great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for it is appropriate that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
On Cauterization of Non-Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When severe pain occurs in the part of the head, or if there is persistent pain inside the eye, one should evacuate with medicines that purify the head, and administer the other treatment which I have described for diseases; and if this does not benefit, then cauterization should be performed in two ways: either with a sharp medicinal cautery or with iron.
But if you are performing a cautery with a burning medicine, then take a piece of cloth, soak it in the medication, and hold its extremities from both ends. And then cut into the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet slightly so that it is done in a hidden place, where it is concealed.
And then apply pressure to it with bandages by tightening them properly, and leave it like that for three hours; then loosen the bandages and remove the cloth, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place a poultice over it soaked in butter until the area becomes warm.
Let the treatment be applied until it is healed.
And if you wish, use some of the medicines mentioned in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
But when you apply cauterization, do it in this manner: prepare the cautery fire, of which this is the form:
and it is called a nail clamp, for its head has the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small protrusion.
And then apply it to the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and move the tool gently little by little with speed.
And if the amount that adheres due to the stiffness of the tissue is such that it exceeds half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak cotton in salt water and apply it to the location, and leave it for three days; and afterwards apply dry cotton around it, and treat with internal medications until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this proper but non-traditional procedure.
Chapter Four.
On Cauterization of an Ancient Ulcer.
When you treat an ulcer with what we have said about previous treatments and the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease what has been mentioned of the first cautery with medicine or fire is insufficient, then you should ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it on the area of pain along a line that is half the length of your finger or slightly more, and after placing your hand carefully, press firmly to ensure it does not cut the artery but reaches the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is malformed due to mastication, and that the lizard not adhere and the nerves which move it, and that it not become spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is severed, because in its severing there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing and is not careful and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
And here I will come to the recall of the regimen of blood flow accidents from the artery according to the usual way, in its place in this book.
And if you see from this illness that these cauteries are not sufficient and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the appropriate place of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you proceed, administer the cauteries which we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of arteries with a two-edged cautery, and this is the best form of cauterization and more effective.
Chapter 5.
On the Cauterization of Ear Pain.
When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not subside, now use cauterization. This is the one called puncta, whose form is as follows:
And bring the puncta near the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that part. Lengthen the cautery of the edge of the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
And if the cautery touches these points throughout the ear, and which one of them, and then treat the places inside until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of the turtle.
The tumor which is cured without cauterization is nothing but of the kinds that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization for the type that results from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that kind of tumor with incisions and capillary purgatives and gargle remedies, and if your cure is not effective, then it becomes necessary to cauterize the disease with three applications: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little further in its temple area, and the third you should apply to the junction of both lips.
And pause your cauterization on the opposite side of the affected part, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cauterization is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the uppermost part of the ear, and a little above the horn of the head, and in another temple area, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then move your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the tumor is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special type of knife, the form of which is described above. However, even finer is that which you see somewhat like this; and it should be a knife instead of excessive coarseness, a bit refined.
And then treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On cauterizing ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said and do not cause fever in the patient, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on top of all the temples; one caustic at the middle part of the head, as we have said; and one caustic on the occiput. And the method of the cauteries is done as mentioned above.
And it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is better; and proceed with its treatment as appropriate.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterizing forgetfulness caused by fainting.
Give the patient large doses and pills at the beginning to purify the mind.
And then shave the patient's head completely and place on the occiput a plaster as described in the chapter on plasters.
And place it several times, for that is the method of cauterization. And do this according to the order of the method that I have already mentioned.
And if healing occurs well with those methods; otherwise, then perform three cauteries on the rear part of the head, which are located descending from the most superior part of the head towards the neck. Between each cautery, wait until the swelling of the finger subsides, and then proceed with the cautery using water as described.
If you decide to proceed and the pain is tolerable, then perform the cautery in its proper place; and if you want stronger treatment, then apply the cautery over both sides.
Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and perform the olive-shaped cautery as described earlier.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Proceed with the cleansing of the head using scissors and water as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and afterward apply the cautery in its proper place on the head, and also apply it all around the edges of the head, and at the back part of it, and three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the illness of softening the body to do so and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then apply the cautery with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply one in the middle of the lower back where it meets the buttocks, and lift the skin slightly. Proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and this should be an olive-shaped cautery.
Chapter X.
On the cautery for epilepsy.
An epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And so you should clean the brain when it is necessary at the beginning of the operation and in the other treatment which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer gargle and mouthwash which clean the brain, before that for several days, with the improvement of the food.
And then shave the patient's head, and afterwards cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and on each side of the head apply cauterization. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I have described, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
And let it be an olive pit cautery as was described previously.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On Cauterization of Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have mentioned, having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess inclining towards melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them something to drink that cleanses their brain according to what was mentioned previously in the division.
Cut off the diseased part of the head, and then make an incision properly around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the diseased part is six inches wide, and it should be held from all sides.
And then apply a lotion; it is more suitable to use the grease from sheep. And heat that on the fire with moderate warmth prepared according to measure, which the patient can endure when it is applied. And then place that in the middle of the head within the circle, and let it be rubbed in.
And do this with the diseased part once a week, and follow the regimen until it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points according to what is necessary, but hold your hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And then place that piece soaked in grease or in chicken fat.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery for water descending in the urine.
When it has been declared to you the beginning of water in the urine by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient that which purifies the urine, and protect it from all humidity.
And have that person sweat in a bath for several days.
And then he orders the one who is cutting the head to shave the head, and cauterize that area where cauterization should be done in the proper place on the head; and then cauterizes that area with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of pus discharge from both eyes, or of one cheek if it is the beginning of pus discharge from one eye.
Cut around the area where the cauteries are all the veins and arteries that approach the neck; and place the cauteries at a distance in the latitude of the temples.
And guard against blood flow when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flowing, stop the area with some medicine, which is possible for you to use.
And here comes the knowledge of vein extraction and the ligation of those veins and caution against blood flow.
And in some cases, it is cauterized on the neck behind two bones with two cauteries produced accordingly.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and constant due to veins and arteries that are in a visible part of the head, and it is verified that this is an excess of cold phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of pus discharge into the eyes, and with one cautery in the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck behind two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck behind two bones. And if you need to add something, then cauterize that area across the entire cheek of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On cauterizing the foulness of the nose.
When you treat him as we have said in the division and he does not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the sick person hot decoctions to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave his head and cauterize the affected area with a moderate cautery made of olive oil. And then cauterize that area with a rose cautery using two cauteries above the eyebrows, slightly beyond the hair.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And this is the form of the rose cautery.
Chapter XV.
On cauterizing to soften the eyelids.
When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you do so, cauterize that area above the eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in total, and let them extend towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be proportional to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand when using the cautery, but rather let a third part of the eyelid adhere.
Chapter XVI.
Of cautery of the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pain occurs.
When the eyelashes turn inward and cause pain, cautery can be performed in two ways: either by actual burning or by using a combustible medicine.
If the cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient to trim their eyelashes as one would for a normal haircut, ensuring they are lengthened and even; and if pain persists due to their growth, then wrap the eyes in a bandage so that nothing interferes until the lashes regrow.
When they have grown and are even, then instruct the patient to place their head in a comfortable position, and gently apply over the eyelid of the affected eye a mark resembling a leaf shape, with the beginning of the mark near the lashes.
And then place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or mucilage of fly wings on the eye.
And then perform the cautery according to this method.
And then cauterize gradually over the marked figure in small strokes until the surface of the area, which is like a myrtle leaf, is fully burned through.
And the sign of success in this procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye becoming contracted and the lashes elevated away from the surface of the eye.
And then raise your hand and wash the area for three days, and afterward place a cotton ball on it until the scar is remedied. And for its treatment apply those plasters which will heal it.
If the hair returns because of some cause affecting it and the eyelid is softened, now make another attempt at cauterization over that area just as you did initially.
But if the hair grows on the eyelid below, now cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hair does not touch the eye.
But the cauterization and medicine should be such that you instruct the patient to pluck the hair until they are lengthened and healed, and then make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take known soap and one ounce of any living oil, and mix these ingredients well, and apply this quickly so that it does not dry; and then spread this over the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place this on both eyes; and place under each eye cotton soaked in albumen, and have the patient's head in your lap.
And place your finger on the medication and press it gently so that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for this burning is like that of fire.
And as long as the burning sensation persists, then remove the medicine and press it with your finger; when the burning stops, then rinse the eye with water; and now check if the eyelid is raised as it should be after rinsing, whether you need to treat it with fire or incision, for this indicates that it is well done; and if not, return the medicine to the place where it was not applied before it darkens until it heals your operation and contracts the eye.
Here is the translation:
It is necessary for you to guard your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened and any cause of hair growth appears in the eye, then repeat your medicine upon that place where the eyelid has become softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and soon it will be healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your adjustment.
And the path to rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On Cauterization of a Fistula That Is in the Lacrimal Sac of the Eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not refer to your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shake.
And then place a piece of cloth soaked in egg white or in a poultice of bran over the eye of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, which has this form:
which is made of copper, similar in shape to a reed or an eagle's feather, with one end where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, insert it into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out like a probe.
But the one that is concave is better for the present purpose.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and let it drain and dry it out. And if it is not open, now cut it and extract the pus from it.
And then press on it with the cautery which should be well heated, and hold it there for a moment but do not bring the cautery too close to the eye, so that you do not accidentally burn your hand or cause harm, and now place the cautery on the flesh around the area and cauterize it.
And so if at the beginning of your cauterization it penetrates to the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice, as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then press on the wound gently and around it apply a drying agent until it heals.
But if after these days it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and proceed as appropriate according to the relevant chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the ancients first described: enter the location of the fistula and dilate it, and then place a thin cautery in that fissure whose form resembles the fistula: And pour into it one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand gently but firmly, and do not move too much so that the molten lead does not reach the eye; and ensure that you press on the affected area gently, either in egg white or water, as the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is well; but otherwise, it is necessary to administer traction of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On Cauterization of the Fistula of the Anus.
Fissures often occur in the lips, and more commonly in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that will be described:
And let the thickness of it be according to the fineness of the blade.
Apply that hot iron carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the base of the fissures.
And then treat it with ceroti until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
When an abscess occurs in the uvula or on the palate or in the gums around the teeth, and then it becomes inflamed, and subsequently ruptures, and is neglected, and a fistula is formed, and when you treat this and the treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary for you to prepare a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and then place that heated cautery into the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the base of it, and do this once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
Therefore, if the sinew is cut and it heals, that is good; but otherwise, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone as will be explained in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums have been softened by humidity and the teeth are dirty, then using those medicines and not conferring, place the tip of the cautery in its proper position, and immediately ignite it so that you place the tube over the tooth and quickly introduce the ignited cautery into it; keep it there for just a little while until the pain from the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand, and immediately repeat the cauterization several times as you wish.
Then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, after which he can spit it out, because the dirty tooth is cleaned and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is decay or worm damage, and if you do not confer on the cure with medicine, then cauterization in such cases can be done in two ways: either by using a cow's horn or by using fire.
Cauterization with horn is when you take a cow's horn and boil it in vinegar, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn. Immediately immerse the boiled horn in hot oil, and quickly place it on the painful tooth until it is cooled by contact.
From there, apply some burnings until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you do, soak linen or cloth in the aforementioned broth, and place that on the aching tooth, and place hot iron over it until the heat of the iron reaches the pain around the tooth.
However, when using cautery with fire, you should attend to the thickness of the iron or metal, and it should be in the middle of some thickness so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then apply the cautery with fire in the form that will come, and place it on the tooth and move it around until the cautery is rubbed; do this several times until the pain subsides either on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient gargle with good broth due to the application of the cautery and hold it in their mouth for one hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors and do not respond to digestion through medicine and you wish to digest them lightly, then apply the cautery in the form described below, having two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end and place it on the swelling once or twice, heated until it reaches the base of the swelling.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and afterward let it rest for three days and place on it a poultice soaked in water until what the fire has burnt is softened.
And afterward, care for that which was touched and bandage it with cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On Cauterization of Throat Inflammation and Constriction of the Windpipe
When the venous humidity affects the windpipe, especially when this is due to cold temperament, then it is advisable that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and afterward cauterize there where the vein runs below.
And be careful not to reach the vein with the cautery, nor burn more than a little of the skin.
And cauterize there with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra. And let the cautery be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
And afterward care for that which was treated until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On Cauterization for Lung Disease and Coughing
When cough and lung disease due to cold humidity occur without fever or consumption and are chronic, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the clavicle below the junction of the collarbone and breastbone; and with another cautery in the middle part of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be needle-shaped according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cautery be of the type called puncta, the form of which precedes in the piercing for ear pain.
And let there be punctures between the bones for those; and immediately treat that with what has been prepared so that it may be healed.
And let the cautery have three edges, for the cautery is for that: on one occasion you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery of the tendon that is at the tip of the finger.
When the tip of the finger is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return to its place because of its displacement before it reaches the liquid it usually returns to, and then with slight movement it becomes displaced again as we have testified. At such times, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or side; and then raise the limb at the part inside the tendon towards the upper parts of your left hand if the joint is dislocated towards the inner side.
And then heat the cautery with two ends; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the limb so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come out with four points when you perform the cauterizations.
And in some cases it is appropriate according to this method and because there are eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cautery placed far from the salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and it is done as described, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dispersed, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is blood in the stomach, scrape and stir the moisture until that substance is expelled from its composition and multiplied throughout. And if you continue with the methods of treatment without hindrance, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, extend their limbs and belongings, and then cauterize at three points: one cautery below the feet by the width of a finger using a sharp cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the first cautery so that the figure of the cauterization forms a triangle; and keep the distance between them such that they do not cause rotting.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the bone.
And let the figure of the cautery be in this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this shall be a cautery in the shape of a circle as follows:
And let it be cauterized the stomach puncturing for him who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach points according to the quantity that you wish to try, and then cauterize that which was marked with cautery at the points; and then treat that which was treated as mentioned until he is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Cauterization of an Inflamed Kidney.
When pain arises in the kidney due to coldness or humidity or excessive gas that expels the normal urine through excessive evacuation, and it is cured with what we have mentioned without causing harm, then the patient should be positioned on their back, and you should mark three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity placed over the kidney below the hypochondriac regions, as one would when a person is lying down.
And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the length of each cauterization be according to the length of the right arm.
And do not press too hard with the cautery tool.
And if the quantity of what adheres is half the thickness of the thumb, and it should not be tighter than that; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, with his belongings spread out, and raise his arms.
And it is within your capability to perform these cauteries with a cautery knife when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too far in the cauterization, and let the cautery adhere to the entire length of the tube so that it adheres throughout the body and reaches inside the pouches, because the tube here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the puncturing of an abscess of the kidney with a cautery.
When you find an inflammation or abscess in the kidney and wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the kidney or in its capsule, if it is in the flesh of the kidney, the patient will experience heavy pain and acute discomfort.
And if it is in the capsule of the kidney, the pain will be intense and often weary the physicians with its treatment.
Therefore, have the patient lie on their back; and then feel the location of the abscess by touching it; and subsequently ignite the cautery which resembles a reed, the form of which was described in the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire tube is consumed, until it reaches the pouch, until it causes healing.
And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not advisable to use this method of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine is extensive and who has knowledge of many diseases; but even then, after experimenting a few times with such an operation, it is better to leave it to more experienced hands, which is safer.
Chapter XXIX.
On Cauterization of Ulcers.
Thus say the ancients about cauterizing the roots of nerves in ulcers, and it should be done as follows: Take a piece of the root of a lily stem that is dry and long, and let it be as thick as your finger.
And then immerse it in oil and roast it over the fire. Then cauterize at one point where the clavicle meets the neck; and two small points below that, slightly inclined towards the part beneath the beard; and two points inclining between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly inclined to the rear; and another at the midpoint of the legs; and one above the stomach; and three points from behind; and one at the point where it is between the two shoulders; and two points on either side of the legs below the cauterization point between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary to purchase your own cautery tool, but rather use what is available at the site of treatment.
And some ancient scholars have said that for some men who use a cautery made of iron resembling a needle and ignite it, they place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess to drain the pus, as we have mentioned in the case of kidney abscesses.
But in this puncturing with the cautery there is no fear, for if it happens that someone dies immediately or an accident occurs at the place where a fistula forms, there is no cure.
Chapter XXX.
On the Cauterization of Boils.
When you treat the disease of boils as we have said in regard to treatment in the division and do not conform your treatment to this, then at that time cauterize according to three methods, all of which are appropriate. One of these methods is that you perform three or four lines of cauterization according to the length of the boil, following the shape of the cauteries used for the navel, the figure of which has been described previously.
And let there be a space between each cautery of the width of one finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method that we have described for the cauterization of the navel equally.
And do not compress the area with your hand after the cauteries; let the wound be left open on both sides.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cauteries using two vertical lines, a cause we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and elevate the shoulder, which is on the right side of the boil where the weight of the wound falls on the left side.
And let your elevation be such that when you raise the shoulder according to the length of the body, the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two vertical lines, ignite them immediately, in that area where they penetrate the opposite shoulder.
And then remove the cauteries; thus four cauteries are completed.
And if you want to cauterize, have three burnings prepared.
And if the wound from which you want to cauterize has been bandaged for too many days, because it may be more convenient than other previous causes in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On Cauterization of Hydrophobics.
Cauterization is not applied to hydrophobics except in a certain proper manner.
When you treat the hydrophobic with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel and one caustic on the stomach, and another caustic on the kidney, and another caustic on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one caustic at the right foot, and another caustic on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the caustic should be proportional to the sharpness of the condition.
And then bandage the caustic well so that it remains covered for a long time.
And do not remove the harmful substances from the treatment near the caustic with water that is needed to ensure they are absorbed into the body, and it should be done quickly with the aid of healing.
The shape of the caustic with which the abdomen is cauterized should be nail-shaped as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its form as previously stated.
Chapter xxxii.
On cauterization of the penis and other matters.
When the penis becomes swollen with pus and is filled with watery pus, it is necessary to cauterize the penis above the joint that lies between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not return it entirely, as the watery pus will drain.
The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauterizations to each of the two areas, and on each area let a cautery be applied at the tip of the cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the area: place one below the beginning and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each area two cauterizations.
And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that some water can drain from it.
And then treat according to the causes we have mentioned.
Chapter xxxiii.
On cauterization of the belly.
When a belly disorder is due to friction and humidity which debilitate the organs, particularly the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated according to the methods of treatment without delay. If the patient can tolerate it, cauterize to expel the harmful properties with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using the circular method and four subtle cauterizations around the navel in a circle, with a fine nail-shaped cautery; or use one large cautery over the pubis, or two.
And if you remove the overflowing humors and the pain is tolerable with water, then cauterize that above the navel and on the veins, and lightly apply two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure from which you will not deviate.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupted humidity, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not conform to the usual cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus near the lower spine, making them small and triangular, and two more above the navel placed parallel to these.
And if you find that the stomach of the patient is irritated and the food not digested, and their face becomes inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cauterization as previously mentioned; and one on the liver, and another on the spleen using a pointed cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time to take effect, and subsequently treat so that they may be healed.
Chapter xxxv.
On the Cauterization of Hysteria Near Its Removal.
When you remove the uterus, then use cauteries that resemble rays. Near the incision, introduce the cautery into the removed uterus, and ensure that it ultimately reaches the place where the vein from which the blood flows is located.
In one or two days, because if the pain is too great, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterward cure those with something from among the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, it is better for healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On Cauterization of Fistulas That Are Made in the Rear Parts of the Body.
When the body does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let it be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the rear parts of the body, and it is old, with corrupt pus and moisture, then what is most worthy to do is to probe that area carefully with something subtle, and afterward determine the depth of it using the previously mentioned probe.
Then apply the cautery which resembles a ray. And then place the heated cautery into this fistula according to the amount that the probe has entered.
And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted substances are burned away completely in one instance or two or three, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious about all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
Therefore, take care of the place inside so that it may be healed.
And if the place is sealed, and all matter has been removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter does not come from the bones, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the region of a corrupted bone, or falls from those causes of which there will be mention later.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the Cauterization of Wounds.
When pain in the wounds is caused by friction or excessive swelling, and thus the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a cautery on each wound using an appropriate cautery as will be mentioned.
And after a short while, we should cauterize it again, so that there will be three cauterizations lined up, and thus they will be more beneficial subsequently.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
When debility and softness occur in the bladder due to friction and excessive humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it just above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, using one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sweat; and cauterize it with one cautery in the lower part of both sides, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be made according to its preparation.
Chapter xxxix.
On Cauterization of the Eye.
When there is blood and moisture in the eye, and because of this, treatment is prohibited, and their menstruation becomes corrupted, and it delays its provocation, and pain occurs due to its presence. Therefore, the area should be cauterized three times around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or two cauteries above the affected area, a short distance apart, or one cautery, and this cautery should be made according to its preparation.
Chapter xli.
On Cauterization of Dislocation of the Joint.
When there is moisture and swelling in the vicinity of the joint, and it occurs due to causes related to the displacement of its location, and the sign of this is that one part extends beyond the other when compared. And the location of the dislocation is treated where it occurs.
Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint with two circular cauteries after you have marked their placement around the affected part as it is rotated, so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the form of this cautery be as it is prescribed in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be performed according to the quantity of the inflammation of the entire wound; and then take care of that which needs healing.
Chapter XLI.
On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the groin area and its cause is friction and humidity, treat it with what we have mentioned and do not confine it, as this is outdated. Now, you should release the patient from thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills or similar treatments; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with combustible medicines, or cauterization with fire.
It should be done according to two known methods. One of which is that you cauterize that area over the groin with three triangular cauteries as follows; and make them sufficiently deep. And the space between each cauterization should be the width of the thickness of a finger, and the cauterizations should be olive or large in size.
But in some cases, the cauterizations should be on top of the middle part over the head of the groin, so there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize with a circle whose shape precedes the cautery used in the dislocation of the groin, such that it encompasses and burns the inflammation of the entire wound.
And this is the method of cauterization when pain is adherent to the groin and does not spread within the body.
If it is spread inside the joint, then at that time cauterize with two cauteries on the joint above where you will send the pain which is the pain; and one cauterization on the nodule for four days a little away from the wild area.
And if the cautery cuts, and its depth depends on the amount of stiffness of the joint.
And if the pain you send is spread in the area near the feet, then at that time cauterize there where you will send it with three points or four or more if you need of that.
And if the pain you send is below the shoulder near the joint, then at that time cauterize there with one cutting cautery.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not end the cautery until you burn a nerve or large artery, and thereby cause harm to the patient badly or lead to contraction.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the nodule and ended the cauterization, and the bed sore spread inside until the swelling reached the foot, and the sore penetrated and corrupted the entire foot. And as a result of a severe abdominal inflammation, and as a result of that death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of either cautery of which this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and place it above the opening according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly less.
And in that circle make another third one; and let the space which is between them be equal to the thickness of a finger; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those cords be one finger or two fingers, and fix them decently prepared iron margins in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then set it on fire in the flame so that it reddens and throws sparks, and then place it over the part of the vessel, with the malatua placed on its back. And thus cauterize that wound with three cauteries in one go.
And then let him rest for three days; then apply a bandage to the wound and let the inflammation subside over several more days; and then treat the wound with medicines until it is healed.
Al-Bucasis says: Oh sons, we have rarely used this type of cautery out of fear of its consequences, and because few have found those who are knowledgeable about it.
But for the best cauteries, use them on him who endures them, and find the place where they are most effective.
But the best cauteries with adhering medicines are those you make two circles having a perforated armula in which the mouth of iron should fit; let the length of the bars in their natural state be two walnuts or more like that.
And if the space which is between each one be equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them be divided below and above, and let them contain each other according to this form:
Here is the translation:
Then raise your hand holding the instruments and wipe away the hard water from all over with soft water.
Then let him be bathed for three days and placed on that board until the darkness of the bruising subsides, and let this continue for several days until the inflammation has subsided; this is best for improvement.
Then care for him with herbs until he is healed.
And if the pain extends to the chest or the groin, apply the poultice in the manner that contains water as described for the water treatment.
And this is the method of hard water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for acid, each from separate parts mixed in equal amounts, and strain them and place in a new jar of which the bottom part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the remedy.
And place at the bottom of the jar another inverted jar, and pour over that alkali and live acid with soft water in which it rises by one finger, and when you compress them with your hand for good compression, let the jar descend from the sharp water into the lower part of the inverted jar.
Then adjust all that water and pour it over another live acid and fresh alkali, because at this point it will have great strength, which is administered in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other limbs, as a fire operation does.
And so of certain medicines with which cautery is used widely, such as honey and vinegar mixed with soda and salt, so that they are blended.
And Gualia recounts of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure with which he was cured of pain in the sciatic vein and nerve, and magnifies it as being good to be done, and says that there is no need for any other cure, because he was healed once as recommended, because quickly he entered into a bath and then got up from it.
And it should be applied from a certain green herb, and if the green herb is not available, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be crushed with a little vinegar and placed on the limb where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the hip, and it should be bandaged.
And it should be left on for three hours or for the duration that the patient considers comfortable after adjusting.
And then place him in a bath, and when his body is relaxed, move him to the ground, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But Hippocrates said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with kid's horn, it benefits the patient greatly; and the cautery should be applied in this way: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes and the heel.
And then take a dry kid's horn and ignite it over fire until it turns to charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it lie there until it is spread out. After this, pour water continuously so that the feeling of the bite reaches the water and thus alleviates the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On Cautery for Two-Knee Pain
In some cases, pain in both knees is caused by excessive reasons, such as from squatting or impact or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
And cautery should not be used except in this single case, which is done through the application of irritating matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the harmful matter, place small pills and similar items on the knees where the pain is, three lines away according to the width of the knee. Then apply five cauteries or more in each line, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the treatment.
And the cautery should be performed using point cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four point cauteries in the middle of the knee according to this method:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cautery for the Beginning of Goutiness.
Sometimes this illness affects small children as well; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their limbs, causing elevation and difficulty in movement.
And you will find the difficulties in the last vertebra of the back and in those that begin to rise above the others.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that spot with a circular cauterization as follows: so that it takes the cautery over all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close together.
And then take care of the area within it to ensure it heals as we have said.
But be careful not to administer the cautery on inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pains are caused by the movement of humors that flow into each limb, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout properly.
And therefore, when gout caused by the movement of humors is treated with the method of treatment and not alleviated by it, then the cauterization should be applied.
And when you cauterize that area for evacuation around the joint of the foot with pointed cautery.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, which has this shape:
And if it is necessary that a puncture be made on the face of the foot, then hot cautery should be used for the puncture. And if the pains ascend into the joints or other junctions, and this often happens, then cauterize that area around each joint with three or four cauteries of olive charcoal.
And if you must use these cauteries that are necessary for you, then cauterize that area and do not press too hard with your hand before the cauterization, but only around the specificity of the joint.
And if the pains ascend into the joint and the bone, then administer the cauteries which we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called sugar, then puncture around the edges as it revolves, puncture in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said area, then puncture around the edges over each node and on the base of the finger.
And if the pains ascend close to the sides of the ribs or the muscles, then cauterize them from all sides with the assistant's help.
And if you do not evacuate the malady through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will heal, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Fractures.
When you find a rupture in the groin and the intestines protruding before the skin, and this begins to happen near by, then it is necessary for you to order the sick person to leave off eating on that day and use laxatives so that the protrusion may come forth from his belly.
And let the sick person lie close to you on his back, and command him to hold his breath until it is thrust out or the skin or intestines appear.
And then tell him to lie on his side, and feel for the rupture over the bone of the pubis, marking the extremity of which is like half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then prepare the cautery, which has this shape:
until it is red-hot and gives off sparks. And then reduce the intestines or skin to their normal position, and then press your hand on the place so that the intestine does not slip back.
And you have now placed something between the patient’s thighs and leave him lying on one side, with another person supporting his shoulders and another his feet, while he lies on his side.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand on top of the cautery, and keep it there until you feel the bone of the pubis beneath the middle finger; and repeat this another time if you did not succeed in doing so during the first attempt.
And observe carefully the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, for if you do, it may bring death or other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you use cautery, do not hold it with your teeth, do not conduct your operation.
And let the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
And take care of the place where you use the cautery for three days until the burn scar heals.
And take care of that with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the place is sealed and the plague subsides.
And it is necessary to suspend the patient's nutrition according to the length of time required for the cure, during which the intestines should not be damaged by excessive force in treating them.
And when you want to start removing it after forty days, administer it gradually and properly, and continue for another forty days.
And let them be reduced in work and in the intake of food and drink, and in loud speaking, for when they follow this regimen of complete recovery, they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to spread, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; let this be removed as much as one-third of it from the cord; and subsequently treat it as we have said, and it will heal.
And some earlier practitioners said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, as it is marked with a template:
This is a paused line that you follow through the latitude in the flesh above the rupture, and another line above it; then pause your hand with a cautery nail, but the first cautery is farther and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On Cauterization of Dislocations.
When you find in any members by falling or by striking pain that persists and the pain continues for a long time and does not improve with medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery for each member be according to its size and smallness, and its strength and delicacy, and the location of the dislocation and the pain in it.
If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in a member close to where the pain is, so you need to achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some cases of leprosy are helped greatly by cautery, but rarely in the case of the type of leprosy that is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize that patient, consider whether the leprosy is widespread and has not been cured by what we have mentioned in the division and do not delay, and be afraid that the corruption will encompass the whole body of the patient and all its composition, then cauterize it on the head with v cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second further down, near the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the temples; and one behind, on the nape or back of the neck.
And lastly your hand should apply the cautery a little inside where it presses on the bone, and from there the scars are displaced, so that the expulsion of thick vapors may be facilitated from there; and cauterize over the wound as is necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifest, then you should cauterize in those places with those cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and one cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each cheek, two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, one large cautery on the vertebrae near the buttocks, one cautery on the buttocks, two cauteries on each thigh, one cautery on each ankle, two cauteries on each elbow and one on each wrist, two cauteries on each knee joint, two on each muscle, and two on each tendon of their feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on the hollows of their hands.
And be careful of the nerves which lie over the heel so that you do not burn those.
And in some cases it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little toe and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as others would, because his body is already numb.
And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints as dictated by the properties of the tools.
Regarding the care of cautery, use flour of barley mixed with honey. For the other treatment, let it be for healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
On cauterization for stupor.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the magnitude of the limb or the size of it.
And let the heat of the cautery enter slightly beneath the surface of the skin. And subsequently treat that area with an ointment so that it may heal.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numb area that extends to the ribs and spine, as well as to the points where the nerves that control that limb are located, and thus the numbness is alleviated.
But do not proceed with this unless one is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterization of ulcers that are infected.
When an old ulcer does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with cautery slightly according to the quantity and specificity of the skin so that the whiteness and color of it change, and its color be altered.
And subsequently treat that area with flour of barley and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and either dove blood or swallow blood, using an equal part of each and mixing them all together, then apply a bandage over it so that it may heal.
Chapter I.
On cauterizing wounds.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize that part with a cauterizing instrument in the shape of a circle around it as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its proper place; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
It is safer to cauterize around the wound in a circular manner as we have said, or with words like these.
Chapter II.
On cauterizing of burns.
When a burn is delayed in healing due to the excess of matter it contains, or because of the patient's condition, being old and weak, with little blood, or because of the time; then cauterize around the wound with small punctures using a cautery instrument; and afterward apply something that will hasten its healing.
But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then use a cautery of this shape; and place it in the proper location of the burn until it penetrates the tissue.
And if the cautery is applied in a place that is further away, so that the arm is not burdened; and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter XII.
On cautery with corrosives.
Corrosives are like a wandering corruption in the limb, which consumes it as fire devours dry wood.
Therefore, when you see the corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then you ignite and apply small cauterizations, and larger ones as is appropriate in the location where the corrosion is.
And proceed to cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for its recurrence.
And then dress it for three days, and apply ointment three times a day on the cauterized areas until all the scars are healed and all corruption is eradicated.
And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing where there is no more corruption, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicines, for these serve as an alternative to cautery. But cautery with fire is more effective quickly.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicines in the division above, and so use that when you find it necessary.
Chapter 53.
On cautery of nails and other similar cases.
In many cases, when dealing with the divisions or parts of the foot that are diseased and are called clavus, which is a thick, ingrown condition affecting the foot; and cautery for this can be done in two ways, namely fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is when you ignite the cautery in the shape of a crescent, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the clavus from all parts, and it should be fine-edged.
And then place the ignited cautery on the clavus, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the clavus until the cautery reaches the depth of the clavus. And leave that for three days until it begins to form scabs. And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mallows with salt to it, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because that will eradicate it from its roots.
And then treat the area with a healing flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery to them. This is done by taking a small tube made of iron or brass or crescent-shaped, and place it on the clavus; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube, and hold your hand, rotating it with the pressure of your hand completely, so that the edge of the tube touches the root of the clavus; and the hot water will flow towards the root of the clavus. Wait for the disease to react slightly to the heat of the water for an hour, and then remove it, as the clavus with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus place one finger next to another until you cover all of them with your hand.
And carefully treat those pus spots until the roots of the nails have been eradicated with the help of these ointments, with which the flesh grows back.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery for trembling.
When you find a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or from fever causing irritation, or from some similar cause, it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cauterization; and at the ankles, and above the stomach, use an olive-shaped cauterization.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the recovery from the illness.
Chapter LIV.
On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
When the body is suddenly injured and pus-filled wounds appear, which are formed from thick, corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with long eagle talons; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes it is appropriate to cauterize at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if it is not done, then the excess matter that causes these issues is disrupted, and thus they heal from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done appropriately for evacuation and phlebotomy.
Chapter LX.
On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
If the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut is prolonged due to the condition that caused it in the first place, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar situations, then it is difficult to remedy this.
When such an accident occurs, immediately place your finger over the opening of the artery, and press on it with enough strength to stop the flow of blood until you can secure this position so that no more blood escapes.
And then place the olive wood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire for a number of moments, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take one of those cauteries, either small or large depending on the location and condition in which the artery is ruptured, and apply it quickly after you have removed your finger, so that the blood flow is sealed and restrained.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the blood flow is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and ensure that it does not cause other harm.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible then to restrain the blood, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have said, or by extraction, for when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is restrained, or it may be bound with a ligature or bandage made of strong material, or it may be placed upon medicines whose virtue is to restrain the blood; and they may be strengthened with a pillow and moderate constriction.
And let him who administers moderate constriction with bandages and by means of cloths or through the positioning of burning substances and similar methods not hurry but proceed slowly.
And if anyone is to act and there is no physician present or medicine available, then gently press the tip of the finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood stops from flowing from the upper part of the wound, and on the artery do not rub; and over the artery sprinkle with very cold water until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Of incision and perforation and ventouses and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
We have already stated in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and burning medicines, along with their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterizations; and I have organized the chapters on the superiority of the head among other parts.
In this procedure in this chapter by that method, so that the patient may be praised for it, at the time concerning what they have asked.
And before I begin this, take note, son, that in this chapter it is by means of fear what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many cases of evacuation occur, whether it involves blood or pus that sustains life, due to the application on the vein or incision over the abscess or opening an exit or purging a plague or extracting a splinter or starting a lithotomy or similar procedures. And in all of those cases, accompany fear and trembling, and in the most severe of them, death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the case of hesitation, for some cases depend on your methods regarding people with various diseases. And among them are some who become angry about their illness and die quickly because of the intensity of what they find regarding their illness, and due to the length of the illness, and this anger signifies death.
And among them is one who gives away their possessions and says, "I hope for health from this," while their actual illness is fatal.
And therefore, you should not consent to those who come to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and rapacity; and do not assume any cause without proper certain knowledge that verifies what concerns you, and for which a commendable tradition exists.
For the treatment of all your patients, prognosis and indication of what is beneficial to their health are necessary, for in that lies help for you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your mind and not take from you direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauteries, concerning the treatment of the head among other parts, so that you may find what you seek and need from this.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often afflicts children shortly after birth when the nurse presses too hard on the child’s head.
And at times it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
But I have seen this illness only in children; and to all those whom I saw it brought death, and thus it seemed to me to be a fatal condition.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the swelling of his head was so great that he could not move due to the size of his head, and before long the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this humidity is either aggregated between the brain and the bone, or it is aggregated below the bone on the brain.
For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the abscess and the abscess is small, at that time you should cut in the middle of the head an incision in length, and let the length of the incision extend by two fingers’ breadth where the moisture runs, and this is the form of the spatum:
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are here two incisions according to this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head covered on all sides and the water is squeezed when you press it with your hand at the surface but not inside, and it is not hidden from you. You should cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
and immediately the incision extracts all the moisture; and then dress the incisions with cloths and bandages; and then pour over it vinegar and oil from the fifth day, and then loosen the binding and treat the wound with lint and unguents, and bind the head with equality; and eat the food that is dry with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider based on the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and do this according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and stop the flow of blood, or the patient will suffer harm from that flow of blood and evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When I deal with certain abscesses or wounds on the hands or feet, and if it is old and not treated with medication, then the last resort treatment involves these two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to cut those that the patient raises their hand, first rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; then bind the patient's neck with a cloth; and then observe where the pulse is felt; the locations of each are near the ears, though they may be hidden in some people.
And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then cut each one with a sharp scalpel, cutting deeply enough to reach the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut it where it meets the upper parts.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, frequently gushing forth.
But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then press with your thumb to find it, and make an incision down to the bone.
In what must be poured out of the blood is the quantity of one ounce, and it is light in weight when poured from barley or wheat, and all this is according to the amount which appears of the strength of the patient and the fullness of the vein.
And then consider the inflammation, and if any cause of pus remains on the bone, now incise that so as not to become an abscess by cauterization.
And then strengthen the inflammation with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterwards treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of veins which are on the temples.
When it happens that someone suffers from chronic or acute headache due to excessive moisture in the body and its quality in the veins of the temples, or if it is similar to these conditions, and treatment with medicinal methods does not provide relief, then we resort to bloodletting from the veins on the temples, or cauterization as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those veins is that the patient shaves the hair which is on the temples; and understand the visible vein in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is concealed only in a few people due to the intensity of friction.
And if it is concealed from you, then tie the patient's head with some cloth; and afterwards rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatum, which has this form: And then you peel the membrane in such a way that you reach the artery; and then cut it where necessary to extract it from the parts until you remove it from the membrane and uncover the tunics beneath, which you leave intact from all sides.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut away a part according to the amount by which the ends of it need to be lengthened or shortened, and there will be no bleeding, for if they are not cut back in this way, the blood will not flow properly.
And then remove about half an ounce to three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then place it in two places with a double-thick thread of flax or long cords, and do not allow it to become putrid before the healing of the wound, so that there is no bleeding.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligatures; and do this either at that hour or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or use a knife-shaped cautery until the ends of it are severed, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
And it is better to perform this work when the patient does not have a fever or has a heated constitution; for cautery is among those causes that help eliminate final humidity, and thus it is better to do so while the condition is favorable.
Regarding the extraction of arteries, ensure that the place is clean beforehand, and lay the patient on a prepared surface decently, and nearby have dry medicines ready to promote flesh growth and warm applications to aid in healing.
And if during the procedure blood begins to flow from the artery, then you should work to restrict that blood, either by cauterization or by filling the area with cotton and pressing firmly so as to constrict the blood. And if none of those methods are available to you, then press your hand on the area until the blood is constricted, and apply the site with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and continue applying pressure as needed.
And the most important thing in extracting an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery using two irons, after marking both places with ink, and then place some material on fire so that it reaches the bone and cuts the vein at two points, so that what is between these ends can be extended, since it has not been fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two irons should be exemplary. However, if you use slightly less sharp irons than two, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two irons, they may approach too close to each other and cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in the area, maintain the heat of the fire and cut through the flesh gradually.
This work is better than any other work and more concise.
And let the spaces between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
About the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
When there are acidic tears, and the condition affects the veins that appear on top of the head, and if you do not find any cause for treatment with medicine in this case, often the face of the patient turns red, and a sensation as if ants were moving can be felt in their forehead, and the eyes due to this become extremely weakened, so much that even the hair around them is noticeable, and the eyelids are scorched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient masters were very careful in the treatment of such conditions, and they did not consider this treatment a simple matter.
And it is that you command the patient to pluck out the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be evenly spaced along the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly towards the movement of the tears that flow from the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers apart.
And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry cloth with which you squeeze out the blood.
And then insert the spatum between two sharp points, which has this form for the incision: which is from the part of the flaps into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions on the crest which is above the bone, and then make this median incision into the second incision. And then stretch this spatum and insert into the first incision another tool called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the sharp side on the flesh adjacent to the tissue, and the blunt side within the bone, and move it until you reach the median fissure, and divide all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But ensure that the incision continues to appear on the tissue, and then make this in the median fissure into the other fissure.
And when the blood flow is equal in quantity, press the places from which the clotted blood has been collected.
And then place dry, aged wood shavings in each fissure, and sprinkle them with powder mixed in vinegar and oil and sweet wine, to prevent an abscess from forming.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or decoction, and then treat with ointment made of basilicon in rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of phlegm through catharsis and the expulsion of fluids from the inner parts of the head.
When there is a sudden and continuous urge for catharsis in someone, and the fluids from the patient are expelled in small quantities due to their weakness, and if the condition of their eyelids is ulcerated with hair loss, and there is acute pain and severe tension in the forehead, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come except from the small veins of the inner parts.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (beginning from the fissure on the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision should go through the bone; extend your hand between the temples where chewing takes place), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then apply between the two edges of the incision a piece of old linen or cloth. And then apply powder mixed with vinegar and oil so that it does not lead to an infected abscess.
And when you release this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover it by scraping the bone until new flesh begins to form, and afterwards treat it with a drying regimen such as making plaster from two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth mixed together, which should be applied to these wounds where new flesh is growing.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something resembling a stone such as iron or wood, or it is from a plant such as chaff or beans, or it is a fluid substance like water and vinegar or similar liquids, or some kind of animal.
And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those mentioned that does not adhere but rather lodges in the ear, then expose the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, at that time drop into it some substance of violet oil or cumin, and subsequently administer its extraction with conditions, and make the patient sneeze by inducing a sneezing fit, and plug the nose upon the occurrence of sneezing. And then place around the opening of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, as it often helps with these causes.
And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a gentil epistilus, which has the following form:
And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer its extraction with a thin piece of wood through slight manipulation.
And if it is not expelled by these methods, then make a tube of reed and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing else enters except through the tube. From this excerpt taken from the text on veins with strong attraction, for troops accustomed as we have recounted.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, now take a thin piece of wood or a small apparatus with which birds are usually caught, a small amount, and place that at the end of the vein, and then wrap that area carefully placed. And then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
And thus if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should proceed to incise that area which has become inflamed or spasmodic.
And the method of incising that area is to begin by puncturing the diseased vein and extracting the blood according to the method appropriate for it, and then make a small cut between your fingers and turn the ear towards you, and make a small fissure at the edge of the ear where it is most prominent. And let the incision be in a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is located, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and then close the incision quickly at that moment, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have become inflamed, now administer the treatment and the extraction of it; but if you do not proceed accordingly, then take fine cotton wadding in this form: and administer the removal of that growth which has become lodged in the ear.
If you do not want to use water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the ear, place it in small pieces, and extract them with hooks or with subtle instruments, as we have said, for the extraction must be gentle.
In the water that has entered into the ear, it is beneficial for the patient to use sneezing with a mixture at the beginning, and fill their other ear with some old cloth, and then lay on the side where the water is. If this dislodges the water, it is good; otherwise, take smooth stones or lemons according to the length of a finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those into their ear canal and jump with the affected side down, striking another stone against the heated stone that is inside the ear. Do not remove the stone until all the water is expelled.
Do not remove the stone until all the water is expelled. And the water will be expelled in this way: take paper or cotton, place one end of it in the ear and hold the other end over a flame until it burns away.
And place another piece of cotton in and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and squeeze it with a cannula as was mentioned above regarding the extracting stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering the ear, if it is a small object, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object that causes pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with instruments and hooks, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that enter the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the tractate on distillations and do not confound your treatment, then you should expose the ear to the sun.
And if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract that am or thin am, but if no cause appears, then take a tube narrow below and wide above, which has this shape: And insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that suffices for the patient; and then suck out the am with great suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey this advice, then apply and plug along the length of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective in treating worms, which you will find described in the tractate on distillations.
And let your application be with the oil medicine that you pour into the ear using this instrument, which has this shape: And make it of silver or ivory, narrow at the bottom, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
And thus it should be as pressing when in the constriction of the tube where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap the end of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the reed wrapped with cotton above and press it gently so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
Take what is enclosed in the ear and heat it a little over fire. And be careful that the substance you will apply in the ear is not too irritating, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of blocked ears.
Sometimes infants are born with their ears not perforated, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by an infection or flesh growing there; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal where it cannot be seen, and sometimes it is further inside.
And when it occurs at the entrance of the ear, where it cannot be seen, it is in the most difficult positions for easy treatment.
And when you can see it, have the patient expose the affected ear to the sun and observe it. And if you see an obstruction that is visible, open it with a fine probe of the following shape:
If the end of it is small in width, with one side sharp and the other not; and the probe should be two-sided so as not to injure the ear.
And if the blockage is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine forceps and carefully cut away all the flesh.
And if the blockage is at the entrance of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it slightly over fire, and then place it in the ear canal.
And thus if you have noticed that the swelling is on the side where the patient has more ease, due to the heaviness of hearing, it presses the swelling on that easier side; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the swelling which you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the swelling; or take something and push it into warm water and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it. And if you see that the ear is already abscessed, then you must remove what was there and replace it with another piece wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the abscess has subsided; and afterward care for it until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of boils that occur on the eyelids.
Boils that occur on the eyelids sometimes appear moist, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you should have these available either in tin or in ounce containers, and then sprinkle them finely over the affected areas, and afterward place something finely powdered on those spots.
But if pain and bleeding occur, then you should cauterize those areas with a fine cautery.
The best cautery is applied to incisions and grooves that return when the cause of them remains; and when these are burned with fire, those grooves are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a condition that affects the eyelids.
Grooves appear in the eyelids due to some cause that resembles a serious condition in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called a serious condition.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid, both above and below.
Therefore, the treatment for this is to observe whether the condition has spread on the surface of the eyelid and has affected it entirely; and the cause of this is superficial.
Therefore, make an incision along the length of it, and then carefully remove it entirely with ease until it is completely extracted, and then stop the bleeding and close it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not have trouble with it because the warmth of it restores and heals it.
And if the condition is spreading to the inner parts of the eyelid, you should examine the inner surface, then lift the eyelid and stop the bleeding without making an incision, and press it entirely, and if the eyelid is stretched due to the incision, this is not noted as any cause.
At the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with water that promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment of a tumor above the eye socket.
A tumor is gray and originates in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it often affects children, worsening their wounds and leading to a severe attack of catarrh when they die; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears continuously flow from their eyes.
And for this reason they often lie with their faces covered, and they sleep with their faces covered; and the eyelashes of their lower lids are moist, which have been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of a tumor is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel a tumor inside.
And there is a method of operation for when the patient places their head in your lap, and you place a cloth over them and make a circle according to the amount it contains of all parts, and then place that on them and press with your fingers all around so that the tumor aggregates in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into it using a spatula through a fissure along its length, but the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
But in the initial incision, you should cut through the tissue completely until you reach the tumor, because in major procedures, you treat the tumor through a fissure according to the form of a white mass.
Therefore, extract that which is wrapped in the cloths among those you have wrapped around it from the sides and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert it into the crack so that the powder does not reach the wound and damage it.
But if it does not appear to you ready at the beginning of the crack, then insert into the crack a small piece that can be easily removed; and then extract it as we have said; and then immerse cloths in warm water and vinegar, place them over the area, and secure them with powder.
And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the deepest part of the crack so that what remains is free from moisture.
And then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On the methods of examining the wound.
When hair is inserted below the natural eyelashes and when this happens naturally or due to antiquated practices, it causes irritation to the eye and leads to various ailments such as continuous tears and swelling of the eyelids, which can result in damage to the eye known as examining or treating the wound. It is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or using sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or it is performed through incision and suturing; or through tubes, as I will explain.
And therefore place the tip of the lancet in the proper spot; then move the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it moves well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into one of the spots below the eyelash on the edge of the eyelid near where the hair begins, and push the needle to the base beneath the eyelash, close to where the hair grows, and pull out the pus to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn that part towards the light.
And then, in the inner part of the eyelid below the hair, close to where the lacrimal duct is located, direct it into the smaller lacrimal duct; and then extract the pus and place small pieces of wood or cloth underneath the eyelid; and afterwards press on the eyelid with a probe, as shown in the figure resembling a myrtle leaf.
However, the figure should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, since this varies among people; for some, you must incise a considerable amount from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid is swollen.
And then direct the probe along the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one. And if the incision near the natural hairline is as thick as the king's finger.
And then place the probe in one of the two angles of the cheekbone, and then excoriate that area entirely; and then join the two edges of the incision with fine thread or wool, and clean the blood, and make what is excessive of the pus adhere to two eyebrows using some sticky substances, if you wish to do this, and if not, it does not matter.
About four days after sewing up the wounds, begin treatment with this.
And if you prefer to treat the wound without sewing, use something that dries and constricts it, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but sewing is better. This is what the ancients recommended for this condition.
However, let there be careful attention to the condition and it should be handled with good practice, and not out of fear.
And there is another method for treating this, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small instruments arranged in this form:
But if that is not possible, use the needles, and this is not equalized; now take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between these threads to equalize them, and then lift your hand with an even elevation, lifting the entire marked area as we have described.
And then bring the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and at intervals.
And sometimes you may need to turn the eyelashes away from the wound; then proceed as we have said about incision; but sewing is more artificial in these cases.
To make a reed needle, follow this form: And so you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then by art make two reeds or two thin sticks, whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and whose width should be narrow like that of the pupil. And you have already cut into the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid, and bind the reeds in each section tightly, and leave it for some days, because the excess will die due to the constriction and will be rejected and will fall off on its own.
But if it is delayed, now break it with force, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
When it has hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two reeds that you will make according to this form: and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On Removing Stinging Hairs from the Eye Using a Needle When the Hair is Embedded.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging hairs in the eye, the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it on each hair gently and carefully, and then adjust the ends of them delicately. And let the length of the fields be one palm in quantity.
And below that, prepare another fine field briefly, and use the extremities of it if you wish.
And then place the malady at its head in your hand, and let it be close to the sun so that your work may be visible, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the base of the hair that requires removal and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you extract it from above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
And then pull your hand in so that the hair is removed and placed back into its proper place on the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is placed back and the hair is not removed, pull it back to the sides below the field that you have prepared with it, so that it may be properly placed among the surrounding area.
And observe this with the eye's vision, for now you have placed back both the hair and the field, and stitch each part together, leaving the stitches for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, now attach a long hair from the natural hairs to it, or leave it for some time until it grows longer in its place, and then raise it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of a swelling that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When there appears a swelling in the eye, which is a contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of an injury, cutting, or cautery, and this is called leporine. This swelling can be either natural or accidental, caused by improper healing of wounds, cuts, or cauterizations, or similar injuries poorly treated.
The method of the operation is that you should cut open that contraction and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it there until it heals.
And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry or constrict, as if you do this, the swelling will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek, and boil the leaves and seeds in water or use east wind, which should be mixed with some oil to liquefy it. Then soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it for treatment.
The essence of your treatment is to ensure that you do not allow any part to become overly constricted and heal in a way that it does not maintain its original form.
And this operation that we have described is merely a correction of the swelling that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of ehacrati, which is done below the eyelid.
This ehacrati which is made below the eyelid, which is properly called ehacrati; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
The accidental one is made by plague or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh in the parts above the needle and cut along it with a broad spatula. And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is well; and if not, take a rod and place it in the cleft, and use that to convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures be from two corners of the incision, which you have made where they meet, and let there be a corner formed by them when they come together.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in the amount that is the width below it, which stiffens the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then treat those as we have said about softening medicines and plasters until it is healed.
And if through incisions, either by a cut or suture or cauterization, you must now make an incision in a straight line along the edge of the eyelid as was previously described. And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, let it run in the operation according to how the preparation of the incision was made, and that is in a form of various patterns.
And the skilled practitioners always prepare in every possible way within their means to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to the convenience of the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals such that the eyelid is adhered above to the sclera, and it is prohibited from easy movement and its natural functions, then you must introduce a probe below the eyelid, and elevate or extend it as necessary.
And then you incise the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not have sharp edges for the incisions, holding it bluntly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula gently so as not to damage the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it gently separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
And so you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in that of rose dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a scalpel, and apply on the wound wool infused in egg white, and on the third day use consolidating substances until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the swelling of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that an eyelid swelling occurs in two ways: it is either nervous, resembling a hard but fine knot; or it is non-nervous, resembling frozen white moisture, which when touched with a probe takes it up naturally without sticking, and it can be excised without the probe being left inside.
And both types do not begin except from the greater tear duct gradually spreading to cover the eye and preventing light and the movement of the eyelid.
But the method of operating on the swelling is that the patient rests his head in your lap, and then opens the eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the swelling with a probe by slight incisions and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or ox or cow, or something similar, or strong thread, and duplicate the tip of the needle slightly and place it in the center of the swelling, and penetrate with the needle, and bind with wax the swelling; and extend it to the parts above, and excise with the hair the edge of the swelling near the pupil. And thus you should proceed with the hair inside at the rear end.
And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and leave the tissue of the tear duct intact so that by such an incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail should be removed with the sun oncen extended or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion's spatula which has this form:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then after the incision, place a small amount of dry salt or clean linen made of silk in it, and let that remain for another day; then treat it with whatever is appropriate until it is healed.
And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it placed in that manner, then this type of nail should be treated with medications, and it heals as described and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that area, then you should open the wound of the malformation and take a fine spatula made of horn with sharpness according to this form: with fineness. And if it happens that it is rarefied and condensed and applied to the root, then distill from your own saliva onto the wound made of clean silk or linen or dry salt, and bandage the wound for another day.
And then proceed with the operation by removing everything that is inside it, but if the opposite abscess is inflamed, leave that one alone for now and treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
And then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
If the lacrimal flesh becomes inflamed and causes great discomfort in the eye, delay the procedure for a while; then incise part of it, but do not proceed with the incision too far so as not to damage the flow of tears.
And then apply a distilled rose water and sinew preparation to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of styes and what is born from flesh tightly attached to the eye.
In some cases on the eyes of certain individuals, soft flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches or extends over the eyelids, causing them to come together from the inside, and it resembles the edge of a balcony.
The operation in this case is that the patient places his head on the surgeon’s lap; then open the eyes of the affected area and collect all that flesh at appropriate times, using forceps or needles; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
And your incision should be made with the scalpel we have recommended for nail surgery, or with small forceps with which hair is extracted, depending on the form that will be described in the next chapter.
Thus when your incision is complete and the flesh around it is well scraped, now fill the wound with salted water, or sprinkle on it powdered rust and similar corrosive medicines, and leave a poultice over the wound made of egg whites so that it is protected from abscesses and cautery.
And if for any reason the patient is prevented and the wound is guarded from cautery and you fear an abscess requiring cautery, then leave the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedies are suitable for such an abscess, and subsequently proceed with the operation as soon as it is healed, and similarly deal with the flesh adjusted which occurs in this kind of wound.
However, you must be careful to keep all treatment of the wound by natural or accidental means using iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can endure the operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes from veins that are rust-colored and whose operation is prohibited by the text, and the wound will heal over a period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and whether there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two according to your discretion; and let that pressing be of subtle duplication according to this form:
And thus one ounce is administered gradually in a body according to this form:
And then let those veins be collected with subtle force, with subtlety, and cleanse the blood gradually hour by hour until those veins appear empty and have been turned.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation, do not injure anything but those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill in the blood a sharp green or red herb because of its potency to dissolve what is stagnant in the body.
But if it is not possible for you to collect everything at that hour, then you bandage everything with something that relieves the pain, and leave him for several days until the pain subsides and he is assured of no abscess forming.
And then repeat on him according to the same method until he is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp medicinal heat as described and not healed, then do not proceed further in him but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the moisture that is within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And so when the bone and flesh are exposed in the corruption or blackness, now you must use an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called a rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this one which is made with punctures by a file or rasp with subtle punctures (as in the following form).
And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And do this several times, and then treat the area with astringent and drying substances.
And when the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in its place, and the pus has been removed and it remains for forty days without being renewed or forming an abscess and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, now there is no other way but to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you expose the bone with a probe or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you apply pressure according to this form:
Let the tip of the probe be triangular, and the shaft of it should be gradually tapered towards the tip as you see here.
And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand slightly and then rotate your hand with pressure until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the pain because it obstructs air from passing through when you press it.
Therefore, at this time, restore the place with styptic and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Thus, when the flesh and the place have become hardened, at this time the matter which was flowing to the sides returns to the wound, therefore this is easier for the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the belly.
When the belly protrudes in its entirety and no harm or reduction occurs upon pressure, then it is necessary to treat the patient by laxatives, and subsequently follow with ventilation on the head without scarification and use good suction; and afterwards apply a liniment made of aloes, sesame, and sarcocolla on the belly, and then strengthen the plaster over the belly with powdered materials.
And the method for the powdered material is that you take linen cloths of the pounded substance, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make from these powders.
And then apply those one upon the other according to the quantity that the belly requires. And then strengthen over them with a strong cloth in tight binding; and repeat the suction with ventilation without scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the belly tightly bound day and night.
But if in the meantime the bandaging becomes loose, then it must be made tight again.
And then remove the bandaging day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then apply the poultice with the powders and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the elevation of the uveal membrane.
When you find a disruption in the uveal membrane, and it is prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a grain of barley, and its shape resembles that of a person due to this condition, and you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uveal membrane from below and above. Then place another needle where the thread will be doubled near the lacrimal part, and let that penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; subsequently, incise the location of the double thread and lift that portion of the uveal membrane around the needle, and strengthen it thus.
Then remove the needle and place it on the swelling wrapped in an egg white cloth, and leave it there until the thread adheres to the uvea.
Then treat the swelling with what comforts it until the illness is healed.
And sometimes he applies a circular piece of cloth around the swelling over the prominent elevation, and then it is punctured with a fine probe to reach the center of the swelling, allowing the moisture to drain out, and the swelling subsides quickly.
Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of wounds.
This illness which is called alconati is not the one referred to as scabies, which appears on the skin like water droplets descending and is not that particular condition.
The method of treating this condition is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle. Then take his head in both your hands from two sides and move it so that the scabious secretion reaches the lower parts, and then let it dry without descending, and keep the light (likely referring to illumination or visibility), so that the patient sees the causes as he did before.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
But if the scabious secretion does not descend as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and place it on the conjunctiva just above the ciliary body near the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea, so that the secretion is expelled.
Once it is expelled, then you should apply cooled water in which you have mixed honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
And then treat it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending from the eye.
We have already described the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable to be punctured, as explained in the discourse, according to health conditions.
Now you should have the patient lie down on a bed and raise his limb, using a bandage to secure it.
And approach near to the eyelid of his limb with your left hand if the limb in which the water is the one on the left; or with your right hand, if the limb is the right one.
And approach with your right hand and take the probe if the limb is on the left; or with your left hand if the limb is on the right.
And then place the tip of the probe near the crown according to the thickness of the bone in the white of the eye towards the inner corner, and then gently push the probe upwards and rotate your hand.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel when the probe has reached the intended depth.
And ensure that the distance of the probe to the preon is equal to the measurement from the pupil to the edge of the iris, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see through it with the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And then place the probe into the location where the fluid is, and then pull it out once again. If the fluid drains immediately, now you will see that the patient's vision improves quickly, and remove the probe from the eye.
And then wait for a short while; if the fluid has drained, now you should wait again until the probe can be removed without hindrance.
And when it is stuck and does not come down, then you extract the magda with ease, and revolve with that your hand little by little, and then dissolve in water a little of clear salt from gemma and with that wash the wound inside; and then place outside the wound cotton or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and egg white and seal with that the wound so.
And we and those who know of our time place on that as if thrice in egg white.
And if you do not obey your magda to the instrument of the wound due to its hardness — for there are some men whose wound is hard because of this —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
And thus pierce with that the junction, and do not stop your hand in the trauma, and it is only so that you make a way for the magda to pass through.
And then insert the magda as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for rest in a comfortable dark room where they lie on their back, and all movements should be prohibited.
And place in the nature of that liquid so that it smoothens their nature, and do not let them turn their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandaging be according to their condition within three days.
And then untie that in that dark place and expose the wound to view, and show it to them some causes, and then retie the bandage within seven days.
And do not wonder that you should do this at the hour of the cure or soon after the infusion. Handle it in such a way that you apply this gently so that the water can penetrate quickly and powerfully due to careful attention.
But if an abscess appears, you should then loosen the bandage beginning on the seventh day, and treat it with whatever substance counteracts the abscess.
Now you should cover his eyes and place a cloth over his face through which he can barely see for several days, keeping him in the darkest possible place.
And then he should be moved from that darkness gradually and engaged in conversation about his concerns.
And know that in surgery, the student is not exempt from performing certain procedures, and then you must be bold with the operation.
And it has been transmitted to us by some of those who are knowledgeable about the art, that some say they make fire in the Aracus [or a similar term], which is perforated through which water is suctioned.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the methods of perforation for those who are unfamiliar with them:
And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their ends are crafted with this fine triangular shape, the sharp end just as it should be.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of wounds to the nose.
When in the nose there are various growths that differ from one another, among which is a cause that resembles the sting of a venomous insect or a polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles the aforementioned condition. And there is also a cancerous growth, pale and of dark color; and another that is reddish in color but not dark.
Therefore, for those growths that are not cancerous or false and are reddish in color, you should make the patient sit between your thighs and expose their nose to the sun, and starve the nostrils, applying poultices to those growths. And then extract it from the parts inside, and then carefully cut away what you have identified using a sharp scalpel until you know that all the affected tissue has been removed; if for any reason the excision is not possible, at that moment you should continue cutting with one of the finer instruments available until no part remains. But if bleeding or an accidental abscess occurs due to cautery, then you should stop what you are doing; or if it is a malignant abscess, then you should incise and cauterize it until the bleeding stops and all the pus has been evacuated.
And then place some vinegar or water in the nose near the incision to cleanse it. But if the nose is swollen and moisture reaches the palate as a result, then you will know that it has healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh over the excess pus on the bones to which excision has not reached.
Then you should mix thoroughly some resin with the substance that is to be inserted, and place in it nuts, and put between each nut the quantity of a finger or less, and make a hole and insert one end of the resin into the bone either with a needle or for another possible reason.
And when this has been done, let its scent be drawn into the channels of the bone, and it should be applied to its surface, for carefully observing this action is like how children act in schools, and it is an easy cause for anyone who wants to do it.
And then place the two ends of the resin, one end extending over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then administer a layer of flesh around the nuts that are in the resin, and do this until you know that the flesh is covering the nuts in the resin.
And then extract the resin, and place near the bloodletting in the nose a small piece of cloth, and do this for three days or more until you see that it has corroded everything remaining from the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you decide on a treatment that dries, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, from which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And there is in it something of silver or ivory, which resembles a small spoon filled, like a tiny bowl, and the mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a tube closed like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for capisuction should be flat and open; to which there should be a handle at the back, with which you hold that when heating in oil or whatever you want from juices and suctionable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of thorns naturally found in the extremities of the nose.
Often there is a thorn naturally found in the extremities of the nose, and it is treated and removed on certain days within the period when such care is observed.
And for this reason you should incise that at the beginning of its appearance, and you should treat all of it. And then pause over the place where you cauterize or apply burning medicine, which is at that location.
But if the incision is delayed until it has become hardened, hard, dark in color, and with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron as it is a chronic abscess; for often such harm comes to those who incise this abscess improperly.
And if the abscess is due to touch and is not of a dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all that area, then evacuate the pus and make an incision there without fear, and treat the place with something that dries it up until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On suturing the nose and lips and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar condition.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few will undertake such an operation except in some men.
Therefore, when there is any cause for these conditions, consider whether it is a fresh plague with its own blood, and then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with sutures, and afterward treat it until it is healed.
And if the lips of the continuity dissolution are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you should scrape each part of its visible edge until blood comes out. And then approximate the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over those apply powder of dragon's blood and sprinkle it, and place on top a piece of mastic plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing for two days or three, and then remove that and change the plaster and leave it until the pus is completely evacuated, and afterward treat with an ointment until it is healed.
But the method of suturing is that you approximate the dissolution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal sutures, or approximate the dissolution to the pus as seems appropriate to you.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that cause swelling in the two lips in the partitions within.
Often in some men there appear in the partitions within their lips certain hard swellings resembling the gristle of birds, and some of them are small and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lips and cut into each of those hardnesses from all sides, and immediately fill the place with finely shredded cloth so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it well with something astringent, until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of flesh that is adhered to the gums.
Often there arises on the gum flesh that is adhered to it, which the ancients called "albulus," then you should suspend that with incisions or with forceps and incise it down to its base, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
And then apply to the place finely shredded cloth or other astringent or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for afterward the cauterization will prevent its return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth in the partitions within and those outside, and between the adhered gums, there are rough spots, tartar deposits, and often they are blackened and become green or yellow due to corruption, causing the teeth to form tartar.
And so you should make the patient lie between your thighs and place his head in your lap, and cut the teeth from which these abscesses arise and cause sand-like substances to come out until none of them remain, and do this for blackness and yellowness and other such things until they are cleansed.
Then if it is still in the condition from the beginning of the treatment, that is good; but if not, at this time you repeat the treatment on those [teeth] on another day and on the second and on the third until it reaches the final stage as you wish.
And you should know that the teeth have the need for various forms of instruments and different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to scrape between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
When you treat the tooth of its pain with total gentleness and delay in its complete extraction, because there is no cause that can replace it once it is extracted, for it is a substance sublime that cannot be dispensed with in the extraction of it.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but immediately the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have already seen by the operation of barbers.
Thus when you are satisfied which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula of some virtue, until it dissolves from the tooth the gum entirely, and then remove it with your said tools or with fine forceps little by little until you have removed it completely.
And then use strong pincers for good leverage or a firm grip, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that you have it well without hurting them, and then pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And so if it is not loose, now take one of those instruments and place it underneath from all sides with ease and exert effort to remove the tooth as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, now you must cover that fracture with cloth and secure it at the end with a thin thread so that it does not break during your compression on it with forceps.
And you must act carefully when incising around the entire circumference of the gum and guard against using too much force so that you do not break it or leave part of it behind, and return to the patient because of the malice that it be better than the initial pain of it.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their attempt and audacity during the extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great evils to sick people which are harder to treat, and the roots of them exposed entirely, or some of them, or that you extract it with some bones of the jaw as many times we have witnessed.
And after the extraction let the mouth be washed either with vinegar or with something agreeable mixed with salt.
And if blood flows because of this, just as you do for similar wounds, then apply some quantity of wax and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and holding them delicately with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when using them to work.
And they should be like rings with thick handles such that when you grasp them, they are not bent; their extremities should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron with straight extremities, and at the extremities of those there should be teeth, some of which fit into others and grasp firmly by constriction, and sometimes the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, which is a hawk, and they are very strong in their grip.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of the bones of the lower jaw.
When you need to extract a tooth that is attached for some reason, it is advisable to place a poultice on the area for one day or two until the site becomes softened; and afterward use such forceps or holders with extremities shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or hawk, the shape of the forceps:
Their extremities should be treated internally as well as externally.
And if he does not obey you to attempt this with these forceps or tenaculae, now you must cut above the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
And let it be of short thick length, and do not hide it so that it does not rattle.
Then if by this the root is removed, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a finer end.
And now assist with this instrument which has two prongs of which this is the form as follows: and with other instruments which I will describe for tooth scraping; because useful is made this instrument which resembles a large file, and this is the form:
of the triangular end twisted or short, which has some thickness, and do not hide it so that it does not rattle.
And know that the instruments for tooth extraction are similar and likewise resemble other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan discovers for himself according to what he understands from the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or leave a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if pus appears, at that moment you should proceed with care using those instruments and forceps which we have described for extracting tooth roots, and assist him as follows:
And if there is any swelling, reduce it gradually, and keep the area in the mouth compressed so that it does not spread or escape until all the bone is cleaned out; then restore the place with appropriate medicines.
If there is only a small abscess in the bone, then remove that part which is abscessed and discolored, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
When teeth protrude beyond their natural alignment and especially when this happens to women, particularly to those of advanced age; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth and it is impossible to file or cover it, then remove that tooth; but if it is not attached to the adjacent tooth, then cut it with an instrument of this shape; it resembles a pig’s snout and is made of Indian iron with a very sharp point.
And when your incision is made such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not become inflamed or affect other teeth.
And if the protruding tooth can be filed down, then file it with an iron rasp of this shape:
And let it be of Indian iron and the margua exactly; and let it be of small points as well, like a file with which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that it may not become another tooth or be deformed. And apply strips to it at the end, and shave it with razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and the tongue touches it, now you must file away that inside where the sharpness of that fracture is, until it is smoothed and evened out, so that the tongue does not hurt itself and the speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of deformed teeth with gold or silver filling.
When it happens that the front teeth are loosened and moved by impact or accident, and the patient cannot bite on what they eat, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, now in order to prevent them from falling out, you should reinforce those that are stable with gold filling and not silver, because silver can turn green and after some days it may fall off, whereas gold never changes.
And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the restoration is that you take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then build up with two tortuositates of the filling between one or multiple deformed teeth, until it reaches the adjacent healthy tooth on the other side. From there proceed with the tissue into the part from which you began, and stretch your hand with ease and skill so that it is not harmed.
And let your thread be such that when you stretch the fiber of the teeth, it does not escape.
And then cut off the excess part of the thread using forceps or scissors, and attach it at each place with your fingers, and twist and hide it between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then sew it as tightly as a Roman would.
But if it comes loose or breaks, stretch that or those again with another thread throughout its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as you see them tied:
And when it happens that you return one tooth or two near their proper places, and they grow back as we have recommended, and they heal.
And only skilled artisans and wise practitioners can do this.
And sometimes a similar shape is made from the bone of an animal, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is stretched as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the band that goes around the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligature which was mentioned above the tongue either belongs to those that one is born with and are natural or are accidental and occur due to a disease that has already healed.
And the operation is such that men open the mouth of the patient, and place their hand inside; then they raise the tongue, and then cut that nerve ligament horizontally within so that the tongue may be freed from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or node in that area, and this has remained due to the healing of an injury, then you should incise it and cut along the horizontal so that you have separated the ligament and dissolved the node.
And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the skin so that you do not sever here an artery and cause bleeding.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with cold water or vinegar or salt water; and afterwards place a piece of linen under the tongue; thus, the patient should hold the tongue down against something each night so that it does not heal in another manner.
But if bleeding occurs, apply over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is appropriate for this. And then proceed with the treatment using other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of a Ranula Below the Tongue.
At times, an abscess appears below the tongue, resembling a small swelling that impedes the tongue from its natural movement; and it grows so much within a short time that it fills the mouth.
In the operation where you have the mouth of the patient sixty degrees toward the sun and observe the abscess.
And if you see it of dark color or black, hard, in which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you place the incision in that area, and cut with a fine scalpel, and cut it from all sides; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then pause and apply three times vinegar, which is vitriol, until the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work until you have properly treated it, and wash it with vinegar and salt; and care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are in the throat and other abscesses.
When you encounter an abscess in the throat, which are glands that are somewhat assembled together, some of which appear outside and are called the tonsils. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark colored, with little sensation; then do not touch that part with iron.
And if it is of red color and the base is thick, then do not touch that part with iron due to the flow of blood; rather, let it remain until it has matured, and then either you will remove it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, hard, and the edge of it is subtle, then that is what should be cut into.
And the operation on it is to consider before your operation whether the abscess of it has healed after cauterization or if it has been reduced in some way; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be turned towards you, and hold open the mouth of it, and the assistant takes with his fingers the tongue down with an instrument of noble material which has this form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Then as you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, look directly at it with your own vision, then take some of it and place it in an almond, and pull it out to the sides as much as you can. Or take some other cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument which has this form:
Or take some other cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument which has this form: and it resembles forceps, however the ends of it are curved, thus that the opening of each of those is in line with the other, sharp, made of iron.
But if this instrument is not present for you, then cut it with a scalpel which has this form: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one side, cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then the patient should rinse with water.
If blood flows, guard and use water of the decoction of haws or myrtle leaves and similar to those styptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and afterward cure it until it is healed.
And sometimes pus appears in the groin or other abscesses or those two armpits, and incise them as is said about the incision of two breasts similarly.
And I had treated a woman with an abscess which had appeared in her groin, the abscess was tending to a dark color and was insensitive, it had already closed her groin, and the woman was breathing very narrowly, and I had prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she would have been near death if I had not intervened for one day or two.
And the abscess had swollen so much that it formed two ridges from which pus flowed out through two openings.
Then I decided to operate immediately and inserted my finger into one of the openings, and extracted that, and then I incised at the base of the other opening, and then I closed it, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the plug in that abscess.
And then I excised a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Then the groin of that woman was absolutely fine, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after ate food. Therefore, I did not need to incise that abscess again for a long time, and subsequently an abscess appeared in its place, which I had to incise to prolong its healing.
Thus I cut and cauterized the wound of his leg, thus ending the procedure; and afterwards I walked around not knowing what God had done for him at that time.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the incision of an apostemated swelling.
When one calls to the swelling, and it is apostemated and elongated, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is below thick and round, it is then called a bubba.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not conform to it, and also when the apostema cauterized remains subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round; and if it extends in length, and is sanguineous, of dark or black color, and is not central, then you should attempt its incision because there is fear of malady in such cases.
And when you see it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, make the patient sit down and press your tongue against it with an instrument that reveals its form and then place the thumb on one side, pull it downward, and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the double incision procedure.
And you should not incise it beyond what is appropriate according to the natural term without cause, for if you incise too much, you will harm the patient.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the double incision procedure, and care for it until it is healed.
If the patient is afraid of the incision, use an instrument in the cauterization of him without fear, and the way of the cautery on him is nothing but sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your thigh, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm it with this cause living, and place it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Let the extremity of the instrument be such that it is placed in the cavity as with a ladle's concavity, and place the instrument with the medicine on the tongue, and the patient lies on his back so that saliva or mucus from the mouth can flow due to the intrinsic medicine, so that none of this flows out from any cause onto him and thus causes harm.
And then touch it with your hand on the medicine, and press that onto the uvula for half an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and dip the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it as it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization wipe around the uvula with a cloth dipped in honey, and modify it with that which is around it from the medicine, and wash it with wiping water, and treat it outside with embrocation, and take care of it with bandages until it heals.
And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and less painful from fear.
In some cases, the uvula is treated with something that is milder than cauterization and incision. It is cured by sublimation in this manner: take a poultice of ysope, origany, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, ground seeds similar to these herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them into a flask, which should be submerged in sweet wine and boiled. The flask should be heated moderately, and in the middle of the flask place a tube made like this; it is made of silver or reed.
And insert the end into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
And repeat this procedure several times until it is dry. Be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, as it would be too harsh for the abscess. You should not do this; instead, you must declare the abscess before cauterizing.
But if this instrument is not available to you, take a cane and attach a hollow tube at the end of it, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the hollow of the tube prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres to the gums and other causes.
Move carefully around the collarbone or spine of the patient or for some other reason.
Then look at what is visible among those things, upon which your eyes focus, and then press the tongue with an instrument in front of sunlight so that it may be revealed to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, try to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong cause adhering near the throat will easily be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or some lettuce leaves or a dry biscuit; or give the patient a piece of dried sea sponge, and bind it tightly with honey, then let the patient swallow that, as it passes to the place where sharp spines are and is extracted, thus it will be easily expelled. And take an eel and bind it with honeyed thread, then place it inside and gradually extract it; or take a probe and gently insert and gradually move it.
And if it is not expelled using the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a curved part that you can easily insert into their throat with ease.
And let the patient lie with their head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not injure the patient or cause pain to the bone or spine, or allow the physician's hand to do so.
However, let the surgeon use honey, because of his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and embedded inwards, and he inserts his hand with the instrument into it, all this according to the quantity which has been prepared for him until it is expelled.
Chapter xxxix.
On the Extraction of a Bloodsucker Attached to the Throat.
When treating a bloodsucker with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider the time of day when the patient's throat is exposed to the sun, after you have loosened their tongue with the instrument that we recommended.
Then when you see the bloodsucker, remove it gently with a small incision or with subtle gestures carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it then, take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and immediately place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and falls out of the throat) and keep the patient from water for the entire day.
And then take a vessel full of warm water and open the patient's mouth over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let anything from it pass through, but pour out the water one hour after another with your hand, as soon as the bloodsucker feels the water, it will grasp onto it.
However, if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then smoke the patient with cymin or with asafetida using the instrument that we recommended for smoking the uvula.
In this, so in what case.
And there is another method of operation in suffigation with that one, which is that you take a jar in which are burning coals and the jar is covered by a cloth in the middle of which is a hole, and it is prepared on that hole the end of the instrument; and then place the suffigation above it; and have the patient put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the suffigation does not escape until you know that the suffigation has reached the blood-sucker, for the blood-sucker will immediately fall.
And if it does not work, now you repeat the suffigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and give dry foods like salted almonds, and do not let him drink water, and in this regimen it is necessary that he be kept.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-sucker is treated when it is seen in the throat; and it resembles forceps as you might see them, but it has some curvature. which is placed in the throat, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it presses against something, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the discourse on the preparation for abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are of various kinds, in many ways, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
And there are various ways of puncturing and incising them by two methods, one of which is for the specific type of abscess within itself; and by what they draw from the humidity.
And the second method is for the locations where accidents occur in the body, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment through surgery.
And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but left until the pus has properly matured or they have reached a suitable condition.
And there are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are crosswise and not mature according to their proper condition, such as those near joints, because when an abscess approaches a joint, its nature is prolonged into the surrounding area, and if it corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, it becomes a cause for contraction of that limb; or it may be close to a principal member, and if you delay puncturing it until it matures, it will harm the principal member; or it may be near the buttocks, so puncture it before it matures; but do not puncture it when it is raw, due to incomplete digestion, except for that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not cause a prepuce and extend it into the inner parts of the buttocks, thereby creating a fistula, or leave it until it heals improperly. It is important that you know the right time to puncture the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you should know that it is mature when there is relief from pain and the cessation of fever, along with a decrease in hardness and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, as well as other signs.
And you should know that the incision must be made in the place where the pus is below the abscess and coming from the swelling.
And the incision should always be made along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in places like joints, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use an incision according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the incision until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you make an incision before that, the course of the patient's illness will be prolonged and more severe filthiness will result, and thus the lips of the abscess will become hardened and its depth increased.
But some abscesses should be incised according to the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what that member requires.
And you should administer a small incision in small abscesses, and in large abscesses a larger or wider incision, or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where it is necessary for the condition to be excavated and incised, when it is done as if with bread and is completed at a time when it already exists, just as in the case of those that occur too frequently like boils and buboes.
And of those that are incised in a section having three corners; and of those where it is incised as if in the shape of a maple leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits.
And there are those in which a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, and similar ones to those.
But in the case of one that is not a core as are superficial abscesses and tumors, you should puncture it with a superficial incision or simply scrape it.
And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a portion from it, on another day scrape the abscess inside, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to its degree until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is a robust man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an old person in debility, for the vital spirit in such cases is easily resolved by the evacuation of the pus, and the patient may die quickly, so you operate on them carefully.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you make the puncture in which you puncture these abscesses, you should clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or a flat section; if so, you administer some of it or antiseptic cotton. If the abscess is large and the cracks from the puncture are many, then you should apply medicated plasters to each one until they heal.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or has been hollowed out around its circumference, then you should pack it with old cotton or thread made from linen, as when you have treated pustules or boils without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and then proceed to treat it according to what is needed from ointments until it is healed.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, then administer water, wash and prepare cloths in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding for several times.
If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should infuse powders in vinegar and cauterized oil, and place those on the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you should place powders mixed with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and let all of this be washed internally for three days as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what suits it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in which manner the way of its cure is by separate chapters.
Chapter 41.
On the section of abscesses that appear on the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and there are various types of nodes that contain tunics; and the types of these nodes are many.
And they are soft, and contain moisture similar to jelly. Of those things which contain moisture like dust, and similar to them; and of those things which are stony and hard.
And in the section of all things, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not contradict nature.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entromes, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide that with a section according to its length by making a superficial section according to this form:
And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. When the moisture has been evacuated, then you should excise that skin which contains the moisture, and do not leave any part of it behind, for if any part remains, it may cause issues later on.
And then immerse the piece in Egyptian oil if it is available, and if not, in salt water. Fill the wound with this and leave it for another day, for this will dissolve all that remains of the membrane.
And then apply the Egyptian oil to that piece again, thoroughly and repeatedly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining part of the membrane. Then care for the wound with the oil until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise it according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and insert once between the two lips of the incision and scrape it thoroughly, and exert your effort in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If it happens that you encounter opposition in surgery, now do what I have recounted first of all.
And similarly, treat the suppurated abscess by incision and cure as we have told you; and the incision of a suppurated abscess is easier because it contains little blood and less moisture.
And sometimes there are some abscesses in the head of certain people where there is not much moisture; the cause of this is that I once incised an abscess on an old woman's head and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be pierced, and if someone were to strike it, they would hurt themselves.
But in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the case with this chapter; also, for abscesses that come to children's heads and behind their ears, the incision of all these should be superficial.
And pause the incision of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain into the lower parts.
And then treat those as is appropriate for that cure.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and sometimes they also appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck often develop between the muscles, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper membrane, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
Of these kinds of scrofulas there are spots, for only some of them are stony, and of those only contain moisture, and of those are the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Then in that one which you find to be well disposed during the examination, whose color is manifest and matches the color of the skin, and it is soft throughout, not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not purulent; ensure that you incise it superficially along the part above and below the body in line with .G. between the line of .B., and scrape out that one thoroughly from all sides, extending two fingers' width beyond the edge of the skin if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is safer that the vein or nerve not be incised.
And let the spatula not be sharp, so as not to cut your hand during the incision or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and had to stop your operation, then apply a vinegar trissas or other powders that cause bleeding from the wound, and staunch the bleeding, and leave it so that the acute phase of the abscess subsides and the swelling becomes mollified and begins to soften. When the bleeding has stopped.
Then return to your operation and complete it.
And then ask the patient at that time if there is any cause for other small scrofulas, and if so, incise those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, cover that hour so you do not incise that scrofula from its root. And cover so that you bind that one firmly with a cloth bandage and loosen it when it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and then treat that area.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, then cover so that you bring the two lips of the wound together and sew them up immediately so there is no room for any superfluity.
But if you see that there is room for superfluous fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then cover so that you understand to incise its root, and evacuate it and administer sutures as has been said.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, perforate that one with a superficial puncture where the site of maturation appears to you, and pause in puncturing so as not to reach the pus at the bottom of the abscess, as we have said.
And then administer puncture, wash with appropriate liquid and substances for those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat that with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the pustule of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Thus did the ancients call this section in the epitome, and no one has seen such an operation in our land.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In cases where men have a tendency towards it, avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as doing so would not be beneficial because all the veins and major vessels are here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid loss, which is done by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, cut the epilhot below three circles of its own circles, or four if it is a small section along the latitude in that which lies between two circles in quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are thin.
And if the doctor is cautious, it is advisable to first extend the throat skin by about an inch, and then make an incision into the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then cut the ciphac as we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal by the membrane which is from that place where it is disrupted and by the division of the voice.
And let the wound be left open for some time.
Thus, when the hour arrives in which the perforation is feared, join two lips of the edge of the wound, and cut there alone except for the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recounted is to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the airway of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And by this command, allow the wound to be open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice lasts for three days; therefore, at that hour, command to close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and cut in her throat, incising part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat her. I found the wound as it would be on one near death, uncovered the wound, and saw the blood that had come out of the wound a little.
Thus, I confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was healed.
And nothing happened to the servant except that her voice became hoarse, and after some days she returned to improvement in her disposition.
Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Chapter XLIIV.
Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin outside, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the size of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
And the accidental case happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is cause for fear. And one should not attempt to treat it with iron unless it is small. And you should proceed with caution and investigate it as described. If you find it similar to fatty knots and not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would for nodes and extract it using water or something that cleans the area; and if not, then thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is needed for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of the section on the kinds of knots.
There are various kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
Here is the translation:
Thus I say that an abscess is caused by heat and fever and very strong pains until the boiling of the excess matter ceases; and it completes putrefaction when at that time the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But this one is not heat nor fever nor pain, and it resembles that which happens in the lion's wound which is inside the thigh.
And it depends on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a pimple and it forms in the same way whether larger or smaller, and there are two types according to their nature, dry or fatty, and they contain moisture, and the colors of moisture vary, as I say in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the treatment of this condition, express it and inquire about its beginning, which is called an intrusion, as its form will come in the chapter that follows this one.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this intrusion and insert it into the most humid part of the area where you find the abscess, and you will rotate it little by little until you know that the intrusion has already penetrated the tissue.
And subsequently withdraw it according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intrusion and examine what has come out in its wake.
And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is found, then you shall incise it at a superficial section as I have said regarding other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture in the wake of the intrusion, then you will know that it is fatty.
And draw on the dried surface a section having a cross shape according to this form: So that you have been taught, and suspend that section by threads, and scrape off the skin from all parts with ease, and keep the fleece or sack if you can over it, and extract that pus at the knot.
But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and you should then apply dressings for this, and now you will extract it in pieces until none remains by any means.
For if it bursts for any reason, little or much, the knot will return according to the most likely scenario.
And if you see that it bursts in some small part, now apply the wound with some caustic powders and strengthen the wound, and place over it something suitable for treating an abscess by cauterization, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, now you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is opposite it, now you should cauterize and fill the place with triply refined vitriol and leave that open for two days or three until the wound has become clean and the blood ebullition subsides; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, there are forms of instruments, which are of three kinds: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of inserting instruments is as follows:
The form of small insertion is as follows:
Make them of iron, of aluminum, with properly curved ends so that they facilitate the instrument's insertion into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
And there are three kinds, for among them one is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experienced one is as follows:
The form of the medium experienced one is as follows:
The form of the small experienced one is as follows:
They are convenient for abscesses, excisions, fistulas, and boils, as they enter those areas which are among the bones and from other causes.
And they make hooks, thick ones, lions (likely referring to a specific shape or tool), as well as large needles like those used for sewing saddles, and they are made of citrus thorns, or thorns, or iron, or silver. The best ones are when they are made of citrus thorns.
And they are made of black feathers, which are used to probe fistulas in the curvature of which there are reflections, as their lightness allows them to be reflected in those areas.
And there are three kinds, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, depending on the quantity and width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Form of the large experienced lead plate:
Form of the medium-sized experienced lead plate:
Form of the small experienced lead plate:
The forms of the hooks are of one kind made of special pieces, four of which are simple kinds, to each of which there is only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And their hooks are of one kind, and they are of three kinds.
And of those hooks which have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And of those which have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, its form:
Form of a large hook having two curves: Form of a medium-sized hook having two curves: Form of a small hook having two curves:
Form of an incision having three curves:
Form of a medium-sized incision having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpel blades with which nodes and abscesses are incised, and there are three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor placed in such a way that they might cause hesitation during the incision of nodes due to fear of cutting into a vein or nerve. And through these, the patient may be healed and find some peace because of the adjustment that occurs after the incision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
They are made of iron and resemble reeds from which alcohol is made.
And at that sharp end, there is a punctured area where the spoon is hidden, and in this way it connects to the parts inside and outside, as you see when you want to.
The forms of spatulae, which are hidden among the said fingers for the puncture of abscesses and I do not perceive them as bad for patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these:
They should be made of fine citrus thread, round with some length, and they should be delicate.
And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be large, medium, and small, so that with them the blood flow can be interrupted quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other medicine available.
However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as the sinews of the arms and legs, and the sinews of the shoulders, and the breasts and abdomen and similar fleshy sinews.
And sometimes these instruments are made of other small tools similar to fish scales in this form; with which the blood is interrupted when performed for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which are sometimes like those of women.
Some men have swollen breasts when they begin to sleep and continue swollen. And similarly the breasts of women are assembled and become what we call Roman nipples, hairy.
And for those who need this, cut it in a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then scrape away all roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
If the breast inclines to the sides and is soft due to its size, similar to how it can be in women, then cut it into two parts with its pus removed, in two sections resembling a lunar shape, each of which should fit within the other at their ends, such that one line contains the other according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then scrape away the edge between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with cloth soaked in corrosive liquid and leave it until that corrodes what remains of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Appear Near the Testicles.
These abscesses that appear near the testicles are of the type of scrofula, hard, and they contain a skin that is sac-like.
And of those few that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent shape according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when it is completely evacuated of what is in the abscess of the wound, then fill it with boiled wool and leave it for another day.
And then the wound should be dressed and treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is present, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula equally.
And if the inflammation has spread to the point of putrefaction, then administer cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Incision of Abscesses That Occur Due to Artery or Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the surrounding area has become inflamed, an abscess may occur. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it tends to aggregate in the front part of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will hear a hissing sound.
And an abscess due to a vein is round and appears on the surface of the body.
And the incision for this abscess is dangerous, especially in areas behind the armpits, in the angles, and in the neck, as it can be quite risky; therefore, its treatment should generally be avoided. For those that occur in the extremities or on the head, it should also be avoided.
May it be done upon him who is of this due to inflation of the artery opening; cut in the dry section along its length; and near the incision with an inch or so from the artery, and release the tunics until it is uncovered.
And near place upon him the needle and make that penetrate into the other side, and tie the artery with two double knots at two places, — which cause I showed you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then press the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood escapes entirely from it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and afterwards treat that with appropriate poultices until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to a vein section, then you should have in your hand what is possible of the abscess at that site, and afterwards insert the needle below the place where you had held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it off double with thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a strong bandage as I have told you regarding the grapevine bandage on both sides of the thread's ends.
And if you fear that the thread might be extracted, then insert a knot with the needle below the entire abscess beyond the initial insertion of the needle, and tie four knots.
And then dry the abscess in its middle part so that when what is inside has come out, you then incise the excess tissue, and leave what is attached.
Then pause and apply powder which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, then proceed to give the treatment which is done with cauterization and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess which occurs due to twisting of the nerves.
Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, so too can an abscess occur in the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive hard work, and similarly.
And it is done to alleviate this in the areas of the helper bones or the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually painful.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the surrounding tissue, and it is among the worst conditions when it is constricted by inflammation, and the patient seems in a state of stupor.
And it is not an abscess that aggregates in the front of the body, and because of this there is no pain localized to one area, but rather it pains throughout the entire body without being confined to any particular part in front or back.
Therefore, when it is in the joints, it should not be treated with iron, for it will quickly lead to contraction.
But for the one that is in the head or on the forehead, relieve the pain with spatha (a type of powder or remedy). But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with poultices and lance it to drain the pus.
But if it is large, then suspend it with incisions, and scrape that area, and afterwards cut it open; and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter I.
On the incision of an abscess which occurs on the cheek that affects the abdomen.
Therefore, some people are troubled in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies with growths which are called fungi due to their resemblance to mushrooms; the root of these is subtle while the head is large. And often the lips of these grow together, it is so for small ones as well as those that are magnificently large.
And I have seen one such case where there were two growths in his abdomen that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those that were white and had a small root.
And the lips of those growths were inverted and would split open, and moisture would constantly run from them.
Therefore, I incised those growths and found inside one weighing about eighteen unciae and the other about ten unciae.
And the procedure during the incision of such growths is to consider whether the patient is humid and if the color of the growth is white and humid with a subtle root. Then you should incise it with a broad scalpel while being present yourself to cauterize it over fire, because moisture from the incision needs to be expelled; and if blood flows, cauterize that area.
And if you see the patient pale and fearful, be cautious about incising it with a knife. Instead, take some fresh lead solder and apply it to that growth in the manner we have described, and leave it for two days.
Adjust the strap tightly around the lead wire; therefore, do not stop strengthening the thick lead, until it is severed and falls on its own.
But if the lead is of great thickness, then during its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you may sever half of it, and then cauterize the remaining part so that it does not return.
And then treat it until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut lead that is of dark color, with little sensation, and relatively soft, for such is often cancerous.
And this will serve as a reminder of certain important points regarding that.
Chapter LII.
On the treatment of a hernia of the navel.
A hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; either through fissures in the abdomen above the belly, and from it comes the membrane or bladder as in other ruptures; or due to a wound from which blood flows from a vein or artery depending on what is present there; or due to trapped air.
But if it is due to a fissure in the abdomen and the protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; it causes little pain, and subsequently appears in various situations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the bladder, then its condition differs greatly from what we have described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it retreats; and quickly returns afterwards. It is light in weight and becomes prominent especially after bathing and hard work.
May it be if by moisture, the hours are like a lion and are not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor are they restrained, nor are they created.
And if it is by infection, the hours with these signs appear as an abscess turning black.
May it be if it is by flesh that has decayed, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is situated in proportion to a quantity.
May it be if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is like a lion.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an infection from an artery, or a vein, or gas; then you should be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have described abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you should command the patient to lie on their back and stand extended; then press your finger around the circumference of the entire navel, and then command them to lie face up with their hands under their buttocks; then surround it with a piece of linen about an inch wide around the circumference of the navel where you have marked with your finger; and then extend half of the abscess upwards from this point by about one inch; and then tie it around the circumference with strong thread or cloth in a proper manner.
And then open the center of the abscess over the dressing and insert your finger into that area to check for the intestine; and if you find it adhered or protected by the dressing, then carefully remove it and push the intestine towards the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the cloth, then take one ounce of it; and incise the excess.
And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and place in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crisscross manner, which you should make penetrate; and then compress the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area open so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off by itself; or incise it when it is thin enough to drain, and then treat it with a lotion from among those mentioned until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh or due to moisture, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with a lotion that will heal and consolidate the area.
Chapter LIII.
On the Treatment of Cancers.
We have already said in the division about the types of cancer and how it is approached for treatment with medicines, and that it is difficult to cure without it becoming ulcerated; we have also discussed cancer arising in certain parts and the care required for its treatment.
And the ancients said that in some cases cancer can be in a location where its eradication is possible, just as with cancers located in the mammary glands or in the scrotum and similar parts of the body allocated to removing all of it, especially when it starts small.
When you are old and gray, do not try to apply it, for I have never been able to heal anyone from that condition nor have I seen another who has, nor has anyone else reached that state.
And the operation should be performed when it is appropriate as we have said, which is to precede by allowing the patient to purge from black bile several times, and then if an obvious swelling is found, drain that.
And then prepare the patient with preparations in which the operation will take place, and then apply hooks to the area where they are needed; and afterwards, clean from all parts with a good linen cloth for thorough cleansing so that no cause of infection remains. And allow the blood to flow, and do not cut that area hastily, and press the spots, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
But if it is contrary to let thick blood flow from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and afterwards treat that with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
On the Treatment of Hydrophobia.
We have already recommended in the division of the types of hydrophobia caused by water, and the symptoms of each type, along with the treatment for it using medicines.
And the one that can be treated with iron is only the single type of convulsion caused by hydrophobia, and it should not be approached with iron for the types affecting the tympanum or the ydropica, because those are fatal.
And when you have already treated this kind of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, now consider whether the patient has reached a state of debility, or if they suffer from another illness that is also a form of dropsy, such as if it affects their chest or abdomen similarly. At this point, be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
If you see the patient is robust and there is no other illness except for this simple form of dropsy, and they are neither a child nor elderly, then the method of the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and have an assistant press the abdomen of the patient with their hand, squeezing out the water from below the navel, and afterward take a spatum with sharp edges according to this form:
It should have two sharp points that are long and taper to a point like a spatum; however, it should also gradually become narrower, so that during the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thus harm the patient.
And then consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the bowels; if so, you should distance yourself from the navel by three fingers' width during the incision, below toward the pubis.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers' width.
And if the generation of it is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not advisable for your incision to be on the side where the patient lies, so that the fluids do not flow to that location and cause harm.
Here is the translation:
And I perforate the cyst so that it reaches the space where the fluid is. And then extract that and insert an instrument which has this form: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion leather, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut like a pen tip, as you can see.
And at the uppermost part of it is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the fluid, then immediately the fluid will rise on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of fluid at once, for if you remove too much in one go, the patient may die due to resolution of their vital spirit, or it may lead to imminent death.
But evacuate that according to the amount of strength of the patient and according to what their condition, the strength of their pulse, and their general health indicate to you.
And then extract the instrument, and cover the fluid that causes it to be retained by the ligature that covers the hole over the cyst which you were instructed to perforate according to that method.
And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of fluid, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to leave too much fluid remaining.
But if you are concerned about the patient and allow a large amount of fluid to be removed, then bury it in fine sand, and apply sweat baths; and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed.
About cauterizing on the stomach, and the pus and the rectum near the removal of water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter 51.
About the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their urethra not pierced (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, one should cauterize for the piercing as soon as it is born with a fine powder according to this form:
And then place a fine lead pin in the opening and secure it, and keep it for three days or four.
And when he wishes to urinate, he should be cleaned and allowed to urinate; and then return the pin.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not clean this opening.
But for the one whose opening is narrow, he should be treated with a lead pin as we have said, for enough days until it becomes enlarged.
But for those in whom the opening is not in its place, as mentioned, the cause of this is that when born, the urethra is behind the tip of the penis so he cannot urinate freely until he lifts his penis with his hand to one side; and it is not due to generation, because thus the sperm cannot reach the mother properly, and it is a minor illness.
Here is the translation:
And guard yourself that in your operation for bleeding, you do not make a mistake there; and pause at the time when you cut off the blood, and cure the wound within so that it may heal.
Chapter LVI.
About balanus, which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Often this balanus occurs on the penis as a soft fleshly prominence.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant: suspend it for a moment and cut off that part until it is completely removed; then pause to apply a poultice with Egyptian onion; afterwards, treat it with a cleansing agent until it heals.
And if the balanus is malignant and discolored, then you should administer cautery around the base of it and its circumference.
But if the balanus is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis head, and one part of the balanus is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is stabilized; and then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both parts together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be damaged.
And if blackness and corruption occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should excise all that is discolored, about to become corrupted, or already corrupted; and afterwards, apply a poultice over it using honey mixed with ground and sifted wheat bran and barley flour.
And so treat that one along with the other treatment until it is healed.
If there is bleeding, now administer lunar cautery according to this method:
because beneficial cautery is in two positions at once, namely for bleeding and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the urethra is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, now it is necessary for you to insert a lead cannula into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is such, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when it occurs due to an illness or abscess), you should use blunt forceps until the attachment dissolves and the head of the penis is fully released.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, now you should use forceps gently on the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin, it can be easily pierced due to its delicacy.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a fine thread, which should be moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
And then treat it with styptic herbs until it is healed and consolidated.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what occurs during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution involving the cutting of continuity as other diseases do; however, since it is part of our procedure and our will, and since that operation is specifically for children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the least painful way to achieve safety.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws. The reason is that we have acquired this through experience. For this reason, I found most artisans and barbers to circumcise and clean with a razor and scissors; and they use ligatures with wax and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and did not find a better way to clean with scissors, using ligatures with wax during circumcision than with the nail, because most times you avoid the disease above, but the disease of the foreskin has two layers, and remains below the skin. Further light incision can lead to certain pain. And in the cleaning method which is done by alphabetists and is digital, used by barbers, there is no assurance against cutting the extremity of the male member, because it easily leads to injury inside the groove.
But in the operation with the nail, it is easy to err and corrupt your procedure. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and most times they are born in such a way that there is no need for circumcision, and I have seen that.
But with the circumcision done with scissors and ligatures with wax, the goodness and experience reveal themselves to me. The scissors are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand according to the two sharpnesses proportionally and make an incision accordingly at one time, it is done in such a way that the compression with wax encompasses the foreskin entirely without error.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child sit if it is one who understands a little, so that you only tie the thread on his penis, and leave that for another day.
And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him according to his understanding. And then make him stand between you, prepared in such a way that he is not afraid; and hide the scissors in your hand or keep them out of sight, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
And then insert your hand into his penis and blow on it, and pull that in so that the head of the penis comes out, and then clean what is accumulated from dirt.
The form of the scissors used for cleaning is as follows:
Let one pair of blades be blunt and the others sharp, so that the point of the blade does not come out, and let the length of both edges be equal to the length of two fingers equally.
The mistake in cleaning is that you remove too much of the inner lining, either all or part of what should remain after incision.
Therefore, you should apply the poultice for as long as your hand can hold it due to the swelling of the area, and then incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold the poultice with your hand, then apply it for one hour and then incise it.
But if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the groin in an abscess, then you should leave it until the pus has matured, and then incise it with ease, according to what is prepared for you.
And be careful of the head of the groin, for it should not be done that way.
And therefore, treat it with the powders that the plague consolidates, using those we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
And if it is incised too much from the lining, and you follow the parts above, do not pay attention to that.
And therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or hardened sand, or due to pus or blood, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the stone is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned and the cause is urgent for the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be slender like a reed quill, as thin as a sparrow's feather but half the length of a palm, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a thread and tie it at one end to the wool or cotton firmly; and place the ends of the thread in the lower part of the siringua, and if necessary cut any excess length of the wool with scissors so that it can be inserted into the tube. Then gently insert the siringua into the bladder through the urethra.
And have the patient lie on a chair, and lift the bladder area with oil as a lubricant, using olive oil and rose water.
And then insert the siringua with ease until it reaches the opening of the urethra; and then bend the urethra above its midpoint; and then push the siringua into it; and then push it further until it reaches the bladder, and ensure that the patient is positioned so that it goes directly to the empty space, and if this order is not followed, the instrument will go where there are tortuosities.
And gradually extract the lint along with the wool, for the urine dissolves the wool.
And when you extract that, use urine for treatment, and use a tube; do not stop using the tube until the bladder is emptied and the pain begins to be alleviated.
Chapter LIX.
Regarding the quality of enemas for the bladder with an enema device and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or frozen blood clots within it, or a constricted fistula, and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
But at the end of it, it is blunt, that is its closure. And in that part there are three parts: two of one side, just as you see.
At the beginning, it is concave, in which that which is to be introduced should fit, according to the quantity that needs to be inserted, without addition, until when any cause draws out the moisture, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this water it is expelled, and when it is expelled far, as the clampcedra does which is fitted with naphtha in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw with it the water that is introduced to the sides above, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
Then insert the extremity of the plaster into the groin as we have recommended in the circle; then apply the moisture with the water that you use, for that moisture will reach the bladder soon, and the patient will benefit from it.
The form of the instrument with which the bladder is treated is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with the head being similar to a small feather, and below that, thin threads.
Then take a bladder of the patient, and place in it the moisture that you want to treat in the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two with strong ligatures made double, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the instrument into the groin.
Then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture, applying gentle pressure until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder available, take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; then pierce it all around its circumference; then tie strong threads through those holes, both ways; then place in that water or liquid which you want to use for moisture, oils, and waters.
Then tie that to the instrument as you did with the bladder, and apply pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of stone extraction.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stone and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have described the stone in which this operation is performed and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And here I will narrate that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stones generated in the bladder mainly affect children; and among its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and it contains small particles like sand; and the patient scratches his penis frequently, and he urinates little by little, and then it becomes painful; and with these words you will have understood this.
And it is easier to treat children with that condition before they reach fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older individuals. But in younger people it is somewhat easier because they are between those extremes.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment is more difficult; if it is small, the opposite is true.
Therefore, to reach the treatment of this condition, we begin by preparing the patient with a diet that eliminates all foods that may prevent the passage of the stone due to their inquiry.
Regarding the malady with its associated pains and swelling, and discomforts, so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or jump from place to place several times.
And then place the patient in the position you have prepared, and let him lie with his back raised from the bed, so that the bladder is made to incline towards the lower parts.
And then examine that and all inside it.
When you feel the stone in its place, then immediately proceed to act upon it.
And if you do not get a clear sensation from the beginning of your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint your index finger with oil, using the left hand if the patient is a child, or the right hand if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus. And examine the stone with your finger inside. And gradually turn it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon it with your finger and expel it towards the outside from the place where you intend to operate.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and instruct another assistant to extend the thighs outward with his right hand, and with his other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, near the location where the incision will be made.
And then insert a probe that has this shape: and cut in the place that is between the anus and the genitals, not at the middle location, but towards the left side of the thigh; let the incision be made on this stone and your finger be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal narrow according to the quantity which can be taken from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because you must easily press with your finger which is in the anus the stone against the place where the incision is made, and it will come out without difficulty.
And know that some stones have sharp angles and edges, because of which the extraction of them is made difficult by this.
And of that one it is like a spherical acorn, and it is round, and its extraction is made easily.
Then for that one which has sharp angles and edges, adjust the incision along the fissure.
And if it does not come out easily, then you should devise something over that, or apply gently with a suitable gesture, the end of which is like a file with which you press on the stone, and do not move away from it; or insert an instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot do that, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see blood flowing, apply it gently with a solution of dissolved vitriol.
But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the bladder opening, and subsequently make an incision over it; and then gently push near that area; and similarly proceed if there are multiple such stones.
And if it is a stone of great size, the ignorance lies in your cutting that which is large and dry, for one of two causes afflicts the patient: either he remains or he becomes affected by the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of what is inside so that it is expelled, or devise in the fracture of the bone with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place upon that wound soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
And then raise the patient on their elbow, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wash the wound with water and little oil, and then care for the wound using egg whites and honey until it is healed.
But if in the wound an abscess occurs that is hard and corroded, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in a bladder (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if you leave it, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
In all the stages of treatment, you should apply both the treatments and adjust the medicines that are prescribed for the condition.
And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then during treatment you should do as I recommend before proceeding to surgery, because many are accused of overstepping with this treatment; but I advise against it, and what you should do is take a smooth iron probe, which has the following shape:
with a triangular tip, sharp, and inserted into a handle.
And then take some wax, and attach it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, gently until the probe reaches the stone. And rotate the probe with your hand on the small stone gradually, and you should make the incision until it penetrates the other side; for the urine will be released immediately.
And then press your hand on what is above the stone at the front of the urethra, for that area is constricted, and it will be opened to allow urine through, and the ailment will be cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it, then attach a piece of wax below the stone and another piece above the stone. And then cauterize above the stone in that urethra between two bindings. Here is the translation: Then remove the bandage and clean the clotted blood, which is done on the wound.
And it is not necessary to bandage the stone after removing it, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above it should remain, because when the pus is released near the swelling of the stone, the membrane returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for this reason, when you bandage the pus above, you must lift the membrane to the upper parts or return it gently, so that the wound heals as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone is found in any of them, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One reason for this is that women have a narrower passage.
And the second reason is that you rarely find a woman who openly tells a doctor if she has such issues, whether she is unmarried or married.
The third reason is that you rarely find a woman skilled in this art, especially the operation itself.
And the fourth reason is that the site for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so a deep incision is required, and this is risky.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is advisable that you consult a skilled female physician, as few are available.
If you are lacking in that [instrument], then seek out something subtle, or present a midwife woman who is experienced in the matters of women, or a woman who has been properly trained in this art.
Therefore, present that [instrument], and command him to do everything you order him to do, starting from the examination of the stone; the reason for this is to determine if the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary that he put his finger in her rectum and feel for the stone.
Therefore, if he finds that [stone], mark it below his finger, and then command him to incise upon that [mark].
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder, and carefully grasp that [stone].
Therefore, if she finds that [stone], then it is necessary that she gradually extract it from the opening of the bladder to the partitions below as far as her strength allows until she reaches the root of the stone.
And then incise at the location of the middle of the vagina where the root of the stone is, regardless of its position, and fix the stone in that place so that the finger does not move the stone when marked below it.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from there.
And know that the types of stone are many: for among them there are few and great, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you should know how many kinds there are of the thing about which you speak to signify upon what you wish.
And if you see blood flowing, apply vitriol thrice to that place and keep it there for one hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And make sure you prepare with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flowing, and you know that the bleeding is from the artery that was cut, then sprinkle powder on the place and bind it with powders and moderate pressure, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die. And then treat the wound.
And when the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days, and the place becomes clean, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter LXII.
Of the section on treating hernias.
A hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white tissue below the arch of the groin muscles, which is called a sac.
In some cases, it is on the proper inguinal region which nature has prepared in the part of the groin, so that one may think it is another groin; and this is the ligament of the genitalia between the white fat which we have mentioned, and this is not otherwise said.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitalia, because this matter effuses into them, and sometimes it happens due to impact upon the genitalia.
And this humidity has various colors, for its color may incline to citrine or to blood-red, or reddish, or it may be black and thick, or it may be watery and white, and these are what they are.
And the signs by which one knows where this aggregation of water is such as follows: if it is in the white fat which we have mentioned, then the abscess appears roundish slightly elongated like a figure of an egg, and the genitalia appear, because the moisture covers that from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper inguinal region, then the abscess appears round at the part of the groin, and for this reason one estimates that it is another groin.
And if the moisture is between the ligament of the genitalia and the white fat, then it lies below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you should observe the color of the moisture in the abscess around the incision through which its form is revealed; and according to what is seen in the traces of the incision, judge about what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of iron wounds, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and then wash the body.
And let him lie supine on his back on some raised surface, and place clean sheets below him.
And you should stand on the left side of him, and command an assistant to stand on his right, who will extend their hand across one of the flanks to the root of the thigh and to the part beneath the navel.
And then take a broad splinter and split the root of the thigh from the middle location along its length towards the wound.
And the incision should be made equidistant from the line that you should follow on the skin of the thigh, until it reaches the white fatty tissue beneath.
And probe that area, and observe carefully so that you do not injure it; and your probing should be as deep as possible without causing harm, and examine the wound thoroughly according to what is possible.
And then pierce the fatty tissue with a wide incision to allow water to drain, and extract all the fluid.
And then separate the two edges of the incision with forceps, and extend the fatty tissue to the surrounding areas; do not touch the root of the thigh beneath it, and dissect the fatty tissue in such a way as is possible for you. And dissect that area completely or in pieces, particularly the inner side carefully, for if you do not examine it thoroughly during the dissection, there is no assurance that the fluid will not return.
If you proceed to suture it outside of its socket during your operation, when you have completed the cutting of the urethra, return it inside and then adjust both edges of the genital seam with a suture, and afterward treat that as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels which are near the suspensory muscle, and extract the testicle, and afterward treat that as we have said.
But if the swelling is divided into two parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other similarly; and if it appears to you that an operation should be performed, then perform it.
And then you wipe away the blood, and insert into the incisions wool submerged in oil or olive oil; and place over that another piece of wool which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the abdomen; and cover them with folded cloths and poultices, and bind those with a bandage as follows:
And then take two cloths and fill them with crimped wool as described; and make the edges such that they are pressed by wood or wet cloth, and attach them to a structure in the waistband of the trousers, and one end of the edge reaches towards the buttocks between the two sides, and the second end reaches towards the part of the thigh, and both ends on two supports behind, and two other ends over two corners, and all the attachments should be secured to the waistband of the trousers.
And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; and that you take a thin knife-like cautery and incise with it the edge of the genital area, and heat it as we have recommended until it is revealed the white tissue containing the fluid, and then take a cautery shaped like this: and it resembles the Greek letter.
And then pierce that tissue, and heat it until all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the tissue with forceps, and excise it with forceps, and excise it with a thin heated cautery; and incise it as much as is possible for you until all of it is removed; and be careful that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting in terms of blood loss, and better than an operation involving cutting.
But if it happens that an abscess forms during the time of cutting or during cautery, or there is excessive bleeding, then you must treat whatever complication arises accordingly, with treatment suitable for it as mentioned.
But if the patient is weak and does not dare to undergo a second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I recommend; and this is when you are certain, by what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is fluid-filled.
Then you should have the patient sit on a raised cushion, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part with a scalpel, and extend the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough to allow all the fluid to come out.
And then place pressure on the site of the cut and tie it there, so that all the remaining fluid can come out. And then take care of that wound until the illness is healed.
But if there is resistance to the escape of the fluid at that time, you pierce it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the opening of the wound creates resistance and prevents the exit of the fluid. Therefore, you should place a needle or instrument used to extract fluid from cysts, as described earlier; or apply pressure to the wound with something small.
And know that the fluid returns, and it happens again after about six months or so; and when it accumulates, then it should be punctured according to the same method, for in this way the patient will pass his days until it subsides.
Chapter LXIII.
On the incision for a flesh hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision for this hernia there is great danger of serious harm in major cases; therefore, it appears to me better to abandon it and save the patient by not proceeding with it.
And I recall the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those parts where the genitalia are composed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute, harsh moisture that is discharged into the genitalia, or due to impact.
The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no relief from the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
A pus-filled abscess is very light in weight; its color is dark, and there is no relief from it.
And sometimes abscesses are caused by the coagulation of arteries, and by the inflation of those that have already been perceived in this way, or by the inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched further.
But what is caused by the inflammation of a vein does not disperse because of compression with the fingers.
And it is possible to make a section over this type and over other parts; you should incise the skin of the thighs, and nearby there are veins above, extract the white ligament, and release the suspensory ligaments, and tie them, and incise the suspensory ligaments so that you can release it from all directions.
Therefore, if the vein has already joined with those tissues and is consolidated, now you should extract the vein and incise it.
And if there is adhesion between any part of the ligament or between what is between the vessels, now you should release all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, now you should incise all of that and extract the vein as we have said.
Thus when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and afterward care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that involve the abdomen.
It is an abscess wrapped in some covering similar to a boil, and it makes difficult the exercise and walking due to the pain.
And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious due to what preceded it.
However, one should proceed with the operation as they did with the first ones.
And he says that you should have the patient sit on a raised chair; then apply bandages to the scrotum below; and then use your hand to pull the genitals upward with force; and have another assistant do this while you do other things, extending them vigorously.
And then incise with a sharp, broad knife across the line where the veins are visible to expose the vessels.
And then carefully cut away from all sides as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which is done on the flanks.
And then insert a needle with double fine thread into those areas, and tie it at the first place where you acted upon it, and tie it again at the last of these places. And then incise those areas in the middle with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
Regarding the treatment of wounds, in curing other wounds where you wish health to be generated by what falls from vessels, which injure one of two genitals, for it is not wrong because of this.
If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary either to extract the testicles or for the testicles to be separated from the vessels because of this cutting off of nourishment by the severing of the vessels, and they must wither, or for what will not be beneficial among these.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that happens in the caphac extended over the abdomen near the angle of the abdominal cavity, so that some of the bowels protrude through that rupture.
And this rupture is either of the caphac or of its vicinity, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting some heavy object, or by similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the caphac, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess equal within the groin because the caphac compresses the bowel.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the caphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and it appears as an abscess different from one near the navel, and this is because of the protrusion of the bowel, and its body outside beyond the caphac.
In some cases, the membrane is separated from the bowel, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
In some cases, hernias are caused by gas, and in other cases they follow the path of a bowel fissure where they are trapped, causing great pain to the patient, and often cause severe discomfort especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, there is fear, because it is advisable to avoid its use in such cases.
The method of the operation for this condition is to instruct the patient to push the bowel back into its place with their hand inside the affected area. If it obeys and returns to its proper position, then lay the patient on their back and raise their legs.
Then apply a ligature to the cord that connects the testicles, and incise the cord of the testicles along its entire length; then place hooks in both sides of the section as needed to keep it open.
And if the section, according to the quantity that is possible for you, is separated from it as much as necessary.
Then carefully remove the tissue around the cord of the testicles until the white hard structure on each side is exposed.
Now insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white structure that is behind the cord, and between the adjacent structures, to loosen any adhesions in the area behind the testicle.
From the side of the testicles towards the parts behind, and with this extend the white thread on top to the left hand, and raise the wound above the thread at the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend it upwards while you dissolve the adherence that is behind upon completion of the solution.
And search among those things to ensure that there is no cause of the intestine wrapped around the white thread hard. But if you find any cause for concern, then you should push that back into the lower abdomen.
And then incise in the part below the testicles at a section from which blood and pus flow as we have described in what has been said.
Take the lint soaked in oil and apply it to the wound; then apply the bandage we have recommended (and some poultices made with white cerate are cauterized, as we mentioned concerning the incision of pus, since sometimes such accidents happen) and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself.
If the cleaning of it is delayed, hot water should be applied and placed over it until it falls off as we have said.
And regarding the treatment of the wound, follow the other methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventral Hernia.
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
And the earlier practitioners said that it should be treated as we have recommended for hernias involving the intestines; which is to ligate the vessels near the section where there is ease in doing so; and then dry up the swelling in the nearby area with something that will cause it to drain, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the Incision Made in Hernias.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the hernia as we have said, and it becomes evident in that location.
And they do not assign any specific cause for the sac in hernia cases; and even if they do, it is rare; and it returns at all times.
If the time is prolonged with it, adjust the fissure in the sphincter within which descends the bowel into the sphincter; and this happens due to the extension of the sphincter, as we have said, which is in the angles, because the sphincter is stretched out, and accordingly it becomes soft and there is swelling.
And the treatment for it is with cautery as was preceded in the narrative.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between the thighs, and then the area of the swollen abscess rupture is dried with section across its width according to the measure of three fingers.
And then stretch the white sphincter that is below the rib so that it becomes uncovered.
And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent part of the sphincter, and press it to the pain in the abdomen.
And then cut the two prominent parts above the tip of the sphincter, and join them with sutures one to the other.
And then extract the tip of the sphincter, and do not cut it completely from the sphincter, nor extend the tissue, nor any other cause such as I will explain to you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat it as you would a wound, and when you incise the abscesses, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; for the sphincter is contracted and the swelling of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this case, for it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened because the flesh within it is also softened, and this requires careful management.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one seeking its cure to lay the patient according to his position, and then raise the entire cord that is softened above the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with sutures.
And if you wish, in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and secure it firmly with sutures.
Then incise between the sutures; and subsequently treat for other injuries until he is healed and the pus has subsided.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, yet for certain reasons it has been read to me and I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except in two ways: one being so that when asked about it, the physician knows how to cure those who suffer from it; and the other way is that we often have a need for castration in other animals for our benefit, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore, I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting.
In the case of that which is done by incision, the way to proceed is that we should cut the animal in warm water until its genitals are softened and loosened and hang down. And then take those with your hand inside until they are relaxed and do not appear below the touch.
In the case of castration done by rupture and section, make sure you hold the animal and press the root of its testicles with your left hand.
And then grasp the suspensory ligaments, and incise each one with a section until two processes are carried out.
And then incise those parts that you have each peeled back. And do not leave on those of the spermatic cord any cause for harm, but rather the fine cord that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by incision, because incision often leaves some cause from the testicles for which the animal desires to copulate.
And then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space between the root of the testicles, in the area between two testicles where there is a figure resembling that of a female, including hair.
In some cases of that vein which carries urine from which is in the cord of the testicles.
In women there is a special case: the womb of a woman above the pubis is like two testicles of a man, a little more towards the inside just as the buttocks of a man and two testicles.
The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women. It is that you should incise those tight tissues so that the pus escapes from it, and then treat it as you would other wounds.
And in the second kind for men, of which you have urine that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
About hemorrhoids and protruding flesh due to causes in women.
Severe hemorrhoids are tightly attached due to natural causes, making it difficult to treat and requiring careful management; in some cases, they become enlarged in women to such an extent that they prolapse similarly to men's and cause issues during intercourse.
Then you should grasp the excess of hemorrhoid with your hand or with forceps and incise it.
And do not incise excessively, especially near the root, so that it does not cause bleeding.
And then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
This flesh that emerges is the flesh born in the cavity of the major part within which it fills, and it easily spreads to the parts outside according to the appearance of a tail (and thus I first called this "tail illness"); therefore, we must cut it as we would with an intestine, and treat what lies inside until it be healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Treatment of Abscesses.
Abscess is what occurs when the female organ is not perforated or the passage is small. And it can be either natural or accidental.
It is accidental due to a previous illness, and that is caused either by flesh that is too tight or by a thin or thick obstruction.
It occurs either in the front part of the major organ, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and it prohibits intercourse, conception, and childbirth, and also easily prevents menstruation.
And the diagnosis of that condition is made by examination with a speculum, if the obstruction is apparent, proceed immediately; but if it is not apparent, then inquire about it through your questions or with an instrument.
But if the obstruction is due to a thin membrane and it is located between the two lips, then you should examine and rupture that.
And you should place pillows on both lips, and then gently place your fingers between them to examine.
And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs spread apart, and then gently spread the two lips to rupture that thin membrane and open the obstruction.
Take then the bandage and immerse it in oil and place that over the area, and change it daily so that the incised area does not become consolidated.
If the swelling is large and thick, now you should incise it with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is due to food, now suspend it for an hour, and then incise it.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from a bite, such as hystiatia, dragon's blood, and onions, mixed with egg white.
Then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not consolidate too quickly.
And keep that for several days and administer dry heat to it.
And then treat it with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the larger birth of other tissues, and now you should incise according to this method. But if it is due to a chronic abscess, then with the chronic abscess that is in the larger area, do not make any opposition with iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and similar conditions that occur in the anus of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the openings of small veins from which blood flows continuously; and as for old hemorrhoids, they form tumors.
Here I have said in the division of the species of those and the signs of those, and to say also those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and piles which are only in the region of the greater and do not appear to the touch, at this time it is not possible to perform cure with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the anus, on which one can feel by touch, these are those that can be treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a sitting position to wash and then extend the hemorrhoid with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and incise those with razors.
And then powder should be applied to those areas that stop the flow of blood from one of the powdered substances used for incisions without chewing, such as acacia and similar ones.
And then bind the area with a dressing for one hour, and afterward place it in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then have the area treated with a decoction of sumac and rind of lemons and gallnuts and similar substances.
And then take flour of barley and apply it with honey and sour wine to make a plaster on the back of it.
And if the blood is congealed, that is good; and if not, apply it to two sides, and at the nipples without incision.
And then take wool and apply it to the area with juice of cilantro or juice of anise or juice of wild parsnip in sour wine, and attach it to the location; and afterward treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
And cure him so that he may be healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the Incision of the Bladder in Accidental Cases Affecting the Belly.
Various kinds of abscesses occur in this area, such as gangrenous, lithic, ulcerative, hemorrhagic, phlegmonous, herpetic, fistulous, hemorrhoids, rectal abscesses, and other abscesses. And I have already discussed these illnesses and their kinds, the signs of them, and their treatments in detail.
And what I say in this treatise about abscesses that occur in the belly when they are among those that can be cured, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if there is redness and sensitivity in that area, do not perform an incision then, but treat it to aid maturation until the acuity of the symptoms subsides.
And now you should have the woman lie on a bench with two legs; let her recline on her back and place her feet at the part below the abdomen, and spread out her arms below her elbows, and bind them with bandages as is appropriate.
Follow the midwife with the right hand and administer the instrument with which to open the largest opening, the form of which will be made clear in the cases that will follow.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the axis of the largest part of the woman's body, and ensure that what enters from the instrument into the largest opening does not exceed the size of the largest part and lead to injury. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the largest part, then at that time you should apply poultices to the tissue around the largest opening so that it becomes impossible to introduce any instrument into the largest opening.
And you should place the spiral that runs along the handle of the instrument above your hand, and have the minister hold the instrument while rotating the spiral so that it opens the largest opening.
And when the wound appears and is touched by the hand and feels hot and moist, then at that time you should dry it with a piece of linen.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place on the wound a piece of cloth submerged in olive oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and apply a bandage around the largest opening.
And place clean wool over the largest opening and on top of it, place linen soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated for about two days with the remedy that you consider appropriate until it is healed.
And in some cases, the largest opening and the wound should be washed with this so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which rue or long-leaved artemisia has been boiled, and afterward return to the remedy.
And if the wound is inside the large cavity, then you must be prohibited from treating it with iron, but take care of that limb as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To instruct midwives on how to treat male embryos in cases where there is an unnatural swelling as shown in the figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs. And it is when you see the woman push down and desire to smell the air, and she is encouraged by what is above her during labor; then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and the delivery is over the head of the child, and the second part is either suspended or hanging from the navel.
When you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the embryo descends gently, for when it delivers over its head, the second part will be delivered, and it should be cleaned of those superfluities with proper cleansing.
But if it is another kind of delivery, it is unnatural and not commendable, for when the embryo is delivered on its back and the body of the child is delivered in front of its head and behind its feet, with one hand or foot exposed first, or the head and a hand or foot turned to the side, or the belly facing forward, and easily turns around its neck, resembling the figures of those that are not commendable.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters and to guard against error and deception.
Here is the translation:
When the fetus is set upon the woman's head naturally, and it is strongly positioned on the woman and the birth is difficult in that place, and sometimes the strength of the womb has been weakened, then at this time one should cause her to expel it or allow her to have it, and evaporate the essence of fenugreek juice with warm oil.
And then insert the midwife's hand between those parts called the buttocks, and separate with the second finger, or dry it with her fingernail so that she can feel what is inside in terms of humidity. And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then at this time the woman should be anointed with powder of cyperus and powder of fenugreek with eggs.
And then command her, after the anointment, to be made to sneeze with appropriate conditions; and do this at her mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will be expelled shortly.
And if both sides of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then it is necessary to reduce them to ease gradually. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and raise her legs up, and then strike the cushion on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the membranes are not returned and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the remnants of the fetus or tie the body to your hand with a cloth and extract it gently, as it will be expelled.
When the fetus is cut on its sides, then you should push them up, and immediately turn the fetus slightly, and then even it out, and then take a piece of it and extend them little by little.
But when it is cut into the contents, then you command him to sneeze, and make that person sneeze under certain conditions, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it in its second natural position, for it will be expelled at that time with a simple incision.
And if it is prevented by everything we have recommended, then take musellage of hartshorn and dissolved gum, and triturate all in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply that mixture to the woman's cervix, at the bottom of her abdomen. And then make that person sit in warm water, until the hypochondria are reached.
And when the lower parts of him are cleansed, then perform the fumigation of myrtle and apply that to him. And when the sub-fumigation has been performed for one hour, then make him sit on a chair, and then make that person sneeze and expel the mouth of him, and take him away, and press the lower part of his abdomen gently, for the fetus will be expelled soon.
Deliver the fetus laterally with one of its parts. Attempt to reduce the hand of the fetus, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and allow that to pass.
And if it cannot pass, then make her lie on her side, and strike the parts of the fetus with vigorous percussion, and then administer liniments which I use and recommend for soothing.
And if the childbirth has begun, then make her sit on a chair, and then study the reduction of the hand, and engage the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command it [the fetus] to exert itself until it is completely delivered.
Deliver the fetus over the back with its parts and the fetal membrane at the side of its larger part. Let the midwife hold the fetus and gradually turn it little by little, and let that part be facilitated.
And when it is and how long it is soaked, then pause on the cooling of what we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
And then command him to squeeze it little by little, and when you have done this, now place that poultice on a cloth and command him to lean over the right side, and then command him to be restrained; and make him sneeze under certain conditions. The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When you begin the incision of the mother according to this method, consider it, and then you make the second cut with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then you make an incision at the abdomen, so that it is not restrained and dies.
And then push the fetus towards the internal parts until you pause at the second necessary point, and tell the woman to restrain herself for several times, and the issue will be expelled quickly if God so wills.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins usually are born in separate births, but sometimes three or four may be born at once, though this is rare and uncommon; however, in some cases it is due to causes outside of nature, and not living.
And with these, whether they are multiple, make a second incision, and separate them by the cord, distinguish each one through the ligament at the navel of each. Sometimes they are expelled as one fetus would be in a natural quick manner, but sometimes they are expelled separately in an uncommendable way as we have mentioned.
And if any of them are difficult for the woman in childbirth and you come to those which we have said about the unnatural figures, then treat them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she should with ease and skill, and with delay when necessary, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared by the birth-giver for health.
A remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes formations occur in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes more than ten, and you should now be convinced that a woman may miscarry at six months, and another at all formations, which cause was made by measurement of the glorious wise ones.
And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is easy to mistake one thing for another, and therefore she should know what needs to be done.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of treatment and it is not successful, and you are forced to use surgery, then it is necessary for you to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not subject to any of those accidents by which danger to her is feared.
Now it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head slightly lowered.
The minister should use a knife with two edges or tie it down firmly on the table so that the body does not move during the extraction.
And then moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and honey, as well as mallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mallows, and then inserts it gently into the mother, and then searches with her hand for the location of the fetus.
And in these cases: then you consider whether the fetus is positioned to descend head first, and if so, place the hooks in its hands, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or at its clavicle, or near the ribs, or under the armpits.
But if the descent is foot first, then place the hooks in the heels, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place the curvature of it where the fingers of the left hand are, and insert the hand gently into the mother and place the hook in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the obstruction.
And then hold and place another hook in position, or a third if necessary, so that there is an equal pull, and not just extension according to its straightness alone.
And it should be moistened at all times, so that the extraction of it is eased just as it is done during the removal of a tooth.
Place in the liquid that is between them so that the extension may be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then place that the midwife anoints some of her said hands with oil and interposes those skillfully and rolls back what is retained.
If the part of the fetus is presented incorrectly, then place the hooks between the places where it is more appropriate; and do this so that all of the fetus may be properly delivered.
But if one hand is presented before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that one by compression of it, then place a cloth wrapped around that one; and immediately extract that one so that all of it may be delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or compression occurs during its presentation, or it is in the tight fitting part of the water, then place between the said protruding spines and cut open the head to extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly do if the fetus has a large head by nature: then it is necessary to incise that with some instrument, or take that as we have said using an alundat; and immediately extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is presented and is compressed behind the clavicle, then it should be cut open so that the moisture which is in the cheeks may be effused.
If it is not complicated and you do not wait too long, then cut into the head as soon as it is convenient for you.
And if the flanks of the abdomen are full of pus or are in a state of hydrops, then it is necessary for you to puncture that part which runs with the moisture that is there.
But if the fault is on the lesser vessels, then the attraction of it is weak and the direction of it towards the mouth of the artery is weak.
But if it is constricted in the abdomen and the thighs, then you must remove that piece of cloth with which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the abdomen and the thighs where the fluid runs.
But if the other members are stiff and turn the head, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the artery is open, then insert your hand into the chest, and search for the head, and pull it along with those mentioned to the mouth of the artery, and then insert about one or two inches, and pull it along with them.
And if the mouth of the artery is constricted by pus that has occurred due to illness, then it must not be compressed upon it; instead, you should administer an effusion of moist and fatty substances. And apply plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fault is on the side vessel, then if possible, it should be punctured; and what we have said about the living condition should be administered.
And if it cannot be done thus, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
And do not leave any cause for the second [operation].
And when you have completed the entire operation, now administer what we have said about the treatment after abscesses, of which there has been mention regarding the major ones.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and next to it she was pregnant again, and beside the dead fetus another conception had taken place. It happened to one who had an abscess in the navel area for a long time; it became swollen inside with a pus-filled focus, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the condition did not improve.
Then I decided to apply some causes of strong attraction to him and extracted one bone from him, and after a few days, another bone was passed; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I examined the condition thoroughly and extracted several bones from her, which were located in various parts of her body. And in this manner over a long period, she expelled a small amount of pus.
This is not to be considered strange, but because in this there is science and assistance for what the surgeon does with his hand in administering treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a spiral used by the mother:
This is the form of a clamp with which the leaves are held equally, at the clamping point there are two spirals at the ends of two arms. However, this spiral should be finer than the string, and it should be made of reed or wood.
And the width of each arm should be two fingers, and the margin on each side should be one finger, and the length of each should be a palm and a half; and in the middle between the two arms there are two adjustments made from the same material as the arms, which are already fixed, their length being about half a palm more or less, and the width of each is two fingers, or slightly more.
And these two attachments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they are held when you turn the two prescribed spirals.
Another similar form, finer and more slender:
It should be made of reed or wood, resembling the form of forceps. However, at the end of each of these two attachments, as you see, the length of those attachments is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open one of them, then at that time you should cut the woman on her bed with her knees raised, exposing what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors, equally according to the quantity that you want of the width of the mouth of the wound until the speculum does what you want.
The method of turning, which the ancients called:
Method of pushing with which the action is pushed forward:
Method of association with which the head is contained:
And it is similar to forceps, at the ends of which there are teeth, as you see. And sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like those of a reed, with which it is incised and contained. Method of association for few:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a speculum having two ends with which the head is engaged:
Form of two broad specula:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is easier for their operation and better for people according to their needs.
You should prepare those instruments which are necessary, for the need of them cannot be avoided.
Of the extraction of the second [tooth].
When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then cause her to sneeze by certain means. Place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if this causes it to come out, that is good.
And if that does not work, take a cloth and pierce it with a hole, placing it over the mouth of the mother along with herbs such as wormwood, rue, chamomile, Arabian saffron, cinnamon, and sage. All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And then cause her to sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled quickly.
But if this treatment delays and it does not come out, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or masticate almonds, and then insert that into the womb and gently pull out the afterbirth with it. If it is attached to the placenta of the mother, then insert her right hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the afterbirth, gently extract it little by little so that the mother does not fall due to violent traction. Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then do not exhaust yourself in repeated attempts of abstraction. Instead, ensure that what has been ejected from the mouth of the mother lies close to the woman's body, and subsequently treat it with abortion and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to be purged after a few days and thus dissolved and expelled.
But when it is purged, it rises to the head and to the stomach, causing illness; then it is necessary that sublimations and appropriate remedies be administered for this.
But some of the Ancients already used sublimation of nitre and dried figs.
Form of the instrument with which a woman is subjected to sublimation due to the retention of menstruation and the second condition:
It should be made of wood or ivory.
And the fine end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end above the fire, and the sublimation should be placed on the embers of the fire.
And keep that instrument inside until the sublimation is consumed, then repeat with another.
Of the treatment of the child's uncircumcised penis.
Many children are born and their penises are not circumcised, which must then be carefully opened and covered. Then it should be the midwife who pierces with her finger that foreskin; and if not, pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to cut the glans.
And then apply a poultice made of lint soaked in wine and oil; and afterwards, treat it with a dressing until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to urinate.
And if there is an obstruction of the penis due to the hardening of a wound or abscess; then it should be that this hardening be incised, and afterwards it should be treated as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur in the lower region close to the body or near the buttocks or in the area between them are usually hard and thick.
And it is one fistula or multiple.
And as this hardness subsides and it discharges watery or slightly purulent white moisture, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeper.
And these penetrating ones are known by what is emitted from them through discharge and swelling; and sometimes the severity of the discharge indicates that they are very deep.
Of those fistulas, some extend into the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the bone.
And in the one where it is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating fistula, you should insert your finger into the anus, and insert a fine probe of hair or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert the fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything of that and there is no process from the tract of any cause of evacuation or worms or gas, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and then proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the shaft of the penis, then the significance of that is that urine will come from there, and it prohibits this so that the place may be consolidated by medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then the sign of that is that the probe goes through there if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and causes pain in the circumference of the affected area; and you will have a persistent discharge from there; and that does not respond to medication, nor is it consolidated without treatment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment for these is the labor and persistence of skilled physicians, upon which depends their success.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this that I say is good.
And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with their back upwards and lift the flanks up, so that the contents are inclined towards the abdomen, and then insert a probe of lead or iron if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the probe passes.
And if the pain is around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus at that time.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe can easily penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that sinus or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, for there is no healing in that one, as we have said.
But some might say that it heals in some men slowly.
And for the treatment by which healing is hoped for involves you igniting a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and inserting that heated instrument into the fistula until it goes around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues surrounding the fistula are tightened, so that they resemble the quill of a bird.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth until all those tightened tissues grow and consolidate, and then treat it with medicines that promote tissue growth and consolidation. If it heals, good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside; you say which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or tissue, and sometimes the fistula is on what appears as the surface of the buttocks. Now dry the area from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying around the probe, and it should reach to the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
And then clean those fistulated tissues that resemble the hollow part of a bird's feather quill and do not tear any part of them for any reason.
But if blood flows when you are operating on those tissues, then the moment it happens during your procedure, immediately use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is the adjustment of those constricted tissues, and the other is the cessation of bleeding by removing excess moisture.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in boiled cloth or soft lint until the area gets better, and afterwards cure the wound with hard flesh-producing remedies that generate and consolidate tissue.
And medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when they are restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula already penetrates inside the rectum and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And so if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is only a thin layer of tissue or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then at that moment there should be no operation but rather proceed with caution based on trust and hope.
The cause is to manage it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it becomes possible for you to introduce certain instruments and proper treatment; and do not proceed with drying if you risk damaging the muscle containing the bowel, and ensure that you act upon this diseased part similarly to the procedure without the patient's voluntary movement; and then cure that wound as we have said because it will be easier to heal; or extend that membrane and clean that pus which you dried inside near the anus, as we have said, either by hand or another sharp instrument, and then purify those ulcerated tissues where such drying can occur due to perforation; and then strive to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the upper pus opening is not consolidated, and remains the fistula open in the part of the anus, it will be lighter for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is around the crack of the anus on the surface of the body at the seam and along the edge of the anus, take a probe with a perforated tip, which resembles a needle used to prepare the cores according to this method:
and insert it into that fine wrapping of five threads or around them; and then introduce the probe with honey into the fistula until you achieve the condition where it becomes possible for you to proceed.
But if it penetrates along the edge of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the honey from that tract as though you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the tip of the honey and tie both ends tightly, and leave this for one day or two, and when you incise the honey in the flesh, bind it well so that those tissues are separated where they lie between the two ends of the honey and adhere.
Concerning the treatment of an internal injury, until it is consolidated and healed.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, now make them penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared it, but do not move it from its place, because it is not for you to do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
The shape of the sharp-spined spatum with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be acute on one side and not acute on the other, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus like coal lumps, or they are soft and resemble grape clusters. And they can be small and large, and the blood flows from them constantly and is one type, and multiple, and some are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are due to little moisture, from which yellowish water or a little blood flows continuously, and their color is like that of the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit in such a way that the anus relaxes and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you cover yourself and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your fingernail, and then cut them along their roots.
If the hooks do not hold in them because of their moisture and softness, then take some rough cloth or a cork or a flaxen pad, and extract them with these mentioned tools, and afterwards incise around them and sprinkle on them certain powders near the incision, so that they serve as cauterization; or cauterize them as is described in the chapter about cauterizing. And afterwards treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the pus does not flow out, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and wash it with the water in which it flows out easily when the abscess is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easy to treat, and you should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and afterwards treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for those who require suturing, proceed as follows: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and make it penetrate with the needle on the other side of the incision, and wrap both ends of the thread underneath the part below the needle, and tie them horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the silk and extract the needle.
And do this for all of them, and leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
And then place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate; and place that on the wound and instruct the patient to rest. And then place that inside the cavity; and when it is closed, treat those with applications or other treatment until it is healed.
And when they are old and do not respond to that medicine, you should then scrape those areas with the edge of a spatula or your fingernail until they are made wet and remove the pus from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat those areas until they are healed.
Now you should remove those areas by scraping the pus more vigorously until fresh blood appears and they are excoriated; and then treat those areas until they are healed.
Know that alamermar, which is crucial, and it appears as small round spots similar in color to the body but resembling the head of a nail, and they occur throughout the body but mainly below the waist and around them, and from these pains you should treat the patient.
And then it is necessary to incise what is in the vicinity of the spot, and hold it with forceps or a clamp, and remove it from its root; and then treat that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the surrounding area as described in its chapter.
Of warts, it is a small raised rough fistulated round growth on the surface of the body, and they appear in most children.
The treatment for it is to cut and spread that part open, or to remove it with a knife or scissors. And if you wish, cauterize that area, as we have said, with fire or with caustic medicine.
Of ant bite marks, they are small raised or thick fistulated growths on the surface of the body often appearing around the genitals, and when touched, they feel like an ant bite, and they spread around the body.
The treatment for it is to take a strong needle or a sharp pin and place it on the ant bite within the circle of the needle; then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut out what is around the ant bite, and place it in the flesh around the area, so that you eradicate the ant bite from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or steel in this manner:
Let the tip of the needle be sharp and subtle, blunt at the back (which means not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger it is comfortable and can rotate easily.
And if you wish to cauterize the ant bite, do so as described earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the shape of the instruments which are administered to castrate.
Sometimes castrations are performed with instruments made of silver or lead or melted and hammered metal; and sometimes they are made of those small or large instruments according to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of young children should be small; and for those whose testicles are soft or painful, their castrating instruments should be small.
The form of the large and few castration instrument:
The head of the cannula above, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just as you see.
And the end below, which is inserted into the body, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion's tail, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side one groove, and the width of the groove should be according to the thickness of the rods, slightly thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the length of the bag should be one palm.
And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those threads strong vinegar from raw vinegar, which should be of these vinegars or around them; and tightly attach the bag to it; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the head of the instrument between two distinct tight bindings, and then castrate each thread with it: But the quality of castrating with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity the patient can tolerate; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Let the patient lie on their back, and raise her buttocks with something underneath like a cushion or a cloth; then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then gently insert it into the rectum until it is comfortable; then the assistant takes the syringe and squeezes it vigorously inside so that everything in the womb is evacuated through the tube; then remove the syringe and the patient lowers her buttocks to the side.
And if the medicine causes her to sweat, let her do so as much as possible; and if she sleeps with it throughout the night, it is better for her recovery.
But if you treat her for abdominal disorders and sweating with the cautery, then continue using the cautery until she is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the rectum, then use a very fine and soft womb purge, similar to those used for children.
On the treatment of plagues.
I have already mentioned in the section on the treatment of plagues what is suitable for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with plague using medicines according to the regimen.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse depending on what causes the plagues and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
And the causes for various types of plagues are as follows: like a stone thrown, or a cut by a sword or knife, or a blow with a lance, or a stick, or an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Here are the plagues that are in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the groin, and similar ones to those affecting the limbs.
And I also recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the recall of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to an impact of a stone or similar object and has merely bruised the bone but is significant enough for you to fear that an abscess might form, at this time, you should immediately apply leeches or perform phlebotomy on the cephalic veins without delay; do not postpone this if there is no prohibition against phlebotomy based on some other cause, especially if little blood flows from the wound of the plague.
And the phlebotomy should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and ensure that the patient is guarded against overeating and heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits phlebotomy in detail, then reduce the patient's food intake and do not allow meat or strong foods.
And pause treatment on the plague if an abscess forms, and then apply it only in rose oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
But if you are sure of an abscess forming, then pause treatment on the plague if it is recent and the patient's blood and air have not changed; in that case, apply the powder I recommend sparingly.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause for some time until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to a division of tissue and similar cases, and if it cannot be closed with stitches using needles, then close those with sutures as I will explain regarding the suture of them.
And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and sinew, and it is not a retention but only a small suspender, then incise that and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of stitching, and order the patient to abstain from foods that are harmful: meat, fish, and similar things, until he is well.
And if you find that the stitch has become putrid and does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and immediately treat it.
And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then press on the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you and what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor. Therefore, you can powder those with this powder, for it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of almonds one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix all this well and sift it, then fill the wound with it, and compress it tightly so that it adheres properly to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
From the band above, take the poultices and leave that one, and do not loosen it while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not reach it to heal until it becomes healed.
And sometimes use this single cautery when it is not at hand the juice and saliva of a dragon.
And perform this method of operation on large wounds when it is necessary to place them flat and make them narrow, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then do not apply this powder immediately, but instead treat these with what we have said, placing upon them some cold applications or placing upon them flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they begin to rot; and then cure these with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if you encounter a wound with a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
Of wounds to the neck.
But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between a simple wound of the head, it is the same.
But if the nerve of the neck is severed or an artery is cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treatment with anything that strongly constricts, such as zinc ore and similar substances that injure the nerves and contract them. Do not pause on any cause of pain, for the substance of the nerves is connected and continues to the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if he is to be treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes immersed in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then dried when washed with warm water, and the other stones are applied according to this method, and moisture is found.
But if the wound is severe, then administer stitches, or close its edges, and subsequently treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or affects the lowest part of the flesh, then pierce it at the deepest location.
But if an artery is already cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then tie off or cauterize it, or ligate it if necessity requires such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then you should close the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; instead, equalize and reduce it to its natural position, and subsequently strengthen it with proper support, and leave it for several days; afterward, treat it with powders that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what you cannot reach, leave it until the wound pusifies, and once it separates, reduce its swelling.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended to you. And if a fistula has formed in the wound, now treat it with the liquid whose description will come shortly in its proper chapter.
If it is a thrust wound from a spear or knife, and you feel the depth of it, now consider whether there is air bubbling when the injured person urinates; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is fresh with its own blood, now apply powder during the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain trapped in the depths of the wound and return to the heart to infect the patient, but instead use a drawing agent applied twice a day.
And if the drawing agent is not available to you, now apply a piece of cloth over the wound opening so that it absorbs any moisture; and have the patient lie on the wound so that the liquid within can drain out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted and no spasms, heart palpitations, or abdominal cramping occur, and other good signs are present, then you will know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with dressings and proper care until it is healed.
But if healing of the wound is delayed and much time has passed, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its proper chapter.
And if the wound is from a spear or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as you would with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already penetrated to the bone and some of what was severed is still inside, then you should turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal would be easier.
And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is similar to what we have said.
For wounds of the abdomen.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
A small disruption is difficult to manage by other methods, and it should be noted that reducing them is more difficult if you do not return them to their proper place immediately, because they swell and become enlarged, making the instrument for doing so difficult.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike in the two previously mentioned types where it is difficult.
And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds on the body.
Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the abdomen.
Here is the translation:
Thus I say that when the swelling is small and some cause has constricted the bowel by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when inflammation has come upon the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when it is thus, then what you should do is to warm that area in this way: take a sponge or cloth soaked only in lukewarm water, or steeped in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply it to the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is done with something that has styptic properties, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which sage and mallows have been steeped, for by this it is alleviated somewhat from pain.
But if the pain persists near this treatment, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate and does not require cutting, and there is no need to dry it out due to necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, this is its form:
One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is fine, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be somewhat blunt.
And thus when the ulcer is enlarged and it has come out of the abdomen, now it must be that its reduction is according to the form of nature, in its proper place, if possible over this, for better is.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, now you must make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs further apart than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place the patient's head and feet further apart than the parts below.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, now direct your attention and consideration entirely so that the part in which the ulcer is shall be further apart than the other.
And so you must administer this for large ulcers and for medium-sized ulcers as well.
And for small ulcers, prepare what is necessary, and then have the most skilled person among you perform the treatment, who should hold the wound entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and then proceed to suture it appropriately.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a piece of material that can serve as a needle according to the quantity and amplitude of the ulcer; then hold from the extremity of the disruption with your ring finger, and pull the needle taut so that you do not place stitches at both ends of the edge but rather between the edges of the inner parts, until you make it penetrate through one part; and when you have joined both ends of the edge and both ends of the inner parts together, this makes four stitches.
About an inch above the wound on both sides, make two incisions parallel to each other. Then bring together the two edges of the wound and close it properly; then place your finger over this area and insert another needle there, and similarly fasten this with wax as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium fineness between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles pierce the flesh quickly; but thick ones are difficult to insert into the tissue, and therefore it is best that they be of medium fineness and thickness.
And it is not advisable to place the needle at both extremes of the wound in a straight line, as this may cause the flesh to be pierced too quickly and the wound to separate before it has properly healed.
And do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not hindered from healing properly.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not cause irritation to the patient while sleeping; and place over the sutures small padded cushions from all sides, which should cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has healed properly.
And this type of suture with needles is most convenient for small wounds, as you only need one or two needles or around that number.
But the second type of suture is common: it involves suturing all four corners, two from the wound and two from the circumference, at once, with a needle that has been properly waxed in terms of fineness and thickness.
When you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, reduce the needle from that part where you began, so that the thread may draw the pus to the most sovereign part of the wound, so that the suture may be a cloth stitch on which the cloths are strongly pulled.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to people.
And in such a suture, I sewed the wound of a man who was injured in his abdomen by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was larger than one palm, and it had split from the intestines around two palms from the mid-intestine, and the disruption was at the midpoint of the body part; then I reduced that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within the space of fifteen days or so, and he was treated and became well; and shortly thereafter he spoke with words, and returned to his normal state.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine, as I was in a place where no medicines were available, but placed linen soaked twice daily on the wound and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
But I will describe two kinds of suture according to the narration of the Word.
And it is that you begin the suture from the outer part and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place cuts according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leaves the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate at the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part at the other extremity of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, now make another penetration in that same extremity of the wound from the outside to the inside; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the extremity of the wound, which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side and take it to the other side at the extremity that is of the suture, and extract the needle from the bone which penetrates, and then reduce that one into that bone and fix the extremity of the suture that is on the other side at this extremity of the wound; and extract that one from the bone which is on this side.
And do this one time and then another, and do this one time after another until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the purpose of this method of suturing is that you sew the membrane as if sewing skins together; thus, you sew the suture once from the side of the bone extremity, and leave it for another time until it is complete.
Here is the translation:
Keep the needle at your disposal near the exit point, and insert it into the inner part through this opening, and leave both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and pass it from outside to inside at both ends of the suture.
Then turn each stitch and pass them from the inner part to the outer part at both ends of another opening on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common simple suture, and it is the type of suture that I have described previously.
This is the speech of Walia.
And if someone asks you, the stitching of the abdomen is done with two needles, which means that you insert a thread into each needle and begin by inserting one needle into the opposite side according to the method used for sewing equal parts.
And know that when a disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
The reason for this is that when you manage a recent wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and you reduce the bleeding and clean it properly, then apply powder to it.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that you have at hand which help to form hard scabs and bind the threads; then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
If the medicines are not present at hand, then pause for a short while, because it begins to gather pus and forms thick scabs, and change that twice daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need another medication in various conditions when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members, then cover it with linen soaked in high-quality oil or in rose oil, and place that around the area between the joints and let it remain there.
And if pain or putrefaction occurs in the intestines, as this often happens, then administer astringent black terebinth twice, and especially if the corruption has reached the intestine and an abscess has formed penetrating into the cavity of it.
And know that what is of the thick intestine heals more slowly than what is in the thin intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called “gegunu” does not easily recover from a wound that affects it completely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, its large size, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue, and you obtain that fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way as you reduce the intestines.
But if it has passed to the space and is already green or black, then when you apply that with wax over the area that is discolored, so that blood flows out, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
And then cut into this other bandage, and pause with both ends of the thread hanging from below the part of the wound, so that above it may be relieved the attraction of it; you must secure the placement of the cloth and emission of the pus from the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the bowel.
When a disruption occurs in the bowel and is small, it is possible that it may be restored in some people; for this reason, I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by the thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, with discharge from the injury and gas.
Then I proceeded with the treatment of it, although I was not confident in its healing, but I tried to make that part which had become inflamed healthy and to consolidate the area.
And when I saw the area already consolidated, I warned about the harm that might come from this bad event in his abdomen; and no one became harmed by this accident, but they remained cautious in their food consumption and drinking, and then bathed and exercised as directed.
And some experienced individuals say that when a small wound occurs in the bowel, it should be treated in this manner: take large-headed ants; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants with its head open on both sides of the wound; when it grips onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop placing ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce that and bring the flap along with it; and let those small pieces remain attached in the cloth so that the cloth is sound; and do nothing to harm the patient.
And it is possible that the cloth be sewn with fine thread made from the same animal as the cloth attached to it, since it is more needle-compatible; and take one end of this thread of cloth, let it be bare, then attach that end to the thread by sewing around it, and now insert that thread through the disruption.
And this method of stitching with fine threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin cloths, now only fine stitching can be done, and not complete healing of it.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and forms an ulcer that is not consolidated and continues to discharge over time without being excised, whether in any limb, is universally called a fistula, and we refer to this as an abscess.
And truly, a fistula is a felted nodulation, hard and white, at which there is no pain but rather a sensation like the itching of bird’s pinions; and for this reason it is called a bothersome itch, that is, an irritation.
And it is in some people a moist fistula, which discharges fluid; and in some cases the moisture can be excised within a few hours. In some cases, this humidity is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, the signs of them, and their cure with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which is done through surgical operation.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among them are those that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the compound joints such as that of the hand and foot; and there are those that affect the vicinity of major limbs and similar areas.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this method, they are diseases difficult to heal, and do not easily receive a cure, and dealing with them requires effort and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth which does not reach to those places that were mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes along straight, explore it with this.
And if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for the lightness of its body allows it to glide easily along the curvature.
And if the fistula has openings that are horrible to see, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate that one will go to the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire meticulously to determine if there is bone or nerve, and whether the depth of the fistula is distant or near. Also consider whether it is a fistula for which all its openings are evident at once within your full capacity, within your thorough investigation, with which you investigate the malady, and the cause of the pain under your compression on the spot, and similar signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And when you have established all those causes with true judgment, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and this is that you consider now whether it is a fistula that is apparent and close, or in a location near a joint, or nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places I have told you about.
Now you should treat the fistula as described in its narration, and remove what is within that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown out from the opening of the flesh or tissue, and care for it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight course, it becomes necessary to incise it as far inwards as you can, and then remove all the corrupted flesh; afterwards apply plasters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
And do this several times so that the sharp medicine may dissolve all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then treat it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal from this treatment, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to determine this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any involvement with veins or nerves or a major limb as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness on it, then you should cut away that part until all the corruption is removed; and afterwards treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and pus continues to flow as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then uncover it again and carefully examine and cleanse it with your strongest remedy, and afterwards treat it.
And if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, and then in that case you should only dress the wound.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it is possible for you to remove that one; then you remove it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if many bones are affected, then carefully perform the extraction of all those, and do not leave any of them for any reason due to your strength.
But if any cause of the humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor hesitation, then incise those ligaments or muscles here, and liberate the bones.
But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones at this moment, then apply something that can alleviate the condition on the affected area, and leave it as it is within the vicinity of those bones, and protect the area so that it does not become consolidated, and ensure that the section you have incised during your operation remains open.
Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a poultice submerged in hot oil with thyme, or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, because when these will soothe those ligaments and the bones are separated from their attachments, and this attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then scrape that off with resistance only from behind until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the area.
But if the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and thoroughly incise within the location where the corruption has spread, and then treat it so that it becomes consolidated.
Here is what is recommended to you concerning what may happen to a man in his condition so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
A young man by age around xxx years old, to whom pain occurs in his abdomen, and from the internal parts there is an evil condition regarding the matter inside the body that has reached the abdomen, and it is a large abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
And then time was wasted on that due to the error of the physicians until the abscess became pus-filled, and they intervened when matter had become disturbed, and his cure was delayed until an abscess had formed瘘管化脓后才进行治疗，而且他在多个排出脓液和身体湿气的开口处进行了手术。
And then the patient was treated by many physicians for two years, and none of them had skill in the art until I was called.
And I saw the abscess and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large amounts; and already the body of that man was completely weakened, and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone.
And then I immediately examined all the openings and found that they reached around all parts of the abscess.
And then I decided to incise one of those openings so that I could expose a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted; it was already turned to dust and decayed. And a part of the abscess had penetrated into the marrow and was also corrupted.
And then I used what had been shown to me and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cut out not from the bone but that corruption which I had diagnosed and prepared to remove.
And then I paused the restoration of the wound with healing medicine for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I repeated and exposed further upon the bone secondly over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I treated what appeared to be that corruption to me, and then I attempted to perform the cure and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I exposed another area and did not stop incising the bone little by little particularly to perform the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm's width of it, and that extract with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it healed quickly and was cured.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its fever and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, because it was affected at all hours by excessive evacuation and fainting spells.
And thus he was fully healed, and nothing remained of bone but flesh; and his condition in his body improved, and his strength returned; and he recovered his abilities and did not experience contrary effects while walking or from any cause.
But if there is an elevated bone in place of the injured body part, then you should proceed as follows: take a thread and tie it at the end of that elevated bone, and instruct someone to extend that; pause with a thicker thread after the first one; then lay the thread on the skin near the bone, and stretch its extremity so that you pull the skin away from the sides, and thus expose the skin over the place where you want to cut so that the scissors do not injure the skin.
Place a board or table under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the corrupted flesh.
You should saw over the slightly corrupted area little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone that does not appear upon its surface, you may need to saw from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and it is connected to another part, with the corruption in the middle or part of it, then you should expose the flesh from all sides; place a board underneath, and saw off the first part where the corruption is, while ensuring that the sawing continues from the other side.
And make the sawing according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption extends between two joints, then it is not in the proper place but elsewhere.
And if the corruption is in the center of the hand or foot, it is more difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then incise that area, and treat it according to each possible disposition, making sure not to cut any vital vessels or nerves.
And you must know which instruments and saws to use for these bones, as they vary according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare appropriate tools for each type of operation.
And know that the operation depends on the type of instrument which you need; when you are a great student and long experience in the methods of this art, and witness to the methods of diseases, then you will apply what is appropriate for the instruments to all diseases.
And I shall form for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will keep as simples, among which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a rod: Let the head of this rod be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and let its points be shaped like the points of an asterisk.
And it is not sufficient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with them when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with the back as strong as possible and the cutting edge of steel, and the handle made of wood like a dagger properly made. Form of it:
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved tip:
Form of a small razor resembling a tentorium:
Form of another smaller scalpel:
Form of another scalpel; this resembles a rod, and the tip of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in suitable words in relation to the bones:
Shape of the probe which is suitable for piercing through the bones:
And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and apparently it suits all the causes we have mentioned regarding knives, forceps, and saws.
Regarding the cutting of tips and the sawing of bones.
The tips may need to be removed either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause; or when you have treated that corruption with the prescribed medicines and the treatment does not take effect, or sometimes the corruption spreads beyond a member without any apparent reason. At such times it is necessary for you to cut off that part where the corruption lies so that the patient may escape from death or severe illness, which would be a greater evil than the loss of that limb.
And the sign that this affects someone is that the limb turns black as if burnt by fire, or the corruption approaches close to the blackness such that the putrefaction spreads within that member and throughout the body. Therefore, it is necessary for you to perform an amputation of that part.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by the bite or sting of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and similar animals.
And if the corruption or the bite is at the tip of a finger, then you should amputate the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if the corruption reaches the hand, then you should amputate at the joint of the wrist and not allow the corruption to spread further into the elbow joint.
And if you encounter that, then cut the arm at the joint in the collarbone.
And if the corruption spreads around the collarbone area, then death is imminent for the patient; and each cause requires its own treatment in cure, which is a matter of the proper amount of efficacy.
Similarly, when corruption reaches the toe, then you must cut it off at one of the joints.
And if it affects the entire foot, then you must amputate the whole foot. But if it penetrates to the toe, then you must cut off the foot at the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and let the patient die.
And the method of cutting off a limb or binding it is that you tie a ligature above the part where you wish to cut, and apply another ligature over the area; extend one ligature below the part, and have another extended above by an assistant; separate the skin that lies between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; then it can be cut or bound.
And it is necessary to cover the area with a cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected site, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate treatment for injuries and abscesses.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you must immediately cauterize the area, or apply some powders to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it so that it may be healed.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his house, this kind of accident about which I advise you, which is one that often occurs due to exposure to intense heat similar to fire combustion.
And that corruption first occurs inside his hand and then tends to spread throughout the entire body.
And then that person prepares himself for something worse than the treatment going to the limb due to the intensity of the pain and burning, and often amputates that hand at the joint, and the wound is healed.
Such corruption in the finger of the hand often persists for a long time.
And then they came to me, and I prescribed them to eliminate that excess through the medicine I applied, along with the cleansing of their body; but the excess was not eliminated and began to spread to another finger starting from the hand.
And they pleaded with me to amputate the hand, but I refused to do so, hoping for the elimination of that excess, and fearing that the amputation of the hand might lead to death, as the strength of the disease was very severe.
And after he left me, he returned to his home and later came back to me saying that he had prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and was healed.
And I have included this narrative only to assist in understanding the nature of this disease and to serve as an example for how it should be treated.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess extends inward forming a collection of pus, and it is then ruptured and perforated, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached corruption behind, nor does it affect the bone or nerves or tendons, it is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
However, if the space extends inward such that corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment for it is to incise that skin completely as it has formed, especially when it is thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached behind, and there is pus passing through the skin, then you should treat it with an enema.
And when you consider the sinus, if it is large and the arm with which you work has a fetid odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil, vinegar, and rose water in equal parts, and mix them in a vessel until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
And then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the sinus, and plug the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
From there extract that which is despised; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is evacuated.
And on some occasions it is administered as an enema with water of ashes, when this medicine is not at your disposal; and take the ash of wheat, put it over the water; then filter that and administer it as an enema until you are convinced that the sinus is now closed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then administer it with water and honey mixed in small quantities three times, and administer it with vinegar and honey mixed, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this on some occasions and are convinced that the sinus is now cleared, then administer an enema with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take of the herb dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent vinegar; or administer an enema with various medicines and other herbs that have the properties which I have already written about in the chapter on herbs.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow such that the enema tube cannot be received, then gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and pause in this gentle treatment wrapped in Egyptian herb or basilicon until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is too wide, then you should approximate the edges of it with sutures and leave it in a condition where the enema can be introduced without additional intervention.
And if the orifices of the one through which the arm flows are raised above the parts below, then dry up that in the pus base location which is where the arm flows underneath, for when the arm is compressed at the depth of the bend the flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry up the sinus beneath the pus base as you wish, then proceed by preparing the limb according to the preparation which allows the arm to flow gently as it is appropriate for you and so that nothing impedes the movement of the arm.
But that which is over the sinus orifice, which you should change at all times so that it dries what is inside the arm. And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is an abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is deposited on the orifice of the sinus has adhered or is about to adhere, then you loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the application.
But if in the sinus there is a space for a subtle pus to form, then do not despair of its adherence, because its healing will soon follow, because some people take longer to generate flesh in their poultices, and among them are those who experience the opposite.
And if for many days a thick and undigested substance remains in the sinus, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this causes it to be prolonged, then adjust the drying effect of the medicines. If the medicines are moist in their composition and in their power, dry them thoroughly like a definitive application when there is an excess of honey added to them.
And the best way to treat it is to take a definitive application and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it over what you previously used with its substance still present, and confirm how that works for you and use it accordingly.
And it seems in that action, when there is no thick substance, take a definitive application and honey which has been cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and frankincense, mix them all together, powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then apply this mixture to a cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; also line with that honey you have cooked until it has thickened, and powder over a cloth and apply it.
And in some cases, it is administered with the aristolochia longa and roots of lily (and that is the celestial lily) and flour of wheat and centaury, and use those simples or mix them, crush them and sieve them and powder over the honey which is recommended; and use this.
And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its root, and it has already infected the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment as mentioned above.
On the treatment of paronychia and cracked nails and the cutting of an added finger joint and sectioning.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the nail of the toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it prolongs and its treatment is delayed, it becomes an abscess of a cauterized abscess or it corrupts, and exudes pus internally which corrodes the root of the nail, and quickly corrupts the entire nail, and often spreads to the bone inside causing a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes darkened.
And when you have done what we have said in the division and do not see improvement in your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with a knife all the excess that is swollen from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound, as immediate cauterization is helpful in such cases.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail begin to push back into the flesh from the sides, causing pain and discomfort, then you should apply a fine paste below the angle of the nail that causes pain on the flesh, and push it up and incise that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is all removed; and then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
If corruption has already begun in the bone, then you must incise the bone and extract it, for it is never healed when the corrupted bone remains.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of its joints as is prescribed in its treatment, and subsequently care for it until it is healed.
But if there is a bruise or inflammation under the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and subsequently dry the nail with a sharp spatum in a transverse cut from top to bottom, but be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh below the nail, for you would cause the patient great pain, and it would lead to the formation of excess tissue in the area; and thereafter treat that place with something that relieves pain.
But the finger that is swollen, which occurs in many people, is mostly fleshy, and there is little bone in it, or it is little in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some of the joints of the fingers. But that which is born in some of the joints of the finger is not so harmful, and that which is born at the joints is very harmful.
And of those that are fleshy swellings, the incision is slight, and you should cut it behind its base with a broad spatum.
But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
In that which is described about nuts, you should incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this, and then treat that within so that it may be healed.
In the case of consolidation that occurs between certain guarded movements or due to the birth of a person who is born with it, or due to the healing of an illness or by burning from fire, then you should treat that consolidation until the said condition returns to its natural form.
And then place between the bandages soaked in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain areas on the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
Regarding incisions for veins, these are varicose.
Veins that are varicose, and veins wrapped thickly full of melancholic humors, which flow through the limbs of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, particularly in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry loads.
Then you should administer purgation of the body with black bile several times for strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of them due to iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and completely extracted.
The section on this is as follows: Begin by filling a bag with warm water and place it so that the thick blood is dissolved, which is sediment in the bag. Then press the patient's body at the part most filled with pus below the bone using a cloth bandage, and then make an incision in one place or two, or three near the area, and then lift the black blood on the lower side of the bag upward into it, and above downward until the amount of blood is released that you want and as much as suffices, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
And then bind it with bandages and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
But the elevation of it is as follows: If you see that the patient's body has hair, then shave the area where the bag will be placed. Then place the patient in a bath or fill a bag with warm water so that the area reddens and the veins become prominent; or have the patient exercise vigorously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes heated.
And then dry the area along the vein by making an incision either above near the bone or below near the foot.
And then probe the area with hooks and strip the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it should appear to you as it slopes toward darkness.
And thus when you examine it, from the area take what appears to be white and cord-like.
And so you place the patient lying down with their head raised and propped up by pillows.
And then cut another section near that one for three reasons, and then displace the wound above the vein that appears.
And then raise that and incise it at the rear section behind the heel, and then extract that and raise it so that it exits through the second section, and then extract that from the section above it.
And do this until you extract that from the section that is highest or farthest from all the sections, until everything has exited; then at that point incise it.
And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or insert it below the skin and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled. And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise that piece and it will cause harm to the patient due to this injury.
And when you have completely removed that piece, then place on the wound wool submerged in wine and rose oil and unrose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is contracted with tortuosities in its covering at those parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along each part of the tortuosity and the places where it is covered, and then suspend it with needles until you raise it completely.
And be careful in your sectioning that you do not cut the vein and that you do not compress it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; and use your discretion in this.
Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
It should not be as sharp as a knife nor have a pointed end so that it does not compress the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility, like a lion's tail, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein due to its slenderness; however, it should not be excessively thick as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein in the leg.
This vein is generated in the fields in hot lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabia and in the hot and dry lands of India where there is little vegetation and no grass or crops.
And similarly, it is generated in other parts of the body apart from the fields.
And its formation is through putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body, serpents and other creatures generating between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the occurrence of this event is that inflammation appears strongly in the field; and near the area, blisters form; and soon the vein begins to appear from the location of those blisters, resembling a plant sprout.
And when the extremity of it becomes apparent, you should then wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma within two drachmas, and fix that area and leave the lead suspended from the field.
And so many times when you need something from outside for some reason, wrap it in lead and note that. And if it is elongated, then cut a piece of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that end until it has come out, for if you cut that one it is contracted and goes into the flesh and causes abscesses and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration.
It is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear end and there remains nothing of it in the body.
And this vein extends in some people to a length of five palms and I have been told that it has reached up to twenty palms.
And if it is cut during the time of its medication, then insert the reed into the tract and perforate that one along the body until everything inside the matter is evacuated, and treat putrefaction in the area with some medicines for a few days; afterwards, cure it according to the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and comes out through multiple openings, with each branch coming from one opening.
And thus treat it as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is called in some lands bovine disease because at times it occurs among cattle, and it is a worm that is born between the membrane and the flesh, which moves throughout the body up and down, and is noticeable to the sensation beyond the skin from member to member until it disrupts the membrane and comes out.
Regarding the generation of worms, it is through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms, serpents, and intestinal worms in the belly.
It is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, at that moment it forcefully penetrates and destroys the heart, causing many illnesses.
And so when you want to cure that and extract it, at that time it is done only by observing its movement and appearance in the patient's body. Then you should press on what is above it and what is below it with bandages and strong binding, and then dry it out to extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then you should apply cauterization with fire to the area where it is located. The main cause of concern is the corruption of it, which can corrupt the location as we have said.
And if you see it reaching the head near the heart, then press strongly above the eyebrow and dry it out to extract it; and the patient should use purification of their body with medicines that evacuate foul and harmful humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Regarding the treatment of nasal ailments.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs and then changes from one limb to another.
And I have already seen that as I will now describe to you. I was called to attend to a sick woman in a village, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation in the vein called funis on the arm. After it had been punctured for about an hour, I saw that inflammation moving, like a worm climbing up this way, but more quickly than one would expect, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
Then let the pain move from that place and settle in the muscle, and stay here for about one hour.
And then move to the other side until it reaches the other arm.
And then I returned to the middle, where it was rotating throughout the body as I saw fit; and I was very amazed by the permutation of it and the speed at which it moved from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my eyes according to that method, but now I have witnessed the pain being transferred from one member to another. But I did not see this in my eyes as I did in the woman.
And I did not think this could be so unless it was because the woman was of such delicate constitution, with her two bodies and exposed veins, and in this way the airiness is perceived to be transferred.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this retroversion in those who have delicate and moist bodies with prominent veins.
And when you want to treat it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply it to the eye as we have said, but instead press firmly on that area until the trapped air is released, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see this in your eyes, then treat it by evacuating the body and using what expels air, and apply plasters made of fetid pills and Serapi pills and similar remedies.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse in kind and vary according to the parts of the body into which they strike. Their diversity is such that some have large points, others small points, some concave, others blunt; and among them there are those that are solid. Some arrows have three edges, while others have tongues or barbs.
And the signs of an arrow striking the head are when the arrow penetrates and passes through the bone and emerges from the cephalus, which is above the brain. This occurs with sudden violent pain, scotoma (partial loss of vision), vertigo, stiffness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, a mixture of understanding (confusion or altered perception), vomiting of bile, and speech may become impaired, and from the wound site comes out white moist substance similar to dust, and the appearance suggests an excess of moisture.
And if these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow unless it is outside the head.
Here are the signs when an arrow hits the heart: it is near the left nipple, and you can feel that it is embedded in a hard object rather than in soft tissue; and the movement of the arrow is like the movement of a pulse, and there comes black blood from the wound, and coldness spreads to the extremities, and cold sweat appears, and fainting occurs; therefore, you know that death will come very soon.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck become swollen, and the complexion of the person changes, and they exhale a large breath, and they crave to breathe in air deeply.
And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain at that moment is near the small ribs, and it causes great pain and sighing, and there is no movement of any of the body's muscles.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, immediately there will be vomit of some undigested food.
And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is embedded there, causing a wound to split open, or damaging the membrane or bowel which is ruptured, then there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out from it, and there is leakage to other parts outside, and immediately there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
And other limbs as well, such as the face, the neck, and the jaw, the shoulders and the arm muscles, the spine of the back, the collarbone, the chest, the ribs, and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to their major functions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
Here is the translation:
The cause of this is that in a man an arrowhead entered through the tear duct near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind the bones of the ear, and he healed without damage to the eye.
And I extracted another arrowhead from a Jew, the arrowhead entered into him near his eye, leaving behind the eyelid and then further inside, where the arrow was hidden and could not be completely removed except for a small part that adhered to its shaft. It was a large sharp Turkish arrow with an iron tip shaped like a lion’s head, which had no feathers.
And the Jew healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his groin, and it was an Arabian arrow with feathers. Then I incised around that between two grooves, and it was submerged in the tissue of his groin; then I carefully worked on it and subsequently removed it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and he was thought to be going to die because of it; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised around the arrow and worked on it, and he healed without any harmful incident.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded between his shoulder blades, and the wound had healed over it, but after about seven years, the arrow came out at the base of his neck.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it inside her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural functions.
And there was another man in whose face an arrow was embedded and the wound had healed over the arrow, so that it could not be removed without pain, and his appearance seemed normal.
And the arrow was removed from the man of the king's council, which was embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right side, with the entire arrow being hidden.
And I was called for his treatment regarding the embedding of the arrow within three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it carefully, but did not feel anything there; however, he felt pain below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I covered the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, expecting that the area would swell so that it would become clear to me where the arrow was, so that I could act upon it.
And no significant change occurred in the area where I suspected the arrow might be; and I continued to cover it with the plaster for several days without any incident; and the wound had healed by then, but on one day I felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized this as such.
And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it softened, and with careful examination, I found the tip of the arrow slightly adhering to the shaft.
And then I proceeded to open the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it took me four months to reach this point.
When the pus has caused the swelling to increase and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I remove that [pus], without any delay in doing so. At that point, I do not seek to devise or think of other methods, but rather one day I began using forceps made for this purpose, as will be shown at the end of the chapter, and with these I extract it; then I proceed to treat the wound.
Some surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I have restored it and the wound has healed properly, and the patient was completely cured without any cause for concern.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you may apply this rule and significance to what has not been mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of these are not understood in narration nor by reading the book.
And the skilled artisans compare a few things through analogy; and with what is present they infer about what is absent; and when new operations or instruments are encountered, they should deduce the causes from outside the art.
And thus I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
And that which is removed by the place where it entered either is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is drawn out.
And if you do not act immediately at the hour when you catch it, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes softened and loses its attraction to it and its ability to hold it back.
And so it seems to be fixed in the bone and if you do not obey this method, leave it alone for several days and then bring it back into place with traction and motion each day, and thus it will be dislocated.
And if you do not obey this method for several days, then you should pierce around the circumference of the bone at that point with a fine awl until the space is widened for the bone, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is hidden in the part of the body and is concealed from sight, then you should probe for it with a probe, and if you can feel it, then remove it using instruments that are appropriate for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein here, then enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears which are pierced, then carefully remove the flesh in which it is embedded on all sides as much as you can; and endeavor to do this, if not by avoiding damage to the flesh in fractures of the ears and in twisting them until they obey.
And when you perform the extraction of the splinter in any place where it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and delicately with utmost care that the splinter does not break and that it becomes difficult to grasp and extract.
And if you cannot do this immediately, then leave it for several days until the parts around it become firm, and then attempt again when the situation has improved. But if there is contrary blood flow, then you should administer what we have mentioned for treatment in the respective chapter.
And guard against the possibility of incision into a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer care in every possible way to avoid damaging the splinter; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended and advise.
And thus when you make the splinter adhere according to the figure according to which the wound of the splinter should be set, for it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But splinters that are ejected from the opposite side, or which you have already processed some part towards the exterior, or cause redness at the extremity of the splinter due to pus formation above the wound and protrude slightly; then you should act on this; and cut it according to the amount that the forceps grasp; and then pull it out, for it is now easy to extract.
If it is retained in the bone, then at that time turn it according to the opposite direction until the arrow presses against the bone, and enlarge it thus, and then extract that one.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then try again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from there.
But if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer impulse, then insert and use it; if it is blunt, use a concave instrument so that it fits into the curve of it with the arrow's socket and then push it out from there.
But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument by inserting it, for the arrow is lightened by this.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is embedded, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow penetrates into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the side, and is close so that you touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to operate on it, then cut around it and guard against injuring any veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound as needed, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which are made like pincers so that they do not let go of the arrow.
Of those are made various types of incisions, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and the scarcity of the pus, and the extent of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Like a rod so that the instrument may be easily pushed into the concave arrow and is thus propelled by it.
On phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy, of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy at xxx points. Of these, sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two visible veins on each temple; and two veins near each tear duct under the eyes, called aspicientz; one vein located in the middle of the forehead and another at the tip of the nose; two veins on either side of the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; these are also referred to as algelic veins; and there are two veins below the tongue. The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms total five. Among these is one cephalic vein, which is also known as the wild leaf; and people call it "the head vein," blunt, and it is a medium-sized vein, composed of a branch from the basilica vein, and another branch from the cephalic vein; and they name this the people's "whole body vein"; basilica is the vein located in the domestic side (arm), and it is called "citillar," and the common people call it "the belly vein." There is also the funis of the arm, which lies over the elbow, and this is where phlebotomy is performed; it appears prominently on the forearm. Lastly, there is the salvatella vein, located between the thumb and the little finger, appearing in two branches.
And in the thigh and the buttock there are three veins; one of them is that which is behind the curvature of the tailbone of the wild animal; and the second is sophena, and its place is behind the buttocks of the domesticated animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is behind the buttocks of the wild animal; and in the buttock there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins near the ears is for catarrhs, chronic diseases, abscesses, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are, with a large cloth for good friction; tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins appear near their location close to the ears in two lower spots on the head; and feel those veins with your finger, and if you can feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is where you should start.
Take the lancet, and use that which is sharp, and insert it behind the vein into the tendon until the blood flows to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon to the upper parts and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers spaced or around that amount; and let as much blood flow as you wish.
And then press on the area with poultices and let it be treated until it is healed.
And there is a preface at the beginning of the book on those and their cautery.
But of the two arteries, for the Templars the help of phlebotomy is to migraines ancient and often bad, and continuous ophthalmia, and bodies of acute excesses poured out into the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I recommend to you: have the patient hold their neck so that the two veins appear clearly by sensation and feel the pulse below with your finger; then at this moment attempt it.
And then raise the tourniquet above the vein towards your indicated finger, and incise the phlebotomy slightly below, and raise the vein up; and incise it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the patient's compression, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and afterwards place it on the cut and poultices, and bind it tightly above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And there is a reminder of them, and of their incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the help of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and to alleviate headaches, tension, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy there is as I recommend to you; that is, the patient should hold their neck with a cloth so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this shape:
Pause the punctures at the point which is at the head of the artery above that vein and strike it from one side or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity which you wish; and then untie the patient's binding and strengthen that within so that it may be healed.
And in some cases it is opened with a venesection, but it does not need to be that the venesection is of sharp extremity as the other venesections, rather it should be of flat extremity, and cut that across, for the bone is close and strong there, and the vein would easily break if the venesection were sharp.
May the treatment of the two veins that are next to the tear ducts of both eyes be for eye itch due to pressure and grease in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of the venesection is that the patient strengthens his arm with a bandage, and then you perform the venesection while standing over his head.
And the venesection should be performed across the length a little from the venesection site a little, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the venesection tool is sharp, the tip of it easily breaks.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause upon those cuts, and strengthen them for one night, and then untie them.
And the venesection of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and violent headache, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occurs in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck and approaches it to his nose with your left hand, and take the lancet thin long and fix it in the middle place of the tip of the nose according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the sense here, and the blood begins to flow soon.
Push your hand with the lancet little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, for that place is quickly restored.
But the harm of phlebotomy on the two veins leads to constriction of them and to the beginning of leprosy and to many diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient strains each one on his neck with a cloth; and the practitioner stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein at length with a wide lancet little by little; and then extract blood according to season, quantity or according as you need it; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then untie the cloth and strain both veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not overstrained, and leave it for the night as the plague is healed.
And the harm of phlebotomy of the large veins, compares to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
Of the quality of phlebotomy in those cases is that you make the patient sit before you, and tighten his head with a bandage, and then roll open his lips and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because around those very veins are small black veins; and then you cut each with a cutting incision.
If doubt is before you and you do not know which one it is, then you make an incision in the larger of those, and from the more apparent of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
But from the two veins that are below the tongue, phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is appropriate for hemorrhoids that are in the groin, for disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you place the patient between you and the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side a vein and on the other side a vein, and the color of each tends toward blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to go too far with your hand in phlebotomy of those veins, for below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the neck usually run throughout all people, and the phlebotomy of them is done in two ways, either place on the phlebotomy site a small piece of myrtle or olive leaf which has a subtle blackish hue; or use scissors for phlebotomy and check if it bleeds, and this is the form of it:
Use the instruments as described previously, and it is suitable to open concave full veins that appear thick, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this venesection instrument is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it is suitable for venesection of fine veins that contain thin, clear blood.
But the benefit of venesection from the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from illnesses that affect below the jaw and neck, and from what congests the legs and abdomen.
And it is suitable for the venesection practitioner, when performing venesection on that vein, to be very careful with it and to act with great caution, because below it lies an artery. If he errs and punctures this artery instead of the vein, he will cut through the artery and cause a hemorrhage. Therefore, one should not use a piercing instrument for this venesection but rather a cutting instrument like a knife.
And if the basilica vein does not appear clearly, then it is better to leave that one alone and switch to another vein or look for some branch of it. Or you may perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is more visible; and section that with a venesection instrument as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy from the middle, place your hand above the constriction of the arm where you know the location between the wrists, and then press firmly on the inner side; then lift the arm and cut the vein in a concave manner for phlebotomy as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in that area.
And when you see it, as you press the area, swelling occurs in the place that you pressed on the inside, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as it does in a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and then you hold your finger there for a long time; and afterwards remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops after a few moments, then press the arm there.
And warn the patient about the risk of infection, and advise them to avoid using that arm for some days until it is healed.
And if the bleeding does not stop, and there is no medicine available for it, then you should cut the artery if it appears to be necessary; because the limb is contracted, and the blood has stopped flowing. Or take a piece of cloth, and fold it, and apply half of it firmly over the vein in question with your hand and with bandages on another day.
And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what has been prescribed for stopping blood flow, remembering the location of the bandages.
The removal of bone from that place is difficult in many positions because of the small space of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial to extract blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be overly cautious during phlebotomy in that area because below it lies a nerve; and then if you adjust your puncture for phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor, and healing from this is difficult, and rarely does one recover completely. This nerve appears to many as sensitive; and since it is hidden from some people and subtle, not shown, therefore it is necessary that you pause in the area where you perform phlebotomy on the elbow section, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
And it is appropriate here to ensure that you perform phlebotomy on the olive vein or the myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is not near any artery or nerve.
However, sometimes an abscess occurs in some people, when it is not pus-filled upon the first probing, but we do not know for certain about that abscess.
The first of these is to know that an incision should not be administered except for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses. An incision should be made in one of the veins located on the arm: cephalic, fusca (which likely refers to another anatomical term or a vein location), and basilica. The incision should be performed at the beginning of spring, preferably after breakfast in both spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of fullness appear.
And the incision should be made on the third day or when pus has appeared and three hours have passed since the morning.
However, an incision that is administered should be done when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is necessary that a child not be given an incision until they are fourteen years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not have an incision performed on her unless it is between the fourth and seventh month, and women over sixty years of age should not be given an incision.
And when someone wishes to have an incision performed on them in some way, it is necessary for them to clean their bowels before the incision with a cleansing enema, if there is any retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous substances into the incised bowels, which are purified, and so they do not affect the principal limbs.
Do not perform phlebotomy on patients who are nauseated or have drunkenness from illness or excessive drinking until they recover from it, nor on those suffering from dropsy. Also avoid phlebotomy when colic is present, after vomiting, and in cases of abdominal issues, as well as during frequent coitus, labor, exercise, fasting, or vigil, and any other cause that weakens the body's strength, whether physical or animal.
And also take into account the subtlety of the body's fluids before doing this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And also bathe if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way to make the blood thinner.
And avoid phlebotomy at the middle of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And be sure that the patient's day is protected from all harmful animal incidents, such as anxiety, anger, and fear, and from all physical exertions, such as excessive labor, unnecessary hardship, intercourse, and similar activities.
And at the time of his seating, have the causes present that are used by people for aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to their quantity and possibility.
And let the phlebotomist sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the patient who needs to be phlebotomized.
And then have the patient's arm extended, and clean it with water by the phlebotomist two or three times; and then wrap the arm with a bandage using a strap two times.
And let the ligature be timely placed, for if the ligature is not equal or if it is excessive, then you must prevent the flow of blood; or if it is too lax, and then you must restrict the course of the blood accordingly.
And regarding the ligature, it is necessary that the one who is to perform the phlebotomy wipe his hands thoroughly before beginning so that the veins are inflated and clearly visible.
And regarding the phlebotomy, the phlebotomist anoints his lancet with a little old oil properly. And then he places his finger of the left hand on the vein where he intends to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the percussion is made as if the veins were like cords fleeing from the phlebotomy, and those are full of air. When he presses the lancet onto it, if it does not yield, then that one is narrow and constricted; and if the lancet does not enter the vein, and if it enters, then that one is tight.
And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and careful in all these matters.
And then press the lancet, but if the vein is open in one spot, that is good. But if not, repeat this at another spot nearby, or with more urgency, if the location is not abscessed.
And if the location is abscessed, or if the patient becomes feverish, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not bind tightly, as this will forcefully attract an abscess, nor should the patient bathe.
Regarding arterial incision, if it is needed.
And if the opening is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that it will not yield the amount of blood you want, then repeat the arterial incision in that direction and make the opening slightly larger, but do this with haste before the area becomes abscessed, for an abscess often occurs after a small incision.
But if you see that it has already become abscessed, then do not incise it further, for it will not serve any purpose; instead, apply a poultice of oil to that area, as it helps to disperse the blood. And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
And similarly, administer an oil poultice in all arterial incisions where the blood flows despite the prohibition of its course, and use either theriac or sage when applied to the area, for the blood becomes refined and is dispersed when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of the arterial incision, which sometimes happens, especially in cases where it has not been done before or where the venous opening was small, then you should treat it by applying a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly heated, to the area for about an hour, as this will dissolve it.
And it is necessary to do this near the flow of blood from that vein or from another vein.
And if a black or greenish discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, apply a poultice of aloes and powdered myrrh, or some preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar.
From such swellings arise abscesses and elevations which require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
Therefore, place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply pressure to that spot. Then that elevation is bad and harmful; therefore, be careful not to do any of what has been mentioned, for the blood will flow easily from the artery.
And apply a plaster with styptic properties to that area so the location becomes hardened, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from everyone according to the quantity of their vitality and according to the color of the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is alleviated.
And for one who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting in one session, the phlebotomy from the vein should be increased and the bloodletting should be done slowly.
And for one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to perform bloodletting in small quantities, and the procedure should be quick.
And the best method to use in venous bloodletting is the cross-section cut, not the puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from excessive bleeding and from injury to nerves, and it is more beneficial and safer than bloodletting along the length and width of the vein.
For such cases where fainting tends to occur due to phlebotomy, it is advisable that you treat this beforehand with a small amount of bread infused in the juice of grapes or in simple oxymel heated; and extract from the blood in three or four stages.
And if there is stiffness due to constitution, then beforehand take bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then it is advisable to drink watered-down syrup that is subtly fragrant; use aromatics with sugar, and let them sip it little by little.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to dissolve their blood a second time, it is advisable that they do so when the phlebotomy is for more extensive evacuation, and the effect of which is gradual, allowing the blood to be evacuated little by little, as is according to the quantity of its strength over continuous days.
But for those who wish to prevent their arm from swelling and to treat their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then they should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
But for those who wish to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction to the side towards which it tends to flow, it is advisable that they be bled on the second or third day.
When the body in which blood is heated and becomes acrid and causes fever occurs, it should be bled in one session and a large quantity of blood should be taken out to prevent fainting, so that you may preserve all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the patient whose body contains blood, so that he does not die instead of fainting, because often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the openings of the vein are now closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it abruptly, because this can be harmful.
Handle the wound carefully so that it can be phlebotomized again; or this may happen due to the coagulation of blood at the opening of the vein; or place on it some theriacal plaster, or sage leaves, and compress it gently until the blood has fully come out.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave that area alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time and there is no excuse to avoid it, then bleed at that location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the rope of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fossa or basilic vein when they are not accessible or hidden, as it consists of these.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until it reddens, so that the vein appears clearly.
About this ligature with stricture in the middle, tie it tight; and make the incision transversely at the narrow part, not latitudinally or longitudinally.
Make the opening wide and perform your incision where you make the puncture slightly above the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is restricted, now move the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are during the days of summer, now you are excused from moving the hand in hot water, and similarly, pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
And the incision of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves there.
And the incision of the right hand little finger is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of this incision is that you tie the hand with a ligature or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly visible to the observer; then make the incision transversely; and if you do not incise it properly, nothing will come of it.
And be careful not to leave your hand on the incision site for too long, since there are nerves of the aforementioned areas that are exposed.
And then move the hand in hot water and let the blood run there, for if you do not move it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the vein opening, and the flow will be restricted.
And when you have extracted the blood in the required quantity, pause on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not clot immediately; similarly, this should be done in every case carefully.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on my left side is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
And do likewise in the phlebotomy here as you have done with the other one.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy from the sephena vein is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old injuries, and similar conditions.
And the procedure for this phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in hot water until the veins become visible; and place a bandage around the ankle; and the site of the vein is on the back of the heel, and from there it branches out into several lines on the surface of the foot.
And therefore, phlebotomize the largest branch below the joint behind the heel, because it is better and more effective.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below that area on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy at where you would cross it, as if you were going to cut across it.
And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
If you are prohibited from using leeches to draw blood, then place the foot in hot water and let the blood flow freely until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then proceed with another incision a little higher up, since the area is bony; and do not fear malice, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the vein on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is below the heel, near the arch of the foot.
And the best time for phlebotomy is in the afternoon when the blood is thick.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly wraps the area on the side of the hip above the heel with four fingers in a thin bandage, as it should not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, then perform phlebotomy on that area according to each individual case as is possible and according to the transverse position, which is better; or incise that area by incision or cut it by cutting, since the location is bony.
And it is in the words "halfway between"; and if you find that area, and it does not appear to full sensation, then perform phlebotomy on one of its branches, which appears on the foot between the thumb and the ring finger.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you desire.
Then loosen the ligature and apply pressure over the site of the phlebotomy cut and strengthen the area, for it heals quickly.
On wind exposure and the qualities of using those [methods].
Wind injuries are mostly to horns, or ears, or eyes.
Wind exposure is done in two ways: one involves incision and bloodletting, and the other is wind exposure without incision.
And this wind exposure that is without incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And for wind exposures that are administered with incision and bloodletting, there are fourteen sites on the body, of which one is where wind exposure for alnocrati purposes is applied, at the back part of the head; another site is near both sides of the neck; wind exposure of the chin below the jaw, next to the mouth; wind exposure of both cheekbones; wind exposure of alohoster, which is above the temples; wind exposure of two armpits; wind exposure of both upper arms; and wind exposure of both thighs.
Wind exposure does not extract blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and through this, one does not capture the virtue as is done with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for wind exposure to be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by internal congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts wind exposure due to illness or for a continuous period, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month and at some times during it.
And when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, I command that bleeding be performed two or three hours after sunset.
And the benefit of bleeding from the neck is that when you encounter heaviness in the head and sinking to the eyes; but it should be done near complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this bleeding is in the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
And it is not appropriate to use bleeding on one who is completely exhausted, or in one who has a cold, for it causes great harm to them.
And because of this, it is not appropriate to use that on the elderly, and in those whose heads are often ill.
But for one who is repeatedly bled in this manner, memory loss may occur; and because of this, you should command the person performing the bleeding to pause their hand briefly after removing the cup to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Here is the translation:
Let it be raised slightly the windy alkali, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the windy nature of alhagdahan causes pain in the head and ocular disorders, and migraines, and nosebleeds, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the basilica.
Let it be commanded to the ventozador that he not press too hard during scarification so as not to injure the artery and cause blood flow issues.
And the windy nature below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resembles the symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and is used instead of bloodletting from aliheric which is between the two lips.
But the windy nature that is applied to the two palm sides causes caphatan, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And the windy nature of the two inner sides of the fingers causes the efficacy of bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are close to the skin, and from the smaller veins within the larger ones until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the ventozador not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is bare of flesh and below lies the nerves and arteries.
And it is a windy substance with which one applies treatment to the buttocks and it causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
And you command the surgeon to make a large incision, and it should be deep, for the place requires strong drying; and let thin superficial scrapings with sharp instruments be applied.
Small incisions on the sides should be made carefully, for they attract blood from all parts of the body, and alleviate old pains in the loins and uterus, and in the bladder; they induce menstruation and help with boils and abscesses; and serve as a substitute for phlebotomy at two elbows, and one wrist, and two ankles.
However, they weaken the whole body and cause syncope in some people.
And the incision on the wrist is appropriate for treating conditions that the incisions on both sides are suitable for.
And the quality of the position of the incisions is that you place the incision at its beginning and then gradually follow with suction at an appropriate time, and do not prolong the placement of the incisions, but pause them lightly, and replace them carefully, so that the humors come to the site appropriately. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and until the vigor of the blood appears.
And now you should make incisions and gradually continue the suction, and appropriately consider the condition of the body.
For the person with tender flesh and few pores, you should scarify once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the surgeon to enlarge the incision slightly and to perform suction with ease.
And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first time the way of subtlety for the blood and its moisture is opened. And in the second time, to the acquired skill of extracting thick blood.
And if the blood is muddy, then a third scarification should be performed so that it may achieve the desired result.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract thick blood, we perform two scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform a stronger scarification.
And the term of scarification refers to the depth of the incision alone.
And if the skin where the scarification is to be made is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places for cupping with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer, then oil of aloes, violet oil, almond oil, or linseed oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or bloodroot oil, and similar preparations.
And if the excess is thick and congealed, then the oil should be of amaranth, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar preparations.
But if the area where the cupping is to be done has wide pores and soft flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and the places for cupping near the scarification should be washed with rose water or cold water mixed with solutrum, or almond water, or borage water, and similar preparations.
For him whose blood is of thick humidity, wash his wounds with warm water, or with water of myrtle and sumach and similar to those.
For him whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with warm water, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of fennel decoction, or chamomile, and similar to those.
And it is necessary that the wound be guarded before bathing; give it so that it is administered shortly after bathing for an hour or two, and let him sleep near the wound.
What is needed to be done to regulate the wound or bloodletting before treating the wound.
At the beginning, if the wounder or one who needs to be bled is choleric and the wound is on hot and inflamed blood, then it is necessary for them to take cooling causes, such as sour grapes, endive in warm water and lettuce, sesame seeds, julep, and similar.
And allow them to eat such foods as poultry, and meats of suitable birds, and seasoned foods with herbs, and similar.
For him whose constitution is weak, let him drink syrup of lemon, or syrup of sweetened sesame seeds and sumac, and warm water with moderate pleasant odor between evening and midnight; and let it be recommended to him to use little drinking and eating, and avoid foods of poultry and fish and small birds and doves.
And it is necessary that on the day of wound treatment and bloodletting, drinking should be more than food.
That it should be given to drink at certain times to some men theriac or alpharach medicine, or musk, or alicant before the wind or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be refined; and it is not necessary for them to take that hot mixture.
The winds that are due to incision should be made on the back, over the kidneys and gout, and over the navel, in the places of the ribs, and at the pit of the stomach, for these members do not endure incision upon them.
And it is not sought for these but to draw blood from a member, just as we apply a cupping vessel over the breast in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that to dissolve congealed wind in the limb, just as we apply them on the belly and the navel; for that rarefies the limb and heats it and removes the pain by resolving the wind.
And it is applied to the nostrils when they are obstructed or diseased, for by the power of suction it easily removes obstructions and eradicates pus from its place.
And similarly it does when applied to the back and kidneys due to wind that is enclosed there.
And these cupping vessels are administered only with suction; and some are applied over fire.
And some are administered full of warm water in illnesses of the kidneys.
And this is so that the cupping vessel be full and be larger, either with hot water alone or with water in which herbs have been boiled for this purpose.
Shape of the cupping glass applied to the fire: let the width of its opening be as we have made it; and the amount of pitch [used] shall be half a palm; and in the middle of it, at the place where the circle is, let there be a depression, which should be small enough for a needle to fit inside.
Let it be made of iron or copper, with thick edges, smooth, and polished so that it does not hurt the limb when placed upon it.
And let there be across the middle of it an iron or metal crossbar, on which is placed a candle for lighting.
And this cupping glass should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller ones shall vary according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using them.
And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weak should be smaller than those for young and strong people.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass over the fire upon the limb is that you should hold it above the fire of wood decently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it directly on the crossbar at the middle part of the cupping glass, so that the flame is lit around the lower part to prevent it from burning the patient's body.
And it should then be placed upon the limb of the patient, and the hand should cover the depression we have mentioned until when we have the cupping glasses but do not wish to keep the hand there so that the vapor rises over that depression, at that time the cupping glass will dissolve quickly.
And hold the cup above the fire according to its method, and repeat this if you need to use it again.
Here is the translation:
And this is its form: And the larger this suction cup is, all the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter xcviij.
Bloodletting should not be administered in most members but rather in those members where the application of suction cups is not possible due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on parts bare of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found should be in the waters from clean, unpolluted sources.
And then they should be left in clean water day and night until they are hungry, so that there is no remaining cause in their belly; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning of bloodletting and suction cup use; and then rub the affected member until it reddens; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if suction can be applied to the area with a cup, it is better for relief.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and subsequently with cold water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the blood vessels are extended near the site of the leeches and there is residual blood, then you should place a piece of cloth on cold water, and apply it over the area until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or similar astringent substances on it until the bleeding stops; or place crushed fava beans on the site, and leave them until the beans adhere to the area, at which point the bleeding will stop.
In circumcision, if it is necessary, repeat the procedure of bloodletting when it is possible to change those.
And if the bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then at that time wash the place with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places until it bleeds; and afterwards they should be paused, because those when feeling any blood will soon heal.
And when you want to stop bleeding, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, salt, or ash on it, and the bleeding will soon stop.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is considered necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
Oh, son, be aware that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and the vulgar, and by those who for any length of time have not heeded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of it in all that time; and I have not applied what follows, but through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, extracting the science from them.
And subsequently I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience contain; now I condense it for you to spare you the burden of lengthiness; I abbreviate it at the end of brevity; and demonstrate it at the end of clarity; and present many forms of instruments used in those treatments, as is done through addition of explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
A summary and collection of what is necessary for the treatment of fractures of bones, including those prerequisites that are essential before we begin to recall the parts of broken limbs and their various treatments. Therefore, let us begin the prologue of this chapter with a summary of the discourse; and the chapters will be presented to those whose understanding requires that they first pause on the truth of these matters; so you and others like you who wish to know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone to suffer a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to consider at the beginning whether to perform venesection or to wait, depending on the circumstances, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if the person who suffers from it is an infant, elderly and decrepit, or if it is a time of extreme heat or severe cold.
And let the patient be content with light food such as fresh herbs and meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit heavy meats and foods that fill the body, and all kinds of food that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe condition regarding abscesses, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
And now return the patient to their usual regimen that they were accustomed to follow.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, at this time it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, which have viscosity, such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beans, cow's stomachs, hens, fresh cheese, thick soups, and similar items. With this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that the bones in those who are thin, just as in infants and in the elderly, cannot be joined and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the limbs.
However, nature adjusts and applies them over the broken bone from every part for some cause similar to glue, in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they are conjoined together, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, without any cause prohibiting them from completing their work.
And for this reason it is necessary that the patient abstain from foods that are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the arm is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the back; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And I wish to provide a recapitulation of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
The diversity of fractures within themselves. And the types of fractures in bones are diverse in their locations; for one kind of curved fracture is different from that which occurs in the stars [likely meaning "skull"]; and some transverse fractures occur according to the length of the bone: and among the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and comminuted injuries, both those that proceed and do not proceed, just as when paper is prepared for writing, there is a fracture with a crack and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And for each type there is a particular torment proper in the restoration of the second, which will come as a recall of the distinct ones in their places.
A sign of a bone fracture. And by this a bone fracture is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and how it feels when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no visible twisting or deformation and when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
There might be twisting or a small fissure, so do not press on it with your hand and through compression of the entire area; instead, apply one of the medicines about which there will be a recall at that moment when you consider appropriate; and it may be tight due to subtle constriction.
And you should know that the place where it is curved and not split into two or more as occurs in the shaft, as the whole part of its comparison is bent, then you should begin from your time to the correction of what affects it until an abscess forms.
And if an abscess occurs in it, do not delay for any number of days waiting for the abscess to cease; rather, bind that according to every method you can by lightness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the alignment of it is quicker than that of the bone in which such dislocation occurs.
And then strengthen that according to what will come to your recollection of it.
But if the bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or by your hand if the member is small; or by two ropes or by one rope and your hand.
And place yourself in a position where you can put the limb back in its proper location according to its natural shape, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then force yourself to return those adductions with skill and according to every method that you can into their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that no harm befalls the patient due to your operation or injury; and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you act skillfully with your hand, and if you see any divergent cause, correct that and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors often cause an abscess by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen happen due to their repeated handling.
And the quality of the bandaging of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and largeness and in the form of each one.
And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and the forearm and similar to these, then the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to wrap them with linen and a hard material, because the wrapping of linen connects the large limb and strengthens it evenly in all directions, so that no dirt enters.
And when you begin, after proper alignment of the fracture, pause conveniently for that, at the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the limb; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
And then proceed to the upper part of the site of the fracture, and tighten moderately so that your bandaging does not hurt at the place where you have already tightened the fracture. From around the fracture, extend the bandage a little, and gradually loosen the tightness, until you take from the area a large part.
Then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured area one more time, and then tie the bandages to a part further down from the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the bandage and the loosening of that as we have said about the first bandage above.
Then place between the bandages a piece of linen or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason in that area.
Then place another bandage on top, and immediately apply plasters properly made if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time place over what causes the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave it like this for several days; and then you will strengthen it with the plasters.
And let the plasters be about half a palm wide and well made; or they can be of willow bark; or of palm leaves; and the width of each plaster should be according to this form and figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others, and the length of the plaster should match the size of the limb; then reinforce the plasters with another bandage according to your initial tightening; and tie it above with a knot properly as we have said about tightening, and this should be your tightening more so near the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less should be the tightening.
And let the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some foolish surgeons using cords from a sheep's gut for their stitches, it is a great error, when one sees the tension uneven.
And likewise, fine threads are not suitable either, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be at least a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
And if the patient is in pain at the ends of the threads near the stitches in those places, then pause and use threads of linen or carded wool until it does not cause injury to them.
Sometimes fractures occur due to a blow, and there is a disruption in the bone, and I will recall this case in the chapter dedicated specifically to such singularities.
And know that not all broken limbs should be set with stitches on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it should not be placed in bandages but left loose for about five or seven days, or more, depending on your certainty regarding the risk of suppuration.
And this is the method of plasters used by the Ancients for treatment, which were applied over fractures, dislocations, and contortions.
Method of applying a plaster for the quick restoration of a fracture, suitable for various injuries and particularly for women and children, as it does not cause heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine residue that adheres to the walls of the mill during grinding.
And confine it as it is, but sieve that with white cloth, and pause the preparation if it is not thin or subtle; and then use that.
Another method for plasters to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe for asafetida, ledanum, acacia, inula, and migraech, which is the seed of wild millet, each one drachm; of myrrh and aloes each five drachms; aloe juice twenty drachms; all should be ground and sieved together with aqua alichil or with white cloth if the preparation of the plaster is heated; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and confers great benefit to many people.
Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe for migraech (seed of wild millet) and juice of white mulberry each one drachm; myrrh and aloes each five drachms; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole twenty drachms.
All should be triturated in a mortar with a stone pestle, and then sieved, and mixed with water or white cloth if the preparation is heated, and it should be administered.
Method for a plaster for joints and bones that have moved from their places, and for severe pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and hot oil and apply it to the area.
Moreover, in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for treating boils and properly expelling pains.
Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take fresh mulberry leaves and wild poppy leaves; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of making a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take rue, camomile flowers, violets, and flour of barley, of each one part; mix all together and cook with wine, but do not scald the member.
If it does scald, now confect that with cold cilantro water or with water and use it.
Another method of making a stronger plaster for resolution than this first one, when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take rue, linseed, hawthorn, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, of each one equal part; mix all together and cook with sage water or with sweet water or with wine, whichever suits the quality of the limb and according to the condition of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration except for a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else; he recommends that it should be midway between coarseness and fineness.
However, Galen is seen to have applied them on the broken limb during its restoration and for causes where there is slight drying with warmth as well as substances like myrrh and onions, similar to those causes which we have mentioned.
Method of making a plaster to relieve injury and pain: take linseed, chickpeas, human hair or bird's feathers, rue, and salt, of each equal parts; mix them together, sift them, and cook them, then make the plaster.
The quantity according to which it is necessary for the bandage to remain and then be loosened is that you consider whether pain does not occur or improvement does not happen and the bone is not dislocated from its place; then you do not loosen it for several days. And if intense pain or improvement or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen that bandage immediately, and remove the plaster.
And take a cloth and sponge made of marine leather and soak it in cold water, then with that wash the site until the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated; then allow the limb to rest for an hour; afterwards place it on wool soaked in sour wine and oil or scented oil, and bandage it for one night until you are sure of no abscess forming, and until the swelling of the limb subsides and the pain is reduced.
And then iteratively apply that gentle bandaging and small plaster without tightening it as much as your initial constriction, and gently do this until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all other symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandaging, then proceed as you did at the beginning similarly.
And if nothing happens to the limb from any of the causes we have mentioned, then do not loosen it until after three days or four or ten or seven; and in some cases all this is left for twenty days, as you see fit by loosening the bandage, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of the flesh around it sets.
At this point, adjust the tightness more than in your first initial tightening, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's body, as was previously mentioned.
If you see the site of the fracture already drying and withering more than it should, then you will know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, apply tepid water compresses to that area every day for three days; and loosen the bandage slightly, so this operation directs nutrition to the limb, and it heals quickly.
However, what the inexperienced restorers do when restoring a fractured limb later than it should be and in a tortuous manner, according to their procedure, is an error and causes great fear; if this were correct, the Ancients would have enlarged upon it in their books and approved such practice.
And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable to not do so.
Chapter Second: Concerning fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures vary, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of an object, which removes all the bone within the cranium, leaving behind only the inner layer of bone, similar to what happens in wood when struck; thus, this type is called a concussion. Or an object may cut some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating further inside; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two fractures can be either great or slight, and there is also the fracture known as comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is impact from a weak object or falling on a stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is penetrating which is already approaching the panniculus, which is below the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is great or little.
And of the fracture which is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the thin strands, and by this it is named this species of fracture capillar.
And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into the soft parts inside, and it is made in the concave place as well as when it happens to rib bones when they are impacted and split upon entering the inner parts.
And this is mostly made in the bones of human bodies, as well as such heads of children.
And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are used, which are splints or bandages separated from each other. And I will return to the reminder of all this in its place.
And you will know all these kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their weaknesses and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary fracture is known by this: it is revealed on the bone, and when it is wiped clean, it appears as a weakness on it, because the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from these symptoms that it signifies by clear indication fear, as with vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness, fainting, acute fever, and similar symptoms of distress and rigidity, and such are present in the major conditions, then doubt whether they will be healed.
And if for unusual accidents you hope for a cure, then at that time you begin the treatment of them.
Which cause is four when the patient comes to you at the beginning as a patient and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the condition of the bone until the day fourteen according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you wait to remove the bone until the seventh day, because what is before the bone may become gangrenous, and accidents which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is divided into small parts and is torn, then it is necessary that you excise the comminuted and torn part, as I shall recount to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient, and expose the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the figure of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need the detection of the bone, bleeding or an abscess cauterized, then you must proceed with what is necessary, which is to apply the area with cloths infused in vinegar and rose water, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and be sure there is no more bleeding; and afterwards begin the circuit around the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you excise the bone with narrow forceps, and this is the shape of it: And then apply another excisor slightly wider than the first; and this is the shape of it:
Then administer myrrh to cleanse the pus that remains.
And it is necessary for you to have various scalpels, some of which are used for discharging pus more effectively than others; and some are sharper at their tips than the others, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in tapping on the scalpels so that you do not injure the head and the patient.
And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to drill around it before you use the scalpels, which are called non-penetrating forceps.
And they are called this because these forceps do not reach the bone of the skull to the point where it is adjacent to the head, as their tip is rounded or has a margin above it resembling a small border or circle, which prevents them from penetrating beyond the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient for you to have many of these forceps, each of which should be suitable for the thickness of different bones, so that at your disposal there are various types covering the entire skull, with one end being sharp and the length and width varying according to the thickness of the bone.
This is the method for three types of forceps: The quality of perforating around a broken bone is that you place the forceps on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the forceps to another location, and continue this process throughout the extent of the thickness of the shaft or similar areas.
From the incision of the knife that is between each tract of the bone, and apply that poultice as finely as you can according to its lightness, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or by any other cause through some instruments which you have prepared for this, such as towels and fine forceps.
And you must ensure with all caution that the knife does not touch any part of the wound.
And when you have circled the perforated bone, it will be separated from the wound if it is continuous at that point, and you will extract it; you must rasp and smooth that in the roughness of where it is in the bone with an instrument similar to a knife, but it must be thinner and finer than other knives.
And if any part of the small and fragile bones breaks, now take that with ease according to what you need from the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments which we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guillaume and the laureate praise greatly; and this is the speech about it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and you have paused below it with the extremity of this slow and cheerful knife, whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped part is firm and no part is cut, and the sharp part is made into two flaps forward along its length, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be fitted to the wound with the incision side sharp in the bone.
Here is the translation:
In such cases if there is any cause attached to the bone of the abdomen in some places of bone, cut with that part of the scalpel which has a lens-shaped edge, and deliver what can be delivered easily, for it is delivered without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the abdomen, and that which is abscised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in roughness and small projections, then you should scrape off that roughness and eradicate those projections with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer those most suitable places and most appropriately according to where your operation on the broken bone leads you and its shape.
And you should administer in your proportion with which you scrape the bone at the beginning with the broadest of those razors, and gradually use one that is finer and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
But in each of the other small, fine fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what leads you towards the correction of them.
And it is because they are not afraid about all those who have studied in that art. And stand on what we have written regarding large fractures.
And if the abdomen is swollen when you eradicate the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in boiled oil, and place that on the wound's opening; and then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil, and place that over the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible so as not to press down hard on the swelling; and then apply a broad bandage over it, but do not tighten it beyond what is necessary for the wound.
If you are certain that this cure should be applied for one day or two before you are sure of an abscess being cauterized; and then untie it and promptly administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as lint and flour of oats, and powder of iris and artemisia, and similar to those.
It is that you should make these medicines into powder which should be finely ground like those that are dry; and generally, administer everything to it whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And guard according to your virtue that the plague in your cure be clean; and let it not be in the ignorance of handling or otherwise; nor should you allow its virulence to increase. For when it is adjusted upon the pannicle of the brain, it corrupts that and ruins it, and the malady will quickly turn malignant thereafter.
And it affects the top of the head, as the bone is cleansed there and especially when the cure is improperly applied, and a blackness appears on its surface; and therefore consider if the malady presents the symptoms we have mentioned, know that it is dangerous without any doubt.
And if it is not blackness but the medicine that is applied above which causes it, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and use them to moisten a piece of linen, and then apply that to the top of the head; and promptly cure it with appropriate medicinal spices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two main places, or one of several possible areas, because there are two bones there, since the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only bruised, swollen, and disfigured.
If one of the two main parts is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the nasal cavity, and manipulate that fracture from within with your index finger, and from without with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause the patient pain.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should equalize at the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
And after that, insert at the end of the nose a pad of linen cloth if the fracture is in one place, or use two pads if the fracture is in two places, and let the pad be thick enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be soaked in honey and changed every day, but I have not seen this necessary; instead, it is best to soak the pad in albumen of a cooked egg mixed with powder; and then leave the pad in place until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened.
In some cases, insert into the nose, instead of a sponge, a piece of cloth made into a ball wrapped in lion's skin; and let it be that with such force has the fracture of the nose occurred that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, use sponges.
And if another swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose with pitch or wax mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with aqua regia.
But if no swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, now you should apply a plaster over it with sesame flour and powdered eggshell mixed with egg white; and then place it on the lion's skin, and do not cover the nose with any other cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should cut around them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this; and then close the wound, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters appropriate for this.
And if you encounter an internal swelling of the nose, now you should treat it with sponges and administer lead tubes inside until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is broken and there is no swelling around the fracture, now observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not broken into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is easy.
If the fracture is on the right side, place your left finger in the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, then use your right finger; and press against the swelling of the fracture from within with ease to the outer parts, with your other hand from the outer part of the bone; do this gently.
And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply extension from both sides as much as possible to achieve proper alignment.
And if there is a disruption with the teeth, then strengthen those that you expect will break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place on the broken jaw a piece of cloth soaked in cerot, and then place on it a folded cloth, and place on it a large piece of soft cloth cut appropriately, or a pad of dough equal to the length of the jaw; and bind this above according to how you have prepared the bandage for it and as is convenient for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and calm, and give him food in the form of thin soups.
And if you find that the shape has already been altered in some way, then you should change and loosen it on the third day; and then correct what is already altered of it with a plaster made from powdered linseed, egg albumen, or ground chickpeas, after having removed the cerot, and place over the plaster a thin layer of linen.
And then as you place and adjust the plaster on it, if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it so that you do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for this fracture typically becomes strong in about three weeks.
And if another abscess occurs that requires cauterization, then administer what we have said for other similar cases in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that abscess be treated accordingly.
And if the fracture is a compound fracture, now consider whether the bone fragment is displaced or not; then use your skill to extract those fragments with what is appropriate for their removal using the instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, now enlarge it with a scalpel according to the amount that you deem necessary.
And when you have extracted those fragments that need to be removed, if the wound opening is wide, then close it; and if not, apply one of the plasters appropriate for this condition until it heals.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
There are various ways the collarbone can be broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three manners.
For it may be broken, or displaced, or separated into two parts without any fragments being displaced; and this is easier for its restoration. Or it may be such that fragments are displaced within it, making its restoration difficult. Or it may be such that the fracture is a compound fracture.
And the procedure in such a case, when the fracture is a compound fracture, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds an instrument and stabilizes the broken collarbone, and the other extends the arm over that area.
To set the fracture, apply the splints in such a way that the shape is made according to what is necessary, and let there not be too much prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the armpit of the injured side a ball made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your requirement; extend and elevate the shoulder and compress the ball with your hand so that you set the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the shoulder blade to the outer parts, so that it reaches its proper place, then it is necessary for the patient to be reclined on his back, and you should place something under the muscle on one side, about halfway in size.
And the assistant should press the muscle on the lower parts so that the bone of the shoulder blade is elevated to its proper place, and then you should correct the fracture and set it with the splints mentioned.
But if you feel splinters of the shoulder blade and small pieces, then it is necessary to cut them out and remove those splinters with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should devise an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the shoulder blade the instrument used by the surgeon; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it resembles the bottom of a bowl, with its concave shape; and its width should be according to your need for it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Make it as long as is appropriate for the operation; let it have two ends, just as you wish, and one end be broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you now adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear it may form an abscess soon, then you should employ the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's disruption.
And if an abscess forms soon, then insert a dressing soaked in vinegar and rose water, and place it over that.
And do not let the splint be loose over the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so when the bandaging has softened or you see the splint already loosened, then you should correct this and tighten the bandage.
And place the patient's pillow over their neck, and below it place some bolsters so that during sleep the head is raised slightly; therefore raise the support from the side of the injury, and thus elevate the collarbone fracture with the muscle elevation; or bind the arm to the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless it is necessary due to an abscess, after twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see that the face of it needs it, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the collarbone fracture is set.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The collarbone is broken in the middle part and not at the ends, only the edges.
And when it is broken at that location — and it is broken in the middle part — and it is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
And thus place on the wound powder of ground egg whites and rose petals; and next place a double-layered cloth pad; and then place over it, according to the quantity of the spoon, all or at least a little bit, of the lotion.
And if the lotion leaves behind cavities in some places according to the spoon, then you fill those cavities with lint pads, and then apply the lotion evenly.
And then secure above with a bandage made of linen strips, applying it with sufficient firmness to hold the lotion in place without moving it from its location.
And examine the bandage each day; and whenever it needs to be loosened, change it and tighten it evenly if the lotion has moved from its place.
And apply the medication on its proper side.
And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
When this number is complete, then you loosen the bandage, and know for certain that those bones from which there was no fear of their beginning are dissolved.
And if you proceed to the place of the bone piece and place the ligature below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the clavicle or suppuration caused by a cauterization should this happen.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of foot fractures.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains immobile; however, its extremities move as cicadas do, moving slightly and repeatedly.
And the symptoms when the middle of it is broken are that it tilts towards the inner parts and there is great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, shortness of breath, and vomiting blood; and a cavity forms in the broken bone and this is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie supine on their back, and place a bolster between their shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and adjust the ribs using more than two fingers, and carefully proceed with the operation and alignment in every possible manner suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns as required.
And then place on it a plaster and wool, and put under a delicate wooden splint or a similar light material, then wrap that in cloth; and then carefully bind it over the broken bone without pressing too hard; and proceed with bandaging around the back several times, and tighten that binding appropriately; and then examine the bandage at all times, and when it has loosened, tighten it again.
And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded or caused pain or an abscess in that place, then cut and loosen that which is there and remove the plaster and correct what has happened by this method of treatment; and immediately apply the plaster again if you wish to do so; and adjust the stricture until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in places where they join together; and at their extremities near the front, there is no breakage of those parts because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling of those parts during the examination of them.
And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture according to the possible method, until it heals as necessary, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if that is needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing sensation occur, as in the case of someone who has wept, because the bone punctures the membrane; and breathing difficulties, coughing, and vomiting of blood may also happen; and this is difficult to cure.
And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful methods.
And what they say is: it is necessary to pause from foods that produce inflammation and gas, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward.
Let us proceed with what will not be a cause for easily generating an inflamed abscess if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now help with that.
And some of them say that it should be placed above the wound and close to where it is drawn strongly; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
And some of them say: let the place be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and let powders be placed between the ribs until it is full, so that the bandage wraps around as closely to that roundness; and then treat the illness with the cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the illness is caused by violent constraint that cannot be tolerated, and the bone pushes through the membrane at a puncture point, we fear for the condition; now it should be that we cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument to secure the incision previously prepared, and that they cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should apply heat and infuse powders in reddened oil and place it on the area, and treat the illness with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And let them lie supine on the side on which they sleep until they are healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the second vertebra and the neck.
In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that moment consider the following: if you see their fingers already softened, numb, and lifeless, unable to move them or stretch them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and there is no feeling of pain in them, then you know that they will not recover, and in most cases it is fatal.
And if they can move them and feel constriction when pressed on and pricked, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if the vertebrae of the neck are similar to this condition and you want to know if they will recover or not, then at that moment consider their breathing.
If you see that they are already weakened, the same applies to them as it would to their limbs. Soon after lying on their back, they experience vomiting and involuntary diarrhea, and sometimes when lying on their back, they want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and at that point, there is no need to work on treating them.
But if none of those symptoms occur, the cause is better and less dangerous.
And the treatment for them is to apply poultices to reduce the swelling on the affected vertebra with olive oil or boiled honey; place this on that area several times a day until the swelling subsides.
During the hours of rest, one of the soothing and beneficial plasters should be applied, and it should be wrapped with a bandage; and order the patient to use repose and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where pain is felt until it is healed.
And if it happens that the flesh around the bone becomes detached or for any cause that it is separated from it, then you should cover it and hold the bone; and immediately join the two edges of the wound, with sutures if necessary; and afterwards treat it with some incarnative ointment until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the tip of the bone, then you should insert your fingers into the buttock with your left hand, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and afterwards apply a plaster and splint, if necessary, and wrap it.
And if you feel detached and broken flesh in it, then you should act on that, remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the broad (or wide) area.
The bones of the broad areas are often broken, and when they break, the fracture does not extend beyond their extremities but rather is incised along their length and deviates to the sides; this causes pain in the affected area and puncture sensations, and movement is impaired when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you should place your hand on it so that it extends over the fracture in a manner that corresponds to its figure.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then you should align it according to what seems appropriate to you so that it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in the long bone that inclines toward the lower parts, then you should have the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture. And when you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane beside it, and bind it tightly with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any displacement of the fracture or movement of the splint.
And align the concavity so that it fills appropriately, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side so that it maintains alignment properly.
And if an abscess occurs suddenly, then you should stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is treated, and apply what is appropriate for that condition as it has been done before; and afterward return to the restoration of it, and bind it as is necessary.
And if the bones are displaced or crushed, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the wrist.
The adjutori is what is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this form:
Let there be two ends of bandages, and let it be suspended from an elevated place.
Place the patient on a board; then lay the broken arm outside onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint where the curve of the stick is attached.
And then suspend something heavy from it, or have the patient extend it downward with their own strength; and then the physician should bring the fracture back to its proper position, as needed.
And another method is to have the patient lie on their back with their neck raised and suspend the head by the neck with bandages; then instruct two assistants, one of whom holds above the fracture near it, and the other below the patient, each pulling in their own direction.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then apply bandages over the fracture on one side and over the other side with another bandage, and have each of the two assistants pull in their respective directions.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the knot and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around the joint.
Tie it in such a way that it is comfortable and easy to work with; then when it is tied appropriately as needed and applied properly, tighten it if no inflammation or abscess occurs.
If an abscess occurs after cauterization, if there is no constriction within seven days, then place a linen strip soaked in vinegar and rose oil so that the abscess can rest, and then tighten it.
And the method of tightening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of wet cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand on its own muscle.
And place the cloth and tighten over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a fixed position, if there is no cause from the broken bone prohibiting this.
And now use a splint.
And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is thicker and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus an addition of three fingers from all sides.
And then tighten over the splints with the bandage which I have described at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage over the site of the fracture be tighter there. And the farther apart the fracture is, the looser the bandaging should be.
And so if you position the splints and the bandaging as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess after cauterization, then leave the bandaging and the splints for seven days as we have said.
Therefore, consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to excess fluid retention or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for at least three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and their head should be raised slightly to rest above their stomach.
And place a pad filled with wool on the injured area, and at all times of the night or day, ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, nor should the bandage be too loose; thus, correct this all with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier, such that the food is light at first until healing begins; then it should be gradually made heavier.
For the custom of the bandage and changing it is that they be tight for forty days; then they should be loosened, a bath should be given, and medicine applied with substances that correct this.
And if the fracture is still rough and rubbing against itself, then do not loosen the bandage, and keep the splints in place for one day or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the Restoration of a Fractured Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one is small and lies under the little finger, while the other is larger and is situated below the smaller one, towards the thumb side.
If only the larger bone or the smaller one is broken, and firmly set together.
And when the smaller bone above is broken, its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the bone below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse still is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, it is appropriate for the surgeon, due to its restoration, to allow a brief extension period with ease until it becomes level.
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then a more vigorous extension period should be allowed.
And if both bones are broken together, then it is necessary to allow an even more vigorous extension period.
And it is necessary to place the figure of the hand due to its restoration and extension spread out on a board, with the wrist above all the fingers, such that the thumb is higher than the other fingers, and the little finger is lower than the others, lying flat on a sloped surface.
And there should be a board in front of it at an appropriate height or straight ahead, so that the little finger does not have to work.
And one assistant should extend the arm from below with the patient's hand or with a sling, and another assistant should extend it from above similarly.
And the surgeon should then place the bone in such a way that it assumes the best shape possible.
And if in the treatment of the bone you encounter difficulties, then at this point you should try to reduce all parts to their proper place with your skill.
And if a separate difficulty appears that makes the condition worse and is not to your hope for its restoration, then you should act upon it and remove that part according to the method we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is due to plague, I have already treated that in a separate chapter, so follow the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with cerot made from rose oil and white wax, which should be between thickness and subtlety, and place a strong cloth over it with fine stitching so that the abscess can subside; and then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powdered mallow in hound’s tongue juice, and afterwards place poultices; and let the poultice placed over that fracture be more distant and stronger.
And know that the number of poultices for the arm varies in major treatments, or rather, whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones together.
And then place your stitching over the location of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is most necessary to apply compression above the fracture or below it, place the stitches slightly looser according to how it was described at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened cloths, not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are sewn should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the bandaging for some days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as quickly as possible after such an occurrence to the limb, you should bathe the limb with hot water until that condition subsides.
And do not force the limb until it rests, and then return to the binding.
And if the bandaging has already been loosened and the bone is already set and appears to be in place, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen that a little and leave it for some days until nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen that.
But if the patient does not suffer from any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it for about 20 days or thereabouts.
And then let the patient's arm be suspended by their own skill of active movement, and make them lie down on their back to sleep.
And know that this fracture is restored in about 30 days or 32 days, or sometimes it may be restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the strength of the patient.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the wrist and the fingers.
Know that at the wrist and the joints of the fingers, when there is a fracture, it usually heals in about two months.
When it happens that the arm is fractured or dislocated, at that time it is necessary for the patient to lie flat and facing upwards according to equality, and place the arm above in such an extended position.
And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the physician should adjust them until they are properly set.
And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess occurs, in which case cauterize; and then place a splint above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that part in linen.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, now make an appearance of a sphere with cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it tightly with cloth.
And let the splint be made of wood and wrapped in cloth in which it is raised, so that the wood fits against the palm; and bind it as necessary.
But if the fracture is in the parts outside, now it is necessary to place a splint above and another splint below on the palm, so that the arm is supported and straight; and then apply the bandage, as you would wrap the arm at the wrist with linen.
And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, now if it is a thumb, adjust it as necessary and then bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, now it should be adjusted and bandaged to its corresponding finger; or all should be bound together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on that finger, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of abscesses cut and opposed — both the hand operation — both with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated the narration of them.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of a fracture of the collarbone.
The collarbone is often fractured and is felt according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies face down on their belly.
And the practitioner should extend all the bandages to their proper position according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is closer to the shoulder joint, then the bandage should be placed close to the armpit at that part, so that the extension can take place there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the neck, then the bandage should be placed close to the neck, and the extension should take place at the parts below.
And the physician should align the bone with both of his hands until it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by proper union; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The binding of the splint should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off the excess; then bind the pad so that it reaches to the ankle and to the base of the foot.
And insert a strip of cloth between the skin and the pad near the end towards the bottom, so that the ends of the cloth extend beyond both sides of the pad, and then wrap around the pad and the limb whatever excess remains of the bandage.
And then place over the limb at the site of the fracture splints, and place one strip over the bone of the pad.
And then fill the spaces between the pad and the limb with soft cloths, so that the binding is snug.
And then begin the binding tightly on top at the site of the fracture with three or four turns, and as you move away from the area of the fracture with the bandage, your binding should be looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the strip towards the bottom until it reaches the ankle, and tie both ends of the splints from the other side so that the bandage does not come loose from its place.
And then leave the binding in place, so that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any such causes occur, then undo part of it and correct whatever has occurred as soon as possible, as we have said before.
If there is pus in the bone which must be removed, then you should scrape that thoroughly as much as possible; and if not, open it up and remove what can be reached, and treat with whatever remedy precedes until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by these bandages that are attached to it, as we have said about the auxiliary and the arm.
However, in the restoration of the limb in such a manner made, no bad limping occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or that which is applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the person limp for some time.
And know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb bone.
Know that the fracture of the thumb bone tends to happen at the tip, but it also occurs in other places frequently.
However, if there is a fracture, it is often merely a crack or contusion in its parts, and this is either one pain or several pains, and all of this depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that it should be scraped and joined back together its broken parts as described, until it is aggregated and conjoined as much as possible by equality, ease, and fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and place over it a round bandage if needed; and strengthen it above with proper compression.
And so consider all the positions which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions, in such a way that they are appropriate to every event and suitable to what is necessary within them until they are healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the hip.
Know that in the hip there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the hip bone; the other is slender and is called the femur.
And accidents of certain types of fracture occur to both bones as happen to the two bones of the arm, and thus restoration is performed on it similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
And if two bones are broken, the hip is affected in all parts.
And if the more slender bone is broken, the hip is affected in the forward parts.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below, and it is of those causes that are not within your control.
And then administer extension and reduction and fixation of the fragments accordingly.
However, be careful if the fracture of the hip is severe and has many stages, that the extension be less and more gradual, and proceed with caution according to your skill.
And in the case of the hip, there is a reason to operate as you would on the arm, which is when you equalize the fragments and complete the entire procedure. At this time, you will take pieces of wood from plants that grow near causes that are smooth and not thorny; choose those with small grooves, and they should not be from thorny varieties. The length should be according to the length of the hip, and the thickness should be proportionate to what is below.
And wrap each cloth in two coverings according to its length, and place one at the convex part of one side and the other at the concave part of the other side, and let it be tied into the deepest part of the wound.
And tie the two rods in three places at both ends and at the middle point, for with this structure the arch is prevented from leaning to the right or left, and it stands in good position.
And a piece of wood has already been administered according to the length of the arch; and place the arch so that it maintains its mobility.
And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a condition requiring such treatment.
And every day consider the arch and study it carefully based on previous studies, and you must guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause arises, then act accordingly until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
A complete fracture does not often occur in the heel; but fractures can happen occasionally in the bones of the foot; and among those of the foot, few suffer fractures, and they rarely experience anything more than strain due to their disposition.
And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and these bones are elevated above their natural position, then the patient should rest his foot on prepared ground as described.
And then place something on top of that which is raised from those bones, and press down on them, and bind them so that they return to their places.
And then apply a plaster above it and place something above that, and below the chest of the patient place a small table with two flat surfaces.
And then strengthen that limb with a proper structure, since you have wrapped it in cloths and other materials as needed.
And as three or four days pass, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones bound, either joined together or dislocated, and the treatment in such cases is as you know.
But if some say they are joined together, then you should restore them and bind them as I recommend to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place a splint under the joined finger according to the length of the finger, and leave some space around it; and below the patient place the table as recommended to you, and strengthen it with proper support.
But if what is joined together involves two or three or more bones, then you should place a splint of appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth on each finger, and strengthen the table at the base of the patient’s body so that it rests on one of the flat surfaces of the table for proper support across the chest.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in the treatment of other fractures and accidents that we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every condition with what is necessary.
Chapter Eighteen.
On the fracture of the skull of a woman and of the bone of the penis and of the virile member of a man.
When the skull of a woman is fractured, at that time make that incision in the area where it has occurred, and then slightly incline it towards the part of the back.
And then the midwife should fill the skull with cotton, and it should be done in such a way that it conforms to the shape of the head; and then the woman should be bandaged, and her back slightly elevated little by little, because all this is done so that before the fracture site, it remains as it was and the fractured bone returns to its place.
And then place poultices on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after she urinates, reduce and return that as per the method by which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return to her initial poultice.
And do this for seven days or around that time, because it takes that long to restore.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and sew onto it a tube made of cane; then insert the entire bladder into the skull fracture site, and then blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the head, because this helps the fracture to return to its proper position.
And then fill it with cotton and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is fractured, at that time administer for its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
In what is true and not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has some study and use and understands my book; for that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions by the true method in the restoration and in the tightening of it, and thus understands well.
In the penis of the man when it is grasped, take a bandage made of cloth, and put the penis in that; then place around it a wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and afterwards let it be left for three days or about that time, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of bone fractures when they are inflamed.
It is appropriate for one to whom it happens that there is a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the humerus, or similar to those, that you treat and bleed them immediately if the conditions for bleeding indicate this as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, now it is appropriate that you treat for retention of it by such means as you powder on it finely powdered eggshell, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess forms suddenly, now you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days thereafter, for you will cause harmful accidents.
If a broken bone protrudes above the joint and is visible, you should proceed to reduce it and align it with ease and minimal extension.
If extension is not within your capability and the alignment requires more than what you have, then you should reduce it with these tools; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four such tools, depending on what is needed for various types of fractures.
And it should be round, and slightly thickened so that it does not bend due to the pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have a sharp tip at which there is a margin on both ends; and the upper part should be thicker, while the middle part should taper towards the sides.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrum volentz atelarem," which means a small palette.
So that the end of it can be placed steadily with the tip raised above the protruding end of the bone.
And press it in one motion until the bone returns to its place and is aligned with some degree of alignment.
And thus strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold the tool well, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has a good grip on it.
If you cannot reduce the bone with what we have recommended, then now use that with what is suitable for the knives which we have mentioned; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
And remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient still suffers from severe pain in the tooth, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you consider will be of great benefit to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and do this properly even in summer, and do not place cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause rotting and corruption.
And then administer poultices at the appropriate time for your completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut away any protruding parts with forceps and use dressings according to the extent of the wound.
And be careful not to touch the wound at the fracture, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, and it has caused death or incurable illness or severe harm to their patients. And if the swelling is slight, soft, and different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear some of the accidents we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not use poultices on it, but instead apply a dressing made of hard cloths rather than poultices and treat it accordingly.
And when one or two days have passed since the wound began to heal, whereupon granulation has started to form, then you remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and immediately apply bandages, using those which according to our custom are used for treating wounds, such as tetradecphas and similar ones to this.
And it is necessary for you to untie the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it should be such that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can drain from it downwards with ease.
If several days have passed since the wound began and it has not consolidated nor has the granulation tissue formed, then you should know that here there is a delay due to small issues, for which you must examine the wound with a probe. And of those delays, those that are separate should be removed and extracted, while those that cannot be separated and cause pain when the member is moved, you should proceed to incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound becomes infected with gangrene or erysipelas, or any other type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should proceed according to one of those methods mentioned in the preceding chapter on the treatment of such conditions.
And regarding this matter in which you must be cautious and present your best judgment: when a large bone is broken, treat the limb as you would the bones of the wrist and forearm and similar ones, and do not attempt traction or extraction if doing so might lead to death after four attempts; leave it inside for pus to drain, as it will likely fall out on its own within twenty or thirty days; and then attend to the wound if it is visible, otherwise leave it be.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of joint stiffness that occurs as a consequence of some fracture.
This stiffness often occurs in the joints during the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints themselves, and it distorts the shape of the limb; and it greatly prevents the limb from performing its natural functions.
Then consider whether the stiffness is recent and administer medicines that have a binding effect such as aloes, henbane, wormwood, squill, colocynth, and similar ones; take any of these individually or in combination. Confess (administer) them either by mouth with vinegar, or with egg white, or mixed with water, and apply it to the stiffness on linen, and bind it tightly with proper compression.
And let the compression remain for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and reapply another one until the stiffness is alleviated; or apply a thin sheet of lead over it gradually, as lead has the property of reducing inflammation in limbs.
But if the stiffness has already turned to bone and is causing severe pain, necessitating its removal urgently, then cut it at the part that is most affected, and excise the excess or reduce it with some instruments until it is alleviated; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is set and subsequently the limb becomes weak and does not follow its natural course.
When a bone fracture is set, and subsequently the limb becomes weak and frail, this happens for several reasons: one reason is excessive dissolution of bandages and binding done improperly; or due to overly tight compression preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of unnecessary applications; or due to premature movement not at the appropriate time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
For the treatment, give food to the patient and make his heart tender so that the blood multiplies in him; administer baths; and apply cautery and cupping to him.
And apply plasters to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment; or continue rubbing with cold water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they have healed incorrectly and prohibit further operation on them.
When it happens that a limb already restored near its healing shows curvature and prominence in the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformation of the shape of the limb; however, since the limb is not prohibited from its natural movement, you should not accept the word of one who believes that member to be newly broken.
But there are indeed false physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is a reprehensible one, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with cold water in which soft herbs are soaked, such as flax seeds and radish roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and a soft plaster should be applied as well, made properly for this purpose; or take mucilage from radish seeds and mix it with flour of linseed or olive oil, then apply it; or grind fat figs with dove’s milk, and similar medicines to those mentioned for consolidating.
In some cases, it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which is applied to the most humid parts, and movement of the member should be administered to all parts at all times.
If the tortuosity has already advanced and has become hard and converted into stone, and it has caused the need for treatment with iron, then it is necessary to let the pus above drain out and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and to excise what is superfluous from the knotting of that material with the bone with subtle instruments, and facilitate this under careful attention and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its proper place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is distorted, causing severe pain and great injuries.
When a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to attempt its reduction as soon as possible and not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hard, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or extend the limb during the period of inflammation, as movement often causes spasm and severe pain.
But when this happens, it is necessary to prepare for the puncture of the abscess, and allow the limb to rest until the inflammation subsides; then bathe the member with warm water and oil, and subsequently reduce it with care.
And treat the entire limb with what will help it remember its proper place.
Here are the bones set in order as previously described for fractures; I now enter into the part dealing with lesser wounds.
Chapter XXIIIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So when both jaws are dislocated and do not function; the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are partially removed from their positions with slight movement, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully displaced, to the point where they are softened at the joint where saliva flows, and where he cannot hold anything nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his words.
But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and full, it must be reduced immediately, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister hold the head of the patient, and the physician insert his thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be outside equally; and orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax them on each side; and the physician then guides the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then administer a warm mixture of water and oil to ease the reduction of both, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And so when returning and using bandages, and the mouth of the wound is closed and not softened, at that time pause on those powders of cloth with wax, and let it be made of wax and rubbed oil; and then let it be applied with ease to the soft parts.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be placed between his two ears, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to chew for any reason; let his food be given in liquid form until such time as when the pains have subsided and his jaws are loosened, then allow him to eat what he wishes.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and other uses until such time as the jaw is loosened and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their places is difficult, then fevers often occur with frequent sweat, and easily the patient's belly becomes swollen, and easily vomiting of pure bile occurs.
And when you see this, then you know that it is hopeless; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest inward towards the body; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this can be felt.
And for the restoration of the hand, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
And then apply the plaster and powder to that area.
But the extremity of that which joins the spine and is continuous with it does not become dislocated in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to how you have prepared it.
And then apply the plaster, powder, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it does not become dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it does not become dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and protruded at the lower parts below the joint, and more particularly in those whose flesh is thin, it easily becomes dislocated; but in those with thick muscles, it protrudes with difficulty.
If it happens that any person is struck or falls and the muscle of the place becomes swollen with swelling, and it is treated with what has already been displaced.
Then proceed with that which you have placed upon it, and now proceed with the treatment of it.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is in the lower parts away from the tendon; therefore, distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, for you will notice clear differences among them; you will find a concavity at the head of the muscle and below the tendon there is contact with the head of the muscle as if by someone, and the injured person cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they use that limb in any movement.
If it is dislocated from the feet or above, then you will immediately notice a clear touch, and it is not concealed.
And this dislocation is gently reduced when it is fresh and the injured person is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the hand of the injured above the parts; then he places his fingers below the tendon and elevates the joint with strength to its proper place, and the practitioner raises the hand of the injured, and extends it properly; then he holds it still as it returns gently.
But if it does not return as we have said and after several days from the beginning of the dislocation, then the injured person should be bathed in hot water and administered a lotion to soften and smooth it as if for burns, using fenugreek, melilot in water, and it should be applied.
Let the patient lie supine on their back and place under them a pillow of wool that is even between softness and firmness. Then the surgeon places his hand on the sphere and lifts the muscle upward, and holds the patient's arm so it is not injured in the process, and another assistant should hold the patient’s head so it is not turned to either side, for it immediately returns to its position.
And if you wish, reduce that second in this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient and station him on the side of that flank. Insert your hand under the patient’s muscle below the swelling and lift the swelling up toward the head so the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant should hold the patient's arm from behind their abdomen. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to have something else by which they can be suspended, so that the weight will hold them firmly, for the dislocation returns immediately otherwise.
And it is reduced in this other manner: drive a long pole into the ground with its top rounded like a pestle’s head, neither too thick nor too thin. Place the patient below and have them stand along the length of the pole. Then extend one arm to the side opposite the pole, and firmly extend the rest of their body; the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a pole whose length is two yards, width four fingers, and thickness gradually tapering according to the form of the swelling as follows:
And upon the head place linen cloths so that the flesh does not injure the patient.
And let the navel of the patient be pressed down, and let the hand or arm be extended over the body inside the parts below, and let the body be bandaged around the helpers and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And let the arm be placed on a ladder according to the latitude, and the hand be extended below the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other side, because the joint will soon follow.
And when the instrument is complete according to each manner that is possible for you, then it is necessary that you place below the navel a pad of wool of equal quantity; and afterward place a plaster prepared with powder of burnt eggshells and albumen of eggs over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and then strengthen below the navel with appropriate bandaging; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and left alone, and do not disturb the hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that the patient's food be small until the member is strengthened, for it is easier for their recovery.
And then food should be given more after seven or five days, and exercise one movement; and thus if it is firm and not softened, now it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs or for some other reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three tractions as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint has not healed, and the plaster and strapping are reduced over several applications, and it cannot be fixed, and he cannot raise that arm to the upper parts, then you know that the nerves of it, which run to the head of the muscle, have either been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never heal in its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs from the feet and the hip or the posterior parts, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns.
And let the other strapping be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if heaviness and slowness in the movement occur near recovery, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the neck.
Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but mostly toward the front or back. And this dislocation does not hide from you when it lies beneath the skin or by touch according to its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated neck, that is made clear to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach the muscle's usual place.
And it is necessary that you treat the neck, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed, because if it becomes inflamed, reduction will be difficult, and even after a long time it may not heal completely. And especially when it is in the posterior parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and often leads to death.
And the restoration of it is such that if it is possible to reduce it, then the hand should be extended beyond the two fingers, and the arm should be expanded, and the physician's hands should be above the joint below it, and he should push the joint with his fingertips or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is to the front parts, then it returns thus: bend the hand with its fingers, so that he strikes the joint with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
And it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and they should hold it thus with two ministers so that it is not bent due to the extension.
And it should be rotated the arm in all directions, since it is wrapped in folded cloth long over the hand, or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps in the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then push the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
And after the reduction, it is necessary for the patient to rest on a plaster bandage that has stipticity and support with an eagle's claw position, and be wrapped tightly, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the bandage of it and leave it like that.
And if you see that the joint should not be stitched, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; and afterwards remove it.
And if it happens that there is great pain during the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then administer humidification through bathing and gentle friction, and compression until it is calmed; or place upon the joint something immobile, which is called an immobile support; and afterwards bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And afterwards remove that, and place it in a bath; and when it is dry, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and afterwards apply an immobile support again, which is called a hard bandage, once, and the second time, and the third time, in the bathing instrument until it is finished.
And if you wish, place a humid and heated cow's hide on that wound and stitch it; and do this for several times, as it is moist and helps to restore its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the wrist joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
The wrist joint sometimes becomes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to act with speed in reducing it at the moment when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
Here is the translation:
However, it must be considered whether the palm is already stretched over the belly of the hand. If the injury has occurred, then place the back of the patient's hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation was before placing both hands down, then position the hand intrinsically on the table so that the doctor's hand can act directly upon that proximity of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; but otherwise, then strengthen that area with a bandage covering the abscess and leave it like that; and do not repeat this action, for otherwise, it will neither suffer nor allow the reduction of the pus over the days.
However, the joint moves according to its tortuousness; and if you notice in the patient no cause for pain, except that the hand is softened and cannot bear any weight; then know that the nerves are either crushed or severed, and at this point do not apply anything but cauterize it properly, and strengthen it so as not to cause further injury.
And when it has been properly returned, then place on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterward, it should be loosened and left, with the hand of the patient being exercised.
However, if the movement of the hand is restricted and you encounter any severity in it, then apply that area with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Treatment of the Dislocation of the Said Joints.
Several times the said joints may become completely dislocated.
When a finger is dislocated at the joint nearest the palm or at the middle joint, hold the finger still and gently push the dislocation back into place.
And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend it above the part that is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly bandaged on that day.
And when it is night, wrap it as described, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day to exercise its movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, and wrap it in this manner and perform the first operation like this until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated at other parts as well.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae in the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck and the vertebrae are moved from their positions, then there is no treatment for this, as death is feared for the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's defecation occurs without their will, and they cannot control it; often, some parts of their body become weak or two limbs on one side or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its position, as sometimes it shifts and sometimes it moves to four different directions.
Thus it is described for the parts behind and is called jellyfish-like.
The treatment for it is that you consider whether the condition occurred due to labor, for if it did, there is no cure then, nor will it heal completely from that.
But in the case where it comes from a fall or a blow or something similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at great length, much of which I cannot recall; but I have abbreviated what little can excuse the abundance, due to my closeness to understanding and exposition, with which I have laid out and formed this from various instruments different from those with which I would show this and explain that.
And only those are cured which occur exactly as I describe on both sides.
And it is that the patient lies on his face near a wall, and lies below the bed in such a way that his feet are not touching the ground.
And nearby a straight post should be placed, planted in the ground at the end near his head, and another post around his feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister should hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a strong bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the post that is behind his head, and tie it there; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with the hands behind the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other post that is behind his feet.
Then let the attendant extend the bandages at the part of the body, and do not remove the two limbs and the bandages from their places where they are placed, but rather do not secure them so firmly as we have said.
Then the physician should place his palms on the strong part of the spine until it returns, or he should place it on that table, and then adjust the patient's weight on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return by this method, now take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and dig into the wall near the patient a place where the end of the table can fit. Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician should place his weight on the other end, and pull gently until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, open the ring which is revolved around the hand; and it is that you place the patient on the ground with the head of the patient at the end of two poles, the length of which is one arm, and from the head of the patient to the other end, two similar poles; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and they are fixed in the ground so that they do not move.
And there should be one round pole in which is the ring, and it should revolve around the two ends of the two poles.
And at the end of it is a knob in which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is revolved; and on the two other poles there is something similar to that.
Unbind the bandages that you have tightly bound to the patient’s feet at the time when you were about to cut his head, and the bandages that you have tightly bound around his thighs at the time when you were about to cut his legs.
You should have each turn held by a minister with his hand, and the surgeon should hold the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned and the place is adjusted, now you should apply an excipient poultice on white cloth, and then add wool; and then place over the poultice strips of wood whose width is three fingers or around that size, and whose length should cover the area affected by inflammation, and along the part of the spine.
And then bind it with the bandage as we have described, and let the patient use delicate nourishment until he is healed.
And if any inflammation remains in the area at the end of the healing process, now you should administer medicines that soften and soothe through prolonged application, as we have recommended; and a sheet of lead is also applied to that location.
And at times inflammation occurs in the back of the lower spine due to displacement; and that bone is one where it is not advisable to apply this medicine, as it could easily lead to fatal consequences.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with slight movement and concavity.
And the joint of the bone is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forward, or backward.
And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the healthy side against the affected side, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards their chest, and this location where bending occurs is often inflamed or swollen due to cautery, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs outwardly is that the symptoms of it are contrary to those mentioned earlier.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs forward is that when lifting the leg according to its full range, it does not bend due to pain in the heel, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot step forward; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is swollen, and they must walk on the sole of their foot.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs backward is that they cannot extend their heel, nor can they bend it forward as much as the other leg, and their leg is shorter than the other, and their throat is swollen, and the head of the bone is in that location.
The final reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been suffered by its owner for some time, you administer reduction to it and treat it according to its disposition; now it is not in that complete cure; and then there must be no expectation of full recovery.
In the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, now you must attend to this by returning the joint and extending it in both directions within and without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns and does not require any other treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, now you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the side of the limb from below, or along its sides, or use a bandage that is wrapped above the joint; and another assistant should extend the hand over there so as to place their hands on either side of the joint; then apply a lion's bandage tightly around the joint, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
And this extension of the limb or of the part inside towards the clavicle, or of the part behind towards the back.
And perform the extension of all these in one motion while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four types.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, now it is necessary for all species what I will say about its proper treatment.
In the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inner parts, it must be that the patient lies supine on his back; and then place the bandages along the ridge of the shoulder in the place where between the head of the shoulder and the place below the collarbone; and then extend the bandage from the angle as far as the outermost part of the clavicle.
And then another strong assistant should take hold of his arms and firmly grasp the thick part of the dislocated shoulder and extend it outward with great force, for that returns to its place.
And this particular type is the easiest to cure among those in which this member is reduced compared to the other types.
But if it slips away from you and does not obey in the exercise for this type of treatment at all, then bandages must be placed on both sides of the patient's body with a strong, light bandage over both heels and both toes.
And let the length of each be four fingers, and let the affected side be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended above the top of a post, and he should be in the hand; and let the distance from him to the ground be two arms' lengths.
And then command a strong youth to press down the head of the shoulder, and let another youth hold the patient, and the other youth pull the shoulder firmly upwards, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the reduction of the shoulder when it is dislocated towards the outer part, it must be that the patient lies on his back as we have recommended in yellow fever; and the bandage should be tightly wrapped around the affected side properly and over the feet.
Place two poles beside the patient, one at the feet and the other at the head; and beside them place a pole adjusted to the middle of his back, placed upon which wet cloths are wrapped around him so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being among the things of him, so that the extension to the parts below is not pulled away.
And each attendant extends to his part, and the surgeon, with his hands, adjusts the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the bench be extended quickly, and according to this method described on the back; and the surgeon places the palm of his right hand on the patient's shoulder, and with the other hand he grasps it firmly, and with this firm grasp extends it to the rear parts toward the front.
And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the side parts and raised above the ground; rather, he should be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for him similarly if his hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the positioning of the body between two poles; and it is on his back with his limbs extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it is necessary to administer compression on the table at the location of the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is complete as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of the bone is not hidden from you, and that is when you extend the patient's two hands, and when you see those equal parts and the patient extends one hand and expands this one for an excuse, then you know that the limb as it should be has been returned — and then you adjust two things and pause in applying plaster and wrap both with a bandage so that the width is not diminished in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then loosen the ligature and the plaster, and compare one hand with the other.
Now, if you see those equal parts clearly, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of inflammation, then you return and plaster that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
And then loosen that area, and allow the patient to delay in walking on each [affected part] for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the lower parts more so than to the rear; but it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you instruct the patient to apply their hand to the head, then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And for the restoration of all kinds of dislocations you should make the patient lie down straight; then place your hand on his chest if possible; press your two thumbs against his cheek, and put his foot between your hands; then firmly hold those hands over his ankle, and another assistant should extend his leg so that the bone returns to its proper place.
And the sign of successful reduction is that his chest adheres to the bed without laborious effort.
And then apply a plaster to that area and make the bandage adhere to the chest, and afterwards bind those areas together with a bandage for three days or four, and then loosen them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of it to you is unnecessary, now administer strong extension with the instruments previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the thigh.
The thigh sometimes is moved by slight displacement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the inside parts or towards the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the thigh swollen towards the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its slight displacement is easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease by the hands until it returns to its place.
In the treatment of the shoulder when it is dislocated as a second step, make sure you have the patient lying straight, and let there be a strong and capable assistant behind him at his side.
And place yourself with your right hand above the uppermost part of his foot, and with your left hand below the lower part of his foot at the joint.
And pull the foot with your right hand, and then grasp it with your left hand for two moments, and then extend your left hand; and press the heel of the foot with your right hand vigorously.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then press the heel of the foot with your hand for the third time, and you will be at the joint.
Then if it returns in one attempt or two according to this method, and if the foot feels equalized, it is good; and otherwise, immediately repeat the operation, for it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it as we have recommended, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a strong board on firm ground under him, and make sure it fits between his shoulders, and you should wrap a cloth around him so that he does not slide.
And then the assistant hold his shoulders, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or with straps placed on the back of the foot; and then each assistant pull against the extension on their side, and the board should be extended between his shoulders keeping him in place so that his body is not pulled towards the sides during the extension.
Then the surgeon pulls the dislocated parts apart, and another assistant holds the healthy limb above, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And so when the dislocation returns and the proper reduction is demonstrated to you, apply a plaster and wrap it tightly with bandages, and bind the limb securely to the bed.
And be careful to avoid the nerves which are located behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not damage them severely.
Then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage has loosened, wrap it again.
Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if the patient is forced to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and be corrupted, and after that it may no longer be treatable.
And if an abscess occurs that requires cauterization, then you should proceed according to the instructions given in our narrative for the treatment and application described elsewhere, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
Ensure that the person who is dislocated is pulled with some extension without excessive force; and what is not difficult is often easy.
But if the dislocation is in any of the joints of both feet, then you should have the patient lie down with their feet on a raised surface or table, and position them as if they were standing.
Here you should feel the pulse, and place your finger on what approaches of the joints, and then press that part with your finger firmly until it returns, and you see that it is inflamed and does not appear in a prominent location.
Then press the bottom of the foot against a board that fits the entire foot, which has two ends, and then stretch that part with proper firmness for three days; then loosen it and allow it to rest from walking for ten days, until it is stretched and its recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
About the types of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or any such conditions.
When any cause of those conditions occurs, and you fail in the treatment of it and in the restoration of the patient, many times death follows.
And because of this, one should not take charge of the treatment unless they are wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning use medicines that merely reduce swellings, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but refer them to someone from whom you hope for salvation from perdition, or relief from illness, where there appears any hope. And then strive to perform the reduction for the patient at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a severe swelling.
And then if the member returns as we want it to, immediately administer a regimen that reduces severe swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among the dried remedies.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the bones that are separated, then you perforate their membranes, and do what we have said about the simple diseases concerning what precedes in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue the one of the instrument in the ways of fear as it has preceded in my preaching; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutary will be seen by you in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly; may God be blessed for them. Amen.
