O you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science volume, and have made it whole through its explanations and declarations. And to me has come in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands - namely, "Surgery."
And because the work of hands is taught in our region and practiced entirely, it has been overshadowed by science and knowledge, with only minor details remaining from ancient texts that describe actions performed on limbs. And thus comes about the error and folly, closing off understanding and separating knowledge.
Or it seems to me that I will revive them together with the direction of this treatise according to the way of exposure and explanation and abbreviation. And I will come together with the forms of cauldrons and other tools of surgery, along with the arrangement for explanation and preparation as needed.
And because no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned. to tc;s s ...
And so Hippocrates says that without it there is not much, and with surgery there is little; Also particularly in the art of hands.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with the aforementioned things must be careful so as to not err and kill people.
So I have seen many times how some who engage in this science abandon themselves to theory and lack experience.
For I have seen a crazy barber who cut an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and severed the arteries at the neck. Because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another barber who treated a stone of a man's eye, and the stone was large; thus it took away with him a piece of the bladder, and within three days the man died.
And I have already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the severity of the wound, and if it were not for treating it, he would surely die.
And I saw another barber who took in care our duke who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was an injury.
and the ignorant barber pulled out the fracture near to the wound with great force, did not allow any bandage on the wound, and left it like this for so long.
And he commands that it not be dislocated again;
and remains so, causing the leg to become completely swollen and the foot leading to destruction.
I am summoned to come to him, and have been hurriedly dislocated from his leg; and when it is dislocated again, he feels no pain at all.
But in any case, the contamination had already set in or limb, and could not be cured;
and the corruption did not stop spreading through the member until the whole limb was completely lost.
And there was another physician who collapsed an abscess and it became infected, then inflamed due to the spite of its lordship.
and: the first.
And therefore, dear sons, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: That is to say, where there is danger in various disorders;
And I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore, you must be vigilant so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons in consideration and undertake your maladies lightly yet firmly, and follow the best course with God's grace to attain salvation and be praised.
and let go of hopeful diseases causing great suffering in health.
And arm yourselves with this so that you may not doubt, and be ready in such a way that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien states in some of his admonitions: "Do not take careless illnesses into treatment, lest you be called mad master.
"I have devised this treaty according to three chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cautery and medicinal cupping, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
And of exudations, and iron cauteries, and all that is necessary in work.
The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and arrow extractions, and such like things.
And it is about ordered chapters and forms of inflammations.
The third chapter is about correcting dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
And it is organized up to the head, and forms of inflammations.
So we remember this work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of aid and harm from each temperament.
I say that the quality of help, and harm done, is a longer speech and subtle art and secret remedies.
and about this spoke many wise men, and agreed on it.
and I am not satisfied with their words because I repeat the lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps everywhere for any constitution or matter it has, whether there are conditions: That is to say, hot temperament with moist matter, and dry temperament with dry matter.
In hot and dry constitutions combined with certain matters, some advise that fire cautery is greatly helpful. And others said the opposite: That fire cautery does not help diseases that come from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases caused by heat or dryness.
And those who say the opposite believe that fire cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of men. When you examine the body of the person and their moisture to its constitution with heat, you find the body cold.
And I agree upon this statement. ouest douce la cuire the luist les plaies. Et quant tu ne soigné, et les tires in its froid gues-le chaude of heat it est curet is à chaud déguises de a le croix coupeur temps let: Car tu; and l’ai ou la partis d’est douce or li cuise au teste.
And so, let no one meddle in it who has not tried and understood the art of cautery over a long period, and knows the different temperaments of people, their dispositions and causes of diseases, outcomes, and duration.
We do not have fear of other conditions, particularly cold and damp diseases. And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
And know this, my children, that fire-cautery is a secret of healing and more generous than caustic medicinal cautery.
The fire is simple, and does not come from force except to the limb that is cooked, and harms no other limb unless it has a name.
Ardent medications come from one member joining another, causing the affected limb to develop serious healing diseases; And sometimes it kills the patient.
The heat due to its intensity and for the kindness of its nature does not occur without excess if there is no surplus.
And this I have found through experiments and the long service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
And because of the length of my words, I excuse myself so that I may reveal to you the secret hidden in fire and the quality of its workmanship on how it counteracts diseases of the body as the philosopher explains by demonstrating. Or receive them in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they are agreed upon when to be made the fire cauteries, and choosing prayers.
And I say that cauldration is appropriate at all times because the harm that occurs can be prevented by the aid of cauldration. and especially when cauldrations are needed urgently and quickly, so that they cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think as fools do. because the disease that is treated by cauldration has no return. and it speaks thusly.
and it speaks thusly. but it is not as they claim because cauldration is a medicine that changes the temperament and dries up the humors causing pain; its value lies in moving quickly and in the virtue of its work and dominion.
And it is possible that illness comes at any time according to the constitution of the individual and the nature and virtue of the disease.
And they are accumulated in him due to the consumption of meats and such things, unless there have been caustics administered on site where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar matters, so that no great pain returns. But this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and that is true.
But they do not believe that caustics are worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false; caustics are the last of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they are ineffective, then we apply our caustics, which work.
Then indeed, fire cautery is the last of medicines, not according to the misguided beliefs of fools.
The ancients said that cauterization with a tool of gold is more effective than iron, and they did not consider copper because of the quality of gold and the high value of its substance.
And they said that the application of cauterization does not cause itching, but this is not true as I have tested and found that it happens in some individuals.
and gold tools are more valuable than iron ones, just as they claimed. And nevertheless, when you heat the instrument made of gold, it is not because of the color of the gold, and cools down quickly.
and if heated too much; If done with fire; And thus there is sufficient hindrance.
And I have ordered this chapter from the main points up until now so that the journey may be easier to find.
These fire cauteries are effective for moisture and cold on the brain, and among them there is a sweet way to treat an illness called 'soda,' as well as due to various humors descending into the ears, and causing numerous dreams and toothache pain, throat pain, and primarily for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solutive medicine altering the chief III or IV, depending on what its virtues and effects and the condition of the ill person can tolerate. And then raise the head of the sick person.
Then make them sit with their crossed hands and place their hands under some small stones.
After that, put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there you will take your two means, so bleed him afterward and then apply the caustic called "olivari" of which this is the form: And you place it on a piece of parchment with ink, and make it by drawing and slowly stretching your hand bit by bit while turning. Then lift your hand slightly, and return the joint as soon as you see the bone has moved a little; And if you do not see it, resume the fire treatment until you observe the bone as I have told you.
Then take a bit of wool, and place soft, moist cotton inside, and put it on the joint, and leave for three days.
After placing soft butter-covered cloth over it; And leave until the burn is healed. After caring for the wound with anointment called 'tetrapharmakon' until it is sound.
And when they are said by the ancients, that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purifies. and so he may move again.
And some say that one should not overuse the cautery if part of the bone is burnt; and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
And they say that the caustery should be placed lengthwise, and pushed so hard that it widens like a wreath women put in their hair to expel the fluids.
and one must keep the wound openly exposed for an extended period. Afterward, cleanse and dry it.
And these two methods of caustery do not seem to me entirely good for everyone, except in some men who have cause for fear.
and it seems to me that I should leave them.
because the head becomes weakened by continuous natural draugnces, as we testify in other limbs.
and similarly when the head of an ill person is weak by nature, and the first sign of caustery seems more healing and restorative to me, and thus I do this work for health in kind.
When there is chronic pain throughout the body that persists for a long time, one must use herbs and pills called "cachet," along with enemas of wine and oil ointments. And if the fire cautery is performed as we have mentioned before, it does not work. Be aware that the patient's shoulder is of a strong nature, and should not be too cold. Then one must perform the fire cautery slightly as we have mentioned above. After performing the fire cautery on each horn of the shoulder up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform the fire cautery at that spot which is called "vaseline."; And it is where one applies cups; and lift your hand so that you do not see to the bone. the patient feels much more pain in this cauterization than others, and I will speak elsewhere;
it is necessary that the cauters of horns be more delicate than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is how they are made.
For both fire cauterization of the head When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends to the joints, and the head is purged by dissolving medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the classification of diseases are done, none of it helps. Then you must make cauterizations according to two methods: one with ague medicine and the other with pitch.
The medical cautery for ague requires you to pluck a hair of straw and remove the bark and paste as little as possible from around the head, then treat the temple in such a way that you can replace the straw on the leather.
And when it is replaced, if bound and strapped tightly, let it remain so for twelve hours; Then remove the binding and treat the wound in this manner for two or three days; Then place a piece of cloth soaked in butter until it becomes thoroughly permeated;
After the ointment treatment, when it is sufficiently healed;
And if you wish to use any burning remedies that I have written or mentioned, treat with combustible medicines;
The iron cautery is made in such a manner. Heat the shape of which here is the cauldron:
And it is called "close" because the head is shaped like a bell or has little arching; and in the middle there is a small appearance.
And it must be placed back in its rightful position, and hold your hand and gently twist the fire a little, until the joints are as white as cream.
And release your hand so that the vein does not burn further backward and flows abundant blood.
After placing gauze on the wound, keep it in place for three days; Then you apply softened lard to the area, and then treat the head with ointment until it is healthy.
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the tool called 'culatelle', at the very tip, and be careful not to burn the vein in this area that is not ancient.
Migraine
When treating migraines as we have previously discussed in divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the fire cautery mentioned earlier is unsuitable for medicine and iron doe not suffice, then it should be heated with a device called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
And gently place it on the aching limb for half an inch and a half long, then remove your hand once, and hold so that you do not cover the artery and until reaching the bone.
And beware of the jaw moving when chewing, and that the nerves look only at movement and spasms do not come to harm, and watch for bleeding from the artery once it is covered, or if there's a clotting frighteningly large and also for those who do not know it, and are unstudied and inexperienced; Let the work be as I teach;
But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is severed, and I will show you there where it opens in this book.
And if you see that these cauldrons do not relieve the disease at all, and the patient is suffering greatly, apply them within as we have said in the head, and heal the wound until it is clean.
and if you see, apply the cauldron that we have described or for artery extraction in the book, with the cauldron having two blades. and this cauldron is better than that one and more helpful.
Of ear pain due to coldness
When ear pain comes from coldness, and one has used soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not subside, then warm this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
After pointing all around the patient's ear where both sides hold pain, and move it slightly up from the base of the ear after removing the plug. et it has X points around each ear;
After curing, let the limb be until it is sound.
For the treatment of mouth wounds.
The torture that must be treated by cautery does not include those caused by moist movement, as we have described in the division of diseases.
and do not make a caustic for similars that come from hardness and tension of nerves.
When treating this similitude of torture which moves from moisture of worms and purging of the head and gargling, if it does not work, then you must causticize the patient with three cauldrons: one at the root of the ear, and the other a bit behind the temple, and the third between the two lips.
And place the caulter on the part that is sound, and make a caution mark at the top of the ear just above a small bit from the tip of the horn in the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger. And leave the caulter until half the hair is burned off.
This is the shape of the caulter:
And here is the form of the scalpel that we have described before it, but it is slightly more delicate and the knife should be a bit larger.
After curing them as I've previously explained, until they are healthy again.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four caulters:. On the two horns of the head and in the neck, and at the place called "ears", as we have previously mentioned, and then fire cautery on the stomach's mouth.
And treat it as we have said before.
Of lethargy
This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pills to cleanse the brain;
After raising the patient's head completely, and placing on the occiput the astrolabe of anise which is written about in treatises on plasters.
And this is how to do the fire cautery: If it goes as I have said.
If he remains so, well done; And if not, he should do three fire cauteries between the neck and the clavicle, each separated by one hand's width.
And the treatment as with others, and if you see it repositioned, and the patient is suffering, then perform a fire cautery in the middle. And if surgery is necessary, on the other side near the two corners, treat until it heals properly;
and be the fire cautery called "olivare", as I have mentioned before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and as we have previously said;
After resting the head on the patient, then perform fire cautery in the middle of the head and each corner, and behind and three times along the spine of the neck.
and if you need more treatment, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four fire cauteries along the spine of the back. And he leaves until it is more than white, and raises your hand. After the cure when it becomes healthy again, and let there be the olive-shaped caustics that we have previously mentioned.
On epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cool the brain with ice and other treatments we have mentioned in the division when the patient is greatly suffering and enduring hardships of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, let them have a gargle and chew with meats that purify the brain often.
After placing his head in milk, and the cautery is applied as we have said before, and on the vessels. And if the patient is beyond help and suffering, let them have cautery as I have told those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and be olive-shaped caustics as I have described.
If it is a child with these symptoms, they undergo a subtle fire cauterization as follows:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moistures and heavy phlegm, then one should perform the kind of caustic cautery as we have told for those with paralysis.
And if due to melancholy there are declining excesses towards melancholy, and the body is ill-humored and moist, then give it something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what it is before in the classification.
After reducing the head of the patient After finishing the good turn for the patient, just as with a circle, place it within the head.
and have the patient cross their arms, ensuring they are held firmly on all sides;
after applying the ointment, ensure it is thoroughly worked in with butter from old sheep. and warm the cloth on fire promptly, so that if needed, the patient may quickly wrap themselves for relief. after removing the circle from inside the head, let it cool down.
and do this to each patient once a week with another good regimen until they are well again.
Or if you see to cauterize it by making multiple points throughout the entire caulder.
This manner of cauterization moistens the brain evenly;
And then apply cotton soaked in oil and fat of geese.
From underneath the eyes. When the pain first comes as described in the divisions, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protects from all dampness, making them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomamen't venu plusors par l’ivreement des eulz
Afterward, instruct him to turn his head back, and make a fire cautery in the middle of his head, and make two fire cauteries on both temples where the humors gather together, or one by one.
and cover the entire fire cautery with all veins and arteries that are close to the crown, and make the fire cautery long according to the width of the temple.
and beware of blood loss, and if too much blood is seen flowing out, then staunch it with the power you have.
And I will teach you in extracting arteries and making an incision how to staunch it.
At no time is a caustic or incision made behind the two bones backward.
and it is seen that they are cold phlegmatic excesses, then he makes the caustic that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter on the eyes. I make a caustic on the head, and two caustics above the temples, and two incisions behind the two bones. and if there is further need, then he caustically sears above the eyebrow with all small caustics.
When you treat according to what we have said in the section, and it brings no benefit, then give the patient three cups of cow's urine. After the king, treat with fire and make an incision using olive oil caustery. And perform two incisions called 'clavis' above the two sores, slightly below the hairs.
And beware of the artery so you do not cut it.
And this is the shape of the fire cautery, which is called "clavalis":
When the oil paper is softened by disease and moisture, then you caulk with this cauldron called "olivare". This is why this form occurs:
And if you see, then make two incisions above the sores as close to the hairs are.
And do not leave it open except until a third part of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have described.
; that t n's armoust et s. If youd: line Tarn: Never does it happen that hairs of the eyelids are converted to scales, and prick the eye, and a caustic is applied in two ways: This is to know whether by fire or with burning medicines.
Or the caustic of fire instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; After signing on the eyes similar to the feather of peace, and make it begin as close to the signs near the hairs.
Then you place soft cotton soaked in egg white and musk of parsley on the wound, then heat the cautery whose form is as follows:
After repeatedly cauterizing the area you have marked with a little bit of heat, let it scab over at that spot.
and the signs of healing in the work are when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs stand upright at the wound's length.
Then you lift your hand and let it be so for three days, then place soft cotton in butter as long as the cauterization site is closed. After applying ointment until it heals.
And after this when the hairs come in and the paper is softened then you resume the cauterization at that same place as before.
And if the hair is missing, cauterize until the papyrus is raised to its natural position and evenly distributed, so that it does not prick any more with the other hairs.
The fire of medical caustic is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and evenly, then make a parchment in the shape of bay leaves.
Then take French soap and fine salt, half a pound of each, and grind them together well; And make haste in doing it so that it does not become cold again, then fear on the form you have made similar to a leaf of myrtle, and place threads upon paper. And if the illness only resides in one part, work should be done therein, and likewise with both. And apply a piece of cotton cloth soaked in oil to the area.
And ensure the patient's head is steady and hold your two hands over the medicine, and gently press and massage every time the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, as it stings like fire.
When you have done so for some time, apply the appropriate medication to your wound. And when the stinging is gone, raise the bandage and check if it looks lifted as though by constraint of fire or cut. And if it occurs like this, then it is well done.
If not, reset the treatment at its place or if the treatment has not worked, continue until your efforts are equal and your eyes aimed correctly.
Then apply clean linen soaked in butter until the wound is closed, afterward treat the affected area with an ointment called "Dyaphena," and others, as long as it is healed.
And you must guard your treatment carefully to ensure that the eyes do not lose any of the medicine.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick at its edge, resume the treatment at that place properly, just as you did before. after the treatment until it is healed.
and this is the form of the leaf with myrtle:
And know that men's eyes vary in size and shape, and according to this be their constraints.
And let it not be returned on the right path for those who are students of this art.
On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and if your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary for you to perform cautery according to this method.
Command the patient to put his head in your hand. and instruct the assistant to place the master's head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or turn.
after, place soft cotton swabs in an eggcup or glass of lemon juice on the eye.
then heat the caustic which is ready:
And it is near the head as if of a bell-clapper shape, with the quill being the fire cautery.
If you observe it, if it is pointed from one head to the other, and if you see it, so it is as a tent.
However, this which is near the top must be moved for your operation.
After pressing the abscess if it is open, and treating any swelling, and drying out. And if it is closed, treat the wound, and apply heat to scars.
After applying hot caustic properly, and hold your hand to the caustic on the part without hair above the oil, so that your hands do not become foolish. And place the caustic in the fat of the oil, and let it fester.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be best. If not, repeat the caustic treatment once more, and if necessary, leave for three days;
After that, apply moist cotton in butter, and heal the dry ointment until it is healthy again, and if 40 days have passed without improvement, then apply corrosive medication until the bone is exposed. And follow accordingly as described in this chapter.
And there is a method of fire cautery for treating fistulas that none of the ancients mentioned. On touches the abscess, and feels its depth. Afterward insert the slender instrument with which is formed its shape: and they make it to the quantity of one ounce of lead; and hold your hand or instrument firmly, ensuring that the patient does not move so that the molten lead can flow into its cavity.
and it is necessary to place over the oil on the sickbed, cotton wool in an eggshell or bowl:
The lead fills up the hole of the abscess and heals it with marvelous healthiness.
And if the fistula has been healed by fire cautery as we have described, it is good. If not, if it needs to be administered by the needle and drawn back into place on the skin where properly located in its right place.
From cracks in the lips Often there occur lip cracks called "hairs," particularly in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small pointed cautery according to this method:
And quickly put it in those cavities as long as it flows out:
Afterward, cleanse the hole of pus until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the ear, or on the roots of the teeth, after causing decay and pus and is aged and becomes a fistula. And you treat it as we have said in sections, but it does not heal. Then it is necessary for you to apply the fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula. After opening or piercing the fistula, and hold your hand until the heat subsides at its source, and thereafter.
And do so twice as we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
And if treated thusly, it is good. And if not, it is necessary to discover its place and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in this chapter of the treatise.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but nothing works, then place the head of the ailing in their bed. After healing the fire cautery, its shape will come again later, place a wick on the tooth in such a way.
And insert the hot fire caustery into the gaps of the tooth, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth.
After releasing your hand, resume the caustery as you wish.
After filling the patient's mouth with saltwater pus, and letting it sit for an hour and a half.
And in such a manner that the tooth which was moving is firmly put back; and the softened gums are kept from further movement, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold or heat, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then there is need for cauterization according to two methods: And cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
The cauterization of butter is as follows: you take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or silver. After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, and applying grease to the wool, then place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until cooled.
Often do this until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that it is very soft wool and cotton in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron upon it until the heat comes to the union with the tooth.
The fire cauterization consists of such devices that you grasp with an iron or copper rod, and it is thick enough so that the heat does not reach to the mouth of the patient.
After heating the cauterization, so that its form will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization has cooled.
Do this often, because the pain will be reduced that same day or the next.
It is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of that fire cautery, and then let it flow.
And this is the form of the fire cautery:
And perform a cautery on the eyelid that you wish to do, and according to your ability.
And this is the form of the lancet:
the f h. Manze de lapeccest c's. When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold humors, and does not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the fire cautery as follows so that it comes in afterward, with two openings for the fumes to escape from the other part of the cautery.
and place the hot cautery over the abscess once or as often as necessary until it reaches the source of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to its size, and leave it as such for three days. And place on cotton soaked in butter until the swelling subsides;
Afterward, cleanse and dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When stones obstruct the ducts due to heat or particularly cold conditions, then it is necessary for the patient to first be purged with soluble medicines;
After performing the fire cautery at the root of the throat, ensure that you do not come near to the throat itself and let it burn only slightly;
After making the other fire cautery at the joint of the neck near the top of the spine, and it is called "clavi," as we have shown before.
And treat the joint as we have previously said until it is well positioned.
When all diseases of the pharynx are due to cold dampness, and the patient has no fever or thirst, and it is an early illness, then apply two fire cauteries on the lymph nodes behind your tongue. and another one at the point between the nipples.
and let the fire cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that is before mentioned.
And if you see it, make the fire cautery by touching all the one called "points" from which the form is here before mentioned in ear disease.
and let the points be up to thirty or near it.
After curing the joint as previously described, place the cautery with three dots according to this form.
And thus they are lighter cauteries because you make them of iii parts each.
Regarding shoulder joint dislocation.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, place the sickly on their backs and along their ribs. Afterwards, remove the key that is within the tight joint of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated internally, then heat the cautery that has two ends for shaping.
and cauterize the key until it reaches your ribs, then bring the shape of the cautery together with four cauteries.
and because it is made from the cautery that has three ends, thus the shapes of cauterization are these three cauteries.
and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the caturery that has three ends.
On any occasion it is touched upon this particular nerve, where there are seven cauterizations.
After applying the fire cautery, rub with salt mixed with fat; After allowing the patient to rest, and not moving their limbs for a long time until they are well supported.
And if it becomes dislocated above, little happens at first; then make a cautery on the thick part of the cauliflower bone or many dots close together.
For the joint is repositioned, and there is moisture in the bone and health returns to the patient.
When the stomach has many coldness and moisture so that it's removed from its nature, and there are multiple catharsis for him, along with usual treatment methods which do not help; then it should be made to lie supine on his back, stretching out his legs and hands. After this, then do three cauldrons on the left side of the hip for an amount equal to one double measure at each cautery point, and two cauldrons behind the two ribs until the marks from the cauteries are in a triangular shape, and have adequate spacing between them so that they do not merge when spreading.
and the cauldrons should be placed front to back so they prick both sides of the chest, and the marks from the caturers are according to this pattern without crowding.
And if you see a large fire cautery within the stomach according to this method;
And if one has fear of this fire cautery, perform it by poking and sign above the stomach at a specific spot according to the quantity you see thereof; Then cauterize with all the caustic substance called "points".
After the treatment of the fracture we have had before, until it is healed.
When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and distention, until it is removed from its natural state by excesses; and the patient is treated as we have described in sections, but it does not benefit them, so it must be ensured that they are supine on their side. and apply fire cauldrons in quantities of three according to this method, shape, and figure on the liver, avoiding the epigastric region where the edges of the lobes meet;
And there is space between each cautery, the growth of a thumb. and let the cautery be long and wide across the body, and do not squeeze too much at all the cautery site.
and let it burn only halfway down so that the patient's head may be upright, and make them lie on their side.
and if they cannot do so, let them be lying down, extend their legs, and lift their arms.
And if you wish to do so, if you are subtle and wise in the art, cauterize these cutaneous cauders, but be sure not to burn all of the head, for this would dry up the entire body. And it does not reach to boiling point, for the veins are very delicate in that place, and they swell as though to see.
When it is an abscess on the liver, and you must determine if it is in the fleshy part of the liver or in the tissue. If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
And if it is in the tissue, he feels unbearable pain.
And when this treatment requires bandaging, then one must lay the patient supine with their head raised;
And next, examine where the wound or abscess is located, and then heat the caustic which resembles iron filings, in this way: And with fire cautery up to when the core is scorched, and until the sphincter comes, so that the protrusion is fully retracted.
Afterward, according to the procedure of closing wounds until it is healthy again;
And only this type of cautery should be used by those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have spread at times.
Then he may hardly work, and in any case, it seems to me that one should let it move freely.
byrto:
The ancients said that one must make root cauteries with rhizome as follows: Take a rhizome root of Aristology long, the largest that you can find, and let it be dried, and also as thick and as long as your finger. And the flesh in oil, and grasp at the fire, and perform a cautery between the forelock and the neck, and small cauldrations slightly descending on the part that is below the beard.
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly inclined backward a bit. And one cautery in the middle of the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at both sides near the cauldration that is between the shoulder blades.
And do not tighten your hand too much, but make it open as in smelling.
And the ancient ones say that no man should use fire cauldrations resembling a barber's, and they warm it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess. And it jumps up the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this treatment there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula arises which cannot be healed.
The ancient ones said that no man should use a cautery resembling shaving, heat it and place it between the ribs until an abscess reaches; then there is relief from pain as we have described in liver abscess. But in this kind of treatment often fear or illness cause death immediately, or fistula appears that cannot be healed.
When treating the illness of epilepsy as we have said in the previous sections on treatments, and it proves effective, then there are three methods of cautery that all work well.
There is a way in which you make three or four cauterizations, arranging according to the length of the wound, following the liver cautery method we have mentioned before.
and do not press down with your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient lie on their back.
And another method of cauterization is to boil the one with two nicks, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation.
and lift the head which is where the wound edges come from the left side, and make the elevations of which you raise the head according to its size, following the body's length and width for the cauterization.
After placing two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced from the other side, and then apply the fire cautery, so there will be four in total.
And if you see it, cauterize all with the cautery at three nerves.
After the healing process has been ongoing for long periods, and this results in movements like those of previously mentioned treatments.
Caution does not pertain to hydrophobia, but rather to the manner called "esclitics".
When you treat as we have described in divisions and the cure does not work, then it is necessary to make four cauterizations around the buttocks, one on top of the stomach, one above the liver, one above the kidneys, two behind the back at the spine, and one spot on the genitals; And each cautery should be close to the region of pain in the core.
After leaving the open cautery for prolonged use, do not leave the patient's pain untreated afterward. And healing would hasten, and they shall together have two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the fire cautery for the belly is shown by us before. and that one for the back be olive-shaped, as it was previously set here.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and filled with pale yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back between the little finger and the ring finger. and lift your hand with a turning of the cautery.
And do not go too far in, so it would shrink the clear yellow fluid, and let the cautery be according to this method.
Afterward, perform two cauteries on each leg at the point of the calf muscle; and let one cautery be long, one behind the thigh beforehand and another further down, in between the leg.
And leave the burns to heal for a long time until they break open;
After treating other wounds as we have mentioned.
When the solution of a swollen belly comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines have burst forth, and cannot be treated by usual methods. and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, then do a large fire cautery on the stomach as described here before or the cautery of the stomach, where the cautery circulates. and four subtle cauteries around the belly with all sharp cauteries, and two on the groins.
And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the palm, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids
When bunions are at their foundation, or one or more, and they are ancient and filled with large cold and damp corrupted humors, and treated as we have said in sections, then it does not help if you do not apply fire cautery. For the spine of the back, which is a little forward and forward in triangle, apply fire cautery below the vertebrae two.
And if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees swelling of the face, then apply a large fire cautery to the stomach as before mentioned, and another on the liver, and another with a piercing cautery over all. And leave the fire cautery on for long periods of time. After curing the joint until it is sound.
When you come to the eyebrow, if the hair is short and sparse, then ignite the fire over it, and set it all aflame where the eyebrows are placed. and leave your hand as well as the caustic to touch the opening of the vein, so that the blood does not clot.
do this once or twice, and if there are many eyebrows, cauterize each as we have said. after applying healing ointments until they become healthy.
and if you use a large caustic on the eyelid, it will have more benefit.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, we will tell you in its place about a disease that cannot be healed but by cautery.
When there is an abscess and it becomes old and rotten with decay and corrupted moisture, you should thoroughly explore the entire area, and be aware of all aspects within that area.
After igniting the caustic that appears sparse, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that has entered inside it, and continue with the caustic until the corrupted or decayed body is healed, once, or twice, or three times, depending on how much is needed.
And watch for inflaming of the nerves present therein, and large veins.
If the abscess leads to the bladder and intestines, watch for these slits, and do not perform this further when fully developed, but think that it is not true perforations.
After treating the wound until it is cleaned out, and if the slits are filled with pus, and the materials have been long gone, then declare that the slit has healed completely.
And if the materials have not been removed, determine that the wound is overfilled, and corruption occurs in the bone at its base. And thus as one of these which we mention within it.
When the pain of cold comes as rain and heavy windiness, and does not take interest in women, then one must make a cautery on both sides with the pointed caustic iron that we have previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize it completely, there will be three cauteries in a line, and this will provide greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is swollen and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient holds in urine, then you must make a cautery on the part behind it near the bladamoignon where hairs begin to grow, one to the right, one to the left, and each as long as our pace.
and you shall make I cautery along the back, or two if needed in that area.
And perform the clavicular cauldrons according to the previously mentioned form.
When the phlegm is cold and damp, it does not allow for conception, and the seeds are corrupted and their ends delay. and when they come, there is great pain: then it must be done as we have said with three cauldrons around the bladder and two cauldrons forward of the back.
And perform the clavicular cauldron as we have mentioned.
When the viscid drops descend to the hip bone sac, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
And the hinges of departure are found, it is necessary that you causticate the patient on the hip socket with a cautery resembling a circle, and place it so that the socket turns as if in a circle, ensuring the socket is within the circle.
And the caustication should be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these caustications are not present, use three olive-sized caustics and make the caustic as broad as any of them.
And apply until it is properly healed.
From the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from coldness and moisture, the patient has been treated as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old. Then it is necessary for you to purge the patient of excess humors with foul pills or other good-smelling pills. After performing the fire cautery;
and there are two ways to do this cautery as follows: That is to say, together with burning medications, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery comes in many ways, among which one kind is such:
that you perform three triangular cautions according to this shape on the thigh bag, with good depth and size, and leave enough space between each caution as big as a bean;
never make the caution in the middle of the thigh, because there are four according to this shape:
And if you see it, use the fire cautery at the circle we have previously mentioned in the shoulder dislocation.
But do so that the circle contains the entire shoulder, and all sides are smoothed out.
And this is the method used for sciatica when the pain is in the thigh and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make the fire cautery at the place where the patient says the pain is, and apply four small cauteries above the ankle on the left side.
and it should be a surgical fire cautery, and trim down the thickness of the edges.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers' width from the sole of the foot or near it, then make the fire cautery at where they feel the pain three times or four times on what is called "points" cauterization. And if surgery is needed, if there are more problems;
And if it is known that the pain extends from the groin to the thigh, then you shall perform a caustery or circular cauterization with a heated iron and take good care in all your cauteries not to harm either the nerves or large arteries, ensuring no further distress or contraction for the patient.
And I have seen some who made cauterizations above the ankle on the foot, and they rested until the entire leg was consumed by it, with the feet in a similar condition, which were pierced and all the flesh corrupted. After a treatment of belly where there was death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire treatment on one and the other according to this manner.
And the sage advises in the cautery of the haunch: make an iron rod as large as a small nail or slightly smaller, and it should be spaced apart so that the quantity between each is equivalent to the length of a pea.
And let there be hooked pivots over two parts, and they are also like nails, with one iron handle well made.
and it is the form:
And let it be cooled until all is red and blistered without moisture, then place it under the box of the bad elbow joint, and turn it towards the strong side.
and apply the cautery once with a fire-cautery and leave for three days; then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound exposed for long periods. after the treatment with salve until it is healed.
Albuquerque says that we seldom use this type of cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few practice it.
And indeed this is of good cauteries, which can suffer it, and where it presses into.
The cauterization of medicine by fire is such that you make an instrument with pincers to descend the edge of the wound, and it should be made of iron or brass of one width, and in height have II (2) notches, and between each have the amount of the thickness of a thumb. And they are to be above-cut and below, and joined together according to this shape:
After placing the bag of the thigh above the patient lying on his good side, and press your hand much upon the bag of the thigh. After pouring between the II circles of the hot iron which is heated in the fire a bit, and let it remain for an hour at a time, and cause the patient to suffer the heat and burning from them.
In its place, there is a burning pain like from fire;
And when the mordication is completed, gently lift the limb with the instrument and raise it softly, leave so for three days, and apply butter until what appears black from bruising turns white. And let it remain strained for three days to heal properly;
This is the final aid after applying ointments until it becomes healthy.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make an instrument similar to what you did for the limb evenly;
This is how one makes a warm poultice, which I have written or treated in the treatise of medical correction. Take soda and quicklime, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put into a new jar. When there is a small opening not fitting, so that the point of an arrow may enter.
When there is a small opening not fitting, so that the point of an arrow may enter. And put on him who can be well bandaged, and apply honey, salt, and soft warmth upon it, so that after two days you have thoroughly prepared the powders.
And leave it thus until it exudes pus and can be well bandaged, then take all the warmth, and pour it upon salt and alkali as before.
And when this is very pus-filled, it will be treated with the bread of medicinal ointments and other members' fire cauterizations.
Because it does other work as fuses, and with other medicines that one well-cauterizes the joints as in syrup and honey of cashew nuts and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells of a case where a gentleman was healed from ankle pain and sciatic nerve, which greatly troubled him; and said that no other treatment was given to it but with this cure, and the patient recovered once for all when this cure was done as instructed hereafter.
And he said in that manner you pluck the fresh and dry lettuce leaves, and crush them well with a little fat, and apply to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and wrap.
And let it remain for three hours or until the amount that the sick person no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then he makes him take a bath until the body is somewhat revived, and he makes him enter bed, and the pain will go away entirely and be soothed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery with such remedeby unless after the evacuation of bodily fluids.
And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat fat candles, it greatly helps.
and it must be done as follows: Take the bandage and moisten it with old oil, and place it over the hollow that is between the thumb and forefinger, which are called foscile.
After taking goat fat seco, and holding it in fire until it becomes ashes, and then applying to the wool, and leaving it until it is completely burnt out.
and do this again in the same way, and continue doing so until you think by touch that it reaches to the hip, and the pain is gone.
And these methods of cautery are called "cauterization by goat.
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar matters of cold substance spreading, none of these cases call for fire cauterization; rather it is for those who have an influx of cold matter.
After the patient has been relieved of foul pills or similar things, make three lines marked with crosses on their back where they feel pain, and in each line, make V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
And the cauterizations should be done as per "points" type of cauterization;
And if you see it, make III cauteries or IIII at the midpoint of the clavicle in this manner:
Often this disease comes to young children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a narrow waist when they sit up, and fear. And you find it at the last spine of the back, with its appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this wound and observe it healing, then cauterize with a caustic cautery according to the following method. If the cautery can be used for each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, using a fire caustic around the spine with a needle pricking two or three lines, and be the points near each other.
After healing the limb so that it is smooth according to what we have said, and beware not to perform caustic in a spot where there are nerves.
For pain of the joints
When joint pains are from moistness that has spread to every part of the body, and when pain comes on in the feet, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and remedies cannot heal it, then it is treated with cauldrons as follows:
Make the mouth of the cauldron around the joint of the foot, and let the cauldron be olive-shaped as follows:
And if it is necessary to grasp above the face of the foot, make the caustic across all the area you claim "no point. And if the pains come up to the knee and other joints, which happens often, then make cauldrons on each third (III) or fourth (IV) of every part, with all the olive-shaped cauldron.
And if you need more, do so, but do not hold your furred hand until the point is bent.
And if the pains extend to the knees and back, administer the fire cautery as we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if pain is in the hands, make points around the small lines twice.
and if there is no more pain in the fingers, make points above each joint and on the hand's hair;
and if pain comes near the edges or shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care to the patient and give them appropriate remedies.
For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healthy with God's help.
When inflammation comes between the fingers and they swell down to the knuckles anew, it is necessary that when you see them healed, you do not use the affected hand for a day. And use things that stimulate the belly, so that the fetus descends from its abdomen.
After the child has sat on its back between your hands, and command it to warm its ankle until the vein is repaired, and bend the joints at your wrists, and insert fingers into the ear canal, as if making half of a circle above the body.
Then prepare the fire cauldrone whose shape is this:
until it is white and secretes serum. Then reset the veins to their place; And let the minister warm his hand so that it does not return backward;
Work well on the patient's thighs and place a pillow and bandage under them, and another over the buttocks where he warms his hands.
Then place the cautery over the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach on the first attempt, try again another time until you get to the bone. and be careful that the boil does not burst when making the cautery. so you do not burn it. and by this, the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is of no value.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for large people also appropriate to their size.
After three days heal the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed.
After treating with other salves until it is healed, and apply 40 drops of oil to the patient's back as long as the wound is properly closed.
And it is necessary for his extremities to be well-stretched, so that the veins do not protrude when he attempts to stand and walk into a room.
And after ninety days, when he wishes to get up, prepare him with well-made bandages and keep them on for another ninety days.
And he should have good rest, work little, and avoid excessive drinking and eating, as well as too loud shouting.
And when this teaching is completed, it will be entirely healed.
And I will now describe the treatment of tailor in this chapter.
When ulcers come in other bodies and are known to him, and you see that they no longer grow, he makes a fire cautery according to the amount needed, and it should be one-third of their size. Afterward, as we have said;
and none of the old ones have said that it should be cauterized with fire caustics at three angles according to this form:
But mark the first incision and draw a line for width above the tumor, and another below it, and keep your hand steady during the entire procedure of the scalpel blade.
However, the first incision is lighter and easier to make.
from old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective; then it must be treated with cautery called 'poins', which should be applied according to the length, size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and its pain.
if it is safe after the first cautery, it is well;
if not, start another cautery on that one, because it is customary for the affected member to heal where it is close, so it must be done with caustics until the patient recovers safely.
The measures have been eased at times by caustics greatly; especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
If you can see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning and has been treated according to what we have said in division, and neither descends nor ascends, and you doubt that corruption will infect the whole body, then make five caustics on its head: I insert the knife at the nape of the neck, and the other towards the forehead near the ends of the hairs. And it goes behind the two horns, and then in front of the occipital bone.
And let the hand rest so that the cautery reaches just to the bone, and as long as scabs form on it, such that the vapors of thick humors can escape.
And then cauterize around the wound according to what is in front.
And if the infestation is scattered everywhere; And it is clearly evident, therefore you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned above: and the first of them at the collarbone, and another two on the spine down the neck, and six along the spine of the back, one large one on the loins and another near it, and two on each shoulder. and two on the elb cuisses, and two on the tendons of the feet, one over each joint in hands and fingers, and above the palm pits.
and beware of the veins that lie behind them, do not burn them.
and never perform a cautery on the bone of the wrist, nor one on the bone of the stomach, nor another on the liver.
And know that the more you perform cautery on it, the more you help it heal, and the better it benefits.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy ones do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
And it must be that cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in handling iron tools.
After curing him of his illness with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until he is healthy again.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healthy, then you perform cautery on the limb according to its size and magnitude.
and make the cautery a little incision near where the swelling is. then treat it with ointments until it becomes healthy.
And never perform cautery and on the hand or foot or back, at the site where the nerve moves the limb, and thus is swelling present.
And in any case, it does not interfere with anyone unless one is familiar with the members and the pathways of moving nerves within the body.
When the disease known as "albaras" is old and medical remedies are of no avail, then cauterize with a hot iron somewhat superficially, according to the amount of heat desired such that the blister is raised, and its color changes.
Then apply a poultice of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with the blood of conies and that of swans, each in equal parts. And mix everything together well, bind it with a cloth, and apply heat to the area until it is healed.
The treatment of ulcers through cauterization
When a cancer begins to develop, if you wish to stop it, cauterize with the cautery in the form of a circle all around the tumor.
And yet, wise ones say to make a fire cautery like with gonorrhea.
And yet, I do not think it is good either, for I have seen that it can become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to use it before.
A more correct thing is that they should be treated with fire inside, the caustic called "circulation", as we have said in many of caustics.
When some have an illness called "adubaillite", which causes them to die quickly or due to the excess it produces or from the sickly appearance when they are elderly and have little blood, or for their time. And you will see him hastening to die. Then, accordingly caulk around with many small cauterizations by pricking; After that, leave it so. It will delay dying.
And if you see the entire area with caustics, heat the area where the shape is:
And insert your hand into the illness called "adubelati" until you feel the heat of the cautery, and make such cauteries that the sick person feels behind in a way that the course of purification is adjusted accordingly.
Afterwards treat it until it becomes perfectly healthy.
Another way of illness there is called "corrodens," and it's nothing but a mixture in the limb, because it eats away at the members as dry wood does with flames.
If you see this disease in place that may suffer caulking with fire together, then soak the caulk both small and large as required by where the ailment or location is.
After caulking all parts until you have removed the entire corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all which is corrupted be pulled out as bone.
And then let it rest for three days, and apply poultices with oil until the burns from fire are healed, and all the corruption is gone.
After applying the ointment causing heat.
And if after three days no fresh flesh appears, this is good;
and if not, then resume caulking over what remains of the corrupted veins.
And this mengeison is sometimes treated with cold medicines at the site of fire cautery.
However, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already discussed the treatment with cold medicines in its application: Take what you need.
Cords or strings that come to the fingers Often there occurs that in the feet, from behind, a disease emerges which we call "closed," and it is a large growth that afflicts the foot.
And the cautery for this illness is done in two ways. It is known as fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is such that you should heat it like an earthen cone and make it of good iron to pierce the nail entirely, and that it has subtle edges.
After heating all around the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it feels cool at the tip of the namen. and leave it as such for three days until it begins to develop pus. Then make an emplaster of well-ground barley soaked in water, and leave the poultice on throughout the night, then the thorn will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the joint with an ointment until it is sound again.
And if they are turned to the back of the body and often occur in hands and feet, it is necessary that you treat with a hot water cautery. and it happens this way: Take a vessel of pitch or iron, or the edge of a spade, and place it on the thorn and its sheath, that is to say for warts: and place the vessel so that it covers all around, then put a bit of hot water in it, hold your hand steady, and press with your hand while turning so that the edge of the vessel reaches to the root of the thorn, allowing the hot water to reach deep down to the root:
And suffer the patient a little from the biting of hot water for an hour. Then leave it so, and it will peel off completely at all its roots.
Thus do another after another, until you relieve all those that are in the body; then treat with anointments of fat.
When anyone shivers from coldness or fever of a quarter day or other, it is fitting that you make four cauldrons on the backbone of their lower back, one between each vertebra. and one at the chest as an olive cauldron;
it will leave them shivering, and their health from the cold disease will be restored.
At no time is it apparent before the body has bathed or pustules filled with foul matter coming from large corrupted materials.
if it is necessary in the first instance that you appear to make cauldrons above each head of the pustule:; A subtle fire cautery made of mister wood, where the tip is taken hold in flame, or from a long aristolochia root, or with a lenticular caustic.
And never apply a caustic at the beginning when they see it this way, and nothing can grow from there forward, but excess tissue is removed where it comes.
But it must be done after blood evacuation.
Many times there are great consequences of blood from an artery that is cut at the wound coming to the periphery, or in the incision of an abscess, or with a member caustic, and similar things. And it is a very grave thing to stop flowing.
Whenever this occurs with anyone, quickly place your index finger over the vein wound, and strain it very much until the blood has calmed under your finger, and no more oozes out.
Then apply fire to various small and large herbal cauterizations until they are all red;
Then take iron (I), either large or small depending on the wound and its location where the vein is cut, place the caution near the vein while holding your finger, and keep the caution in place until the bleeding stops.
And if it leaps away when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the caustic is extinguished, then quickly take another from those heated near the fire.
And continue doing so one after another until the bleeding has stopped;
And beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and let no other harm come to the patient.
And you know that when a vessel is cut without severing an artery, it cannot be properly sutured on its own if the artery is large unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned. Or through cauterization, or by extraction if it is not treated in another way, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying remedies that have the power to stop bleeding. And thus tied and strained as needed.
Who will provide the tight binding with cloths or burning substances on it, or other similar things, if there is no good result.
And if it happens to anyone and they have no remedy or medicine on hand, then they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stopped above the wound and the vein. And it should not move, but apply cold wetness often enough that is very cold until the blood has congealed and thickened and rehardened.
And make incisions as necessary for cauterization and application of medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and applications of ointments, plasters, powders, and forms of cauterizations.
And I have placed that chapter regarding the upper body up to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that it can be read more easily as desired.
And so as I begin this section, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cauterization, and therefore greater care is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision for an abscess, treatments for wounds, extraction of arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things. When there is doubt and fear, death comes to many.
And I advise you not to undertake foolishness. For many methods of treatment come from people's experiences. If it comes from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they easily perish due to the severity and intensity of their sickness. And one should have fear for these.
And among them are those who give up hope, and they say: "Wait, I am healed; And the illness is resistant.
It is not fitting for you to heed those who come seeking your aid with this manner of affliction, but rather put greater trust in your honor than in self-interest, and do not act rashly, but carefully from what you are certain and can reasonably acquire.
And employ prognosis and guidance in treating your patients to where health is restored.
And this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and memory among the people.
Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as I discussed in the previous chapter about cautery, from head to feet, so that you may find more easily what you need.
Say that this illness often arises in children during birth, and when too much force is applied to the child's head.
and never comes from a reason unknown to us.
And I have never seen this disease occur outside of children, and in all those cases death was swiftly upon them. and therefore it seems to me that I should focus more on early treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water and the skull grew larger each day until it could no longer be supported.
And it was so much moisture that they died, and this moisture is gathered from under the bone above the shoulder blade, between the flesh and the bone.
And such treatments are this: when the moisture is between the flesh and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you shall make a wide incision into the head.
And it should be as long as we tell you, until the moisture recedes.
and here is how to shape the splint:
If there is excessive moisture, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross, following this form:
And if the moisture is from under the bone, and the signs that you see are openings on each side of the head, and the liquid gushes out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not restore them: If it is necessary, you must make two cuts within the head as follows:
And after the incision, all moisture is removed completely. After making the gashes for bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave as such until the fifth day.
Then let it heal, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be properly aligned and have the patient consume dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision involves examining whether there are any signs of an abscess or pus collection.
because it should never be present. also, it should never be behind. and not on the right side either. And never to the left side.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens and fill with water, and follow accordingly as much as you are able.
and be careful not to obstruct the artery; and watch for blood flowing out, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and has been present for some time, and medical treatment proves ineffective, then the subsequent remedy is the fire cautery with which one ties off the two arteries.
It is then necessary, when you see it obstructed, that the patient raises his head backward; after rubbing the area with an abrasive cloth until the arteries appear, then pull out all of the patient's collar with it. then look where the vein is above, and both sides are behind the ears, and few return to them;
Then sign the ends of the bone, then wrap one and the other with a strip of linen about two fingers wide, as long as it reaches the bone, and cut across broadly at the head.
And if you see this, take the gut strip off from above the artery and tie it upwards as two fingers across.
And when the vein is opened, let it bleed continuously upwards.
And if the arrow does not open upon feeling, it is necessary to measure three fingers' space and then apply a tourniquet up to the bone.
and that much blood to be poured out if it is six ounces or so, depending on what the patient can endure, and the pressure in the artery.
then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without an exit channel, and no abscess forms within, then bandage the wound tightly and cleanse with ointment until healed.
And when infection until is gone: let it up to cease; sirop dressez it syphon, and sew on after aseepistressure; as it untie the wound to treat with the syring. When migraine occurs early and with acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old headache, and medicine by methods of medical treatment does not help at all, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have demonstrated.
The method of extracting them is such that the patient braids his hair from the temples and listens to the artery opened in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and heals quickly like some people who are too cold.
If it heals, the patient should stretch their neck with some cloths, then rub the head with a rough towel, and apply warm water until the artery is clearly visible. Then take the spatula as follows: Then lightly scrape the skin until you find the artery, then cut it at the nipples, and separate cleanly into pieces from each part.
And if the arrow is slender, turn it to the point of the hook, then wrap that part with a bandage according to the quantity of two fingers. If it is not coped with, then there will be no relief at all for the wound.
And track down six pints of blood until three;
And if the arrow is large, it must be tied with two loops of strong silk thread to prevent rotting at the wound site and bleeding as it heals.
Then bandage the excess between the two loops with it at that same time, and then, if you see, use a cutting caustic until the bones are exposed.
This is the final work, as long as the patient does not have a fever and is of a warm constitution. The fire cautery is used to finish up dampness: For this reason, it is of greater help with dampness.
Or when one must extract the artery, let them fill up that place with old cotton and put it under well-made slits.
And when they are to be removed, then use dry medicines that produce heat and slits until it is healthy.
And if from the artery there is much bleeding as you do so, then hasten to cover it with cautery, wherein you employ old urine and strain your hand that the wound be cleansed. And if you do not have this on hand, then lay it there until the bleeding is clotted, and place cold water over that area until the bleeding stops, and strain as necessary.
And it must have a space between the two blades, and when you are ready to use them, heat both blades until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two parts. And be sure to separate them between the two sides because this fire cautery is not suitable for all cases.
and here is the form of the fire cautery:
And the one who is skilled and more agile in extracting arteries should use this fire cautery blade sharp on two sides, but the edge must be well honed to maintain heat longer. When inflammations are too prolonged, they retain less heat.
Of tears When the tears of the eyes descend from veins located on the forehead above the eyebrows, and it does not benefit from any medicinal remedy applied there, you see the face of the sick person turn red, and their forehead tremble like with fear. And those wounds that are kept wet and warm so that the papers (skin) dry out, become swollen, and scorched from the heat of tears, if this treatment is needed. And they called the ancient "contusion treatment", and so you make it over to the patient with this condition who has hair on his forehead, then you make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead.
And they called the ancient "contusion treatment", and so you make it over to the patient with this condition who has hair on his forehead, then you make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead. and one of the incisions shall be like two fingers width into the forehead sloping down to the bridge (of the nose), and the others shall be twice a finger's breadth above the skin, being careful not to incise the arteries that are also twice a finger's breadth above the skin.
And remove your hand from the extension of the two jaws, so that each wound is as much as three fingers in width.
And have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then apply the sterile dressing with two parts of which this shape is.
From the incision that extends from the temple down to the second incision; And scrape off all the core that is between the two openings and remove it entirely from the sac which is above the bone, then make another section with the middle incision down to the other second, and then extract this sterile dressing. If you insert the instrument called "culteral" into the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side but on the other side is smooth, not cutting. And that's its form:
And cut the ribs towards the chest near the curve, and make them smooth toward the bone, and push until it reaches the middle crack.
And remove all vessels that arise from the head until the incision is continuous to where the core opens, and then make another section in the middle opening down to the other end.
Then remove the blood evenly, and express the site for the taken blood.
Then place in each wound a tent of fine cotton, and cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring that abscesses do not form.
and after three days leave the wound open, then apply a large amount of clean water, and treat with basil oil balm, and other remedies used for treating wounds, until it is healthy again.
When certain come with hardened habits, and you see the eyes swoln and small, and blurred vision, and burnt papers. and the hair falls out, and they have pain all over their head, and the patient sneezes. Then you can say from these occurrences that those matters and the catarrh come only from various winds, and the moistener must treat there where it is.
And it is for you to instruct the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut near the center of the forehead, and another wide open hole. And begin with an incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut until the bone. and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move during eating.
and when the bone is exposed, let all blood flow into an absorbent sponge, then place thread between both edges of the incision and apply lint. then cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and protect from hot abscesses.
when it is ossified, one must rub the bone until healing begins, then treat with things that expel pus, encouraging new flesh to form.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of cinnamon, and make an ointment. And apply it to these wounds to heal them completely.
Of ear blockage
All that which flows from the ears is one of four things: either grains, or beasts, or stones like iron, or similar substances. or seeds, such as peas, lentils, and beans. or substances that flow like water and easily pass, similar to other things.
When it falls into the ear as a stone or any other matter that does not reside in the ear, and grows not within the ear, then place the ear against the sun.
If you see a stone, and if it secretes any purple oil or frankincense oil, then perform an extraction. and if it is a condition causing sneezing, then clear the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place cloth or wool between the ears. And they raise the ear above.
Often healing comes from this treatment;
and if it does not come about, prepare the delicate extraction of splinters, for there is the procedure:
If it comes from the splinters, that is good;
if not, prepare the delicate extraction of small wire-thorns;
and if it does not come out from there, make a grain of tar and pour the head of the gadfly or hole of the ear strongly, then stuff with wool around the grain so that he cannot enter with the gadfly. then treat it firmly, as often as we have said it comes about.
And if it does not come in any way, take linseed which is used for the eyes, and place on some instrument sharp enough to do so, and put some cotton around. Then press the lens onto the stone or any other object, and grind it down further.
And if it does not decrease from all the things we have said, hurry to cut an ear where blood may appear and swelling occurs.
and the manner of cutting should be that you first treat the patient's headache, and draw out blood according to its power, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the root of the ear near the fat or tissue. And it is the cut as like a crescent until you reach the bone, then according to your ability, and quickly suck the shard into your mouth.
And apply the treatment until it heals properly.
And if there are stones present and they swell, then arrange for their removal;
and if it cannot be removed naturally, make a gentle incision following this method: and make an incision in that grain of sand.
But do not attempt this when you think the stone is wet due to earwax, until you have made many attempts.
then extract carefully with tweezebar and a suction device, as we have said before, to ensure the extraction is successful.
In this case then when it comes to the ear, the patient should practice initial sneezing of conditions, and fill the ear with old cotton. And lie down on the same ear where the water is present. If it comes out strongly like this, it's good.
if not, then take many pieces according to the length of your instrument and lightness, and warm them slightly over fire. And place the patient a poultice from his ear, and it rises up in him. From his feet on the other side, and pierces another stone above the one that is in the ear. And it continues to move from stone to stone as long as the water has passed all through, and thus it flows completely.
And if you see this, take a reed, and put one of the heads into the ear, and the other head through fire until the thinner reed has burned.
Then make others from different reeds as long as water passes through, just as we have said in the stone.
In extracting the beast, if it is of small stature like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division.
But if it is of a large body so it can be felt, then arrange for drainage with probes. and this is the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the removal of worms from the ears, as we have instructed in the section on treating distillations, and if the remedy does not work, then you must examine the ear in sunlight. if there are no worms, use fine probes, and if they don't appear, take the hornlike material that is present.
And it should be narrow at the base and wide above. And insert the finer part in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient has, then proceed similarly with all the material. Perform this often until all wounds are healed.
And if they do not obey in leaving, then stop around the edge of the cloth as I have instructed with stones.
and if they do not exit as we have said, then administer dilutions that the ancients have tried with arrow wounds, and you will find or treat with dilutions.
and if you distill your oils and medicines into this instrument in the ear, thus is its shape as you see it here. And made of silver or brass without small holes and above openings for distillation;
And to apply pressure on the distillation with an arsenic instrument well-made for this purpose, and if you see rust and wind around the tip immediately wrap in cloth. Then pour on your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the jar, and let it be applied to the ear.
Then stuff the syringe with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is dripping or seeping from the ear. And let it scent the patient inside, and be the distillation of drops heated in fire just as one would distill it into the ear. And keep that it is not too cold, for the medicines would not be so good otherwise.
Of ear blockage
No child is born without any hairs on their ears.
And this same thing happens in adults by the outpouring of a wound or moisture inside the ear, and these outpourings come from time to time into the ear if it is not visible.
At no time does one fail to find relief with poultices, and they see very well improvement.
Therefore if one comes by it and cannot see, it is of serious healing in various conditions, and where it must be that you place the patient's ear to the sun. and look inside: if you see apparent swelling, then the work is all in this area of which it has form:
And be sharp and cutting before and behind completely flat, such that it does not bend the ear.
if the swelling is of chancre or body of the ear, take it with subtle pinchers and cut lightly until all bone is removed.
And if distillation is partially in the ear, take a light and subtle razor blade and shave it slightly over fire, then place or adjust the part of the ear.
If you feel the obstruction of which the patient feels pain in hearing, puncture lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place a dressing in the ear according to the size of the puncture, and apply ointment with Egyptian balm. Do not do this for any day until the wound is healed, or you take a dressing and apply ointment with rosewater, and powder it with white lead.
And if the ear starts to protrude, it is necessary that you change the dressing and apply another greasy dressing made of rose oil and wax until the swelling subsides. Then continue treatment until it becomes healthy again.
When bleeding persists, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remed cuing to stop the blood flow which are used for treating dropsy.
This paper linen that comes from hairs when they are wet and dry, it must be stretched with tongs and pincers, and the root of a spatulaceous leaf. Then place them under the lead acetate solution.
And if they do not decay, then you may causticate with the fine lentil-shaped caustic and apply the burn after making an incision;
and many times heal, for nothing remains attached to their roots. and when they are causticated by fire, those roots burn and do not return.
Of chalk Often paper linen appears with things that seem icy in form and hardness, and so this disease is called "hailstorm," and it is an accumulation of moisture large above and below the paper. The work consists of these things:
The work consists of these things: Take care that if hail falls from both sides, and it is an easy thing to know;
Then make the slits wide apart, then gently scrap each part, then grasp with tweezers, and bandage it.
If you cannot cover it without slightly piercing the paper, nothing will harm the patient;
And if the split is large, then stitch it with a thread, and heal until it is cleaned. ;
And if it is small, do not exert any pressure, as the ointments will restore it quickly and cause irritation; ;
And if the hail is descending into the inner ear toward the upper part, reverse the paper and extend the hailstones with tweezebrushings, then bandage it on both sides firmly. ;
If the paper is displaced by incision, it causes no harm.
And when the large abscess is opened, cleanse with salty water and treat the area until the patient recovers fully.
From the fat of the eyes Epiphora is an oily discharge that occurs under the skin of children and rare adults, causing great eye pain, leading to redness in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
Therefore, they sleep with their faces downwards, lying on their backs, and the swelling covers their moist eyelids, altering the appearance of the epiphora in the oil. And when you press the head with your hands and feel pressure between them.
And the manner of treatment is such that the patient rests their head on a support.
and then take a cloth of flax, and tailor it into a tent shape according to the size needed for each part, then place it over him. and press with your hands on both sides so that the parts come together within the circle.
then make a slit in the membrane with a sharp scalpel, and it should not be wider than the wound made on the vein's sheath.
and cut through to reach the dislocated bone as needed. and in various positions, the dislocation comes from the slit, resembling a white fatty tissue fragment.
Remove it now by grabbing a piece of torn cloth between your thumb and index finger at the dislocation, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread.
And ensure that you do not press into the gap, and move your hand all along the bone up to the end, without touching it.
And if there is swelling at the beginning of the gap, gently push into the gap slightly until it appears.
Then remove as we have said, then wet cloths for ease and cooling, place it on the area, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who crush stones and place them there to destroy that moisture which has been lodged there.
Then the healer works until it is sound again.
And if an abscess comes to heat at that place, then the healer treats with plasters until it is sound again.
Of hair from parchment papers When hairs grow other than naturally and become old, they harm the eyes, causing diseases as tears are accustomed to and softening of the skin and pus formation, until it is due to the destruction of the eyes.
And there are four methods of treatment: Or by fire and lancet together according to what precedes or the chapter on cautery, and it is done either through incision and suturing or with bandages, as I will describe.
It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil into your left hand.
if it flows well, that is good; if not, let her pour an arrow through all the thread at once; and be it near the edge of the paper or hairs sprout from there among these hairs, then draw the thread through all over the paper and turn it to smooth.
then cut into the area below the paper, away from the hairs closest to it, covering all the shining part from the large to the small notch.
First remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton or linen underneath the paper, then press down on the paper with a mold similar to a lime bell, so that it should also be according to the quantity you see rising in the paper which is visible at all times.
And if there is a part that requires cutting off a great quantity of paper according to how the paper becomes moistened.
then make all the fatty tissue beneath the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large ridge up to small. and let there be a division near the natural hair growth at the root of the swelling, then insert the needle into one of the two corners as seen, then scrape it all.
Then join the two lips with a stitch from a needle using one thread of fine wool yarn, and bleed the blood, and trim any excess threads around both eyebrows as you do so.
And if not, then pay it no heed, leave the stitch and threads until three or four days have passed.
Then treat the wound without removing any dried or tightened stitching materials, as the paper will loosen with the pressure of the wound and healing, but the stitches are movable (as say the ancients), which requires careful work. And if by another method:
And if by another method: It is that you shape the paper as if it were like the skirt of a rosemary bush, as we have described, removing three or four lines every three days according to the form shown here:
Then follow those who ascend with small, evenly matched strengths according to the form here shown.
If you cannot hold the tongs, and things are not equal, take a needle or wire of any kind, and place it in the wound. And thread another line up to the great gash, and a second line down to the small one, and join together between the two lines evenly.
Then lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin over which you have marked, as we have described, then stitch together both edges of the wound with sutures, until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerotype and similar soothing ointment.
And sometimes the hair of the skin is converted:
If it is necessary to use what we have said about making an incision.
However, the suture on either side is more artificial.
The treatment of abscesses should be as follows: and that you convert the paper and stretch it out thinly as I have instructed, then make abscesses by skillful technique, with fine ligatures as long as the paper and the width of the gauze. and bind as two sides where you hold the threads.
then carefully join the top part to that of the oil paper, and tie the two abscesses with fine ligatures. and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that has been stretched will wither, dry up, and shrink until it tightens on its own.
If it delays, if the cap is affected by forces, then treat until it becomes whole again.
And when the wound heals quickly, and if there are no more papery edges, and hair cannot grow anymore.
This is the form of two sticks that you will make according to this shape, and according to this length and width.
The techniques are such that you should use a fine needle, and wind silk thread delicate and subtle. Then connect the heads and carefully wrap one around the other subtly, making the length of the threads a span long.
Then arrange another delicate silk thread quickly in the sheath and wind it with the first string.
Then place your patient's head on a clean cloth.
And be close to the sun so that the procedures can be explained clearly, as they are subtle and small tasks. Then insert the needle into all sides at the root of the hairs nearing its end, and pierce it quickly through the paper with care until you work along above the natural hairline;
Then extract the hair down to its base, and insert it into the hole, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then remove your hand as soon as the hairs reach all sides into the hole with the natural hairline.
And if the hole is treated and hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the hole apart by all threads that you have ordered, until the hole appears through and you can see it with the oil of your eye.
Once you draw the bowstring and line up the arrow, clip the oil and let it stay clipped for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and a callus forms over the wound.
And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from the scalp naturally occurring, and elevate it as you have left it, until they lengthen, then remove it.
Of the inflammation of the eye When this disease known as "aleacrati" occurs in the joint, there are two ways it can happen:
one natural and the other unnatural.
And it happens through sudden wounds, or cuts, or fire-cauterization, and by similar things.
And in its treatment, the method is to split that welded joint, separate the lips of it, and insert linen tentacles into it, leaving them until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use all methods of treatment for things that dry up and tighten. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before;
but work with things that soften, such as fennel; and rosewater or boiled water and flaxseed seeds are cooked, and unguents mixed with any of the oils, and these wrap around a tent, and treat this.
And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that you do not bind it in any way as it was before;
and these remedies that we have mentioned are not otherwise than addresses of this disease, so that it does not return as it was before.
This illness that is actually called "Axacrati," and is natural and accidental.
The occurrence comes from a wound, a tear, caustery, and similar things.
And for the work involved, you must use a needle, which has a double thread, and the hook is in the hole, and pierce through from the left to right so that the threads reach both sides of the eye.
Then pull the eye over all the needle, with a thread width of one stratum. And if the shape of the pattern returns as it should, that is good.
But if not, take the scissors and place them in the tear, turn the pattern, and make two cuts or carve inside the pattern.
And the head of the shoulder has two fissures at each angle of the incision you made, and make them into angles so that when they are joined together, it appears as if the letter 'Z' without its crossbar.
Then take the cloth as needed depending on how much it is saturated and unsoiled, like paper, then bring together the two separated pieces with a thread.
Then apply what we have said of softening remedies and bandages until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a tear or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary that you make an incision clean of hair on the paper, and according to what has been said above. Then open between the two ribs of a tent as I have said;
Then open between the two ribs of a tent as I have said; And you must perform the operation according to the form of the illness, for it is very varied in shape, and wise masters devise machines that may possibly restore its natural figure.
And the patients themselves must do the same, depending on what operation and treatments are required in various arrangements.
When this suture occurs in home-made manner such that the paper above is sealed with the fat of oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it does indeed become necessary to puncture a razor beneath the paper, and lift it upwards.
And the extent of pressure is applied, aiming to match that which is appropriate for the subtle area, neither too weak nor too harsh, so that the patient does not suffer from an excessively strong or numbing spot.
And make your incision, carefully excising that which is formed, lightly, so the paper returns to its natural shape.
And cleanse all that is formed, and never in oil with salt water, but use gentle warm water and wine.
Then place a tent of lin between the paper and the oil, and cover the wound with soft sheep's wool in abundance. And after three days, apply more wine and soothing substances until it is healed.
That the ulcer occurs in two ways: It is of the nature that it seems hard and scaly, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen damp swelling, so that when touched with iron and cooked in a saucepan, cannot be removed.
and both types begin near the earlobe, growing slowly until they cover the entire field of vision and all light and eye movement.
And the method of incision is such that the patient places his head on a support, then manipulates the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then cut the ulcer edges with small scissors, extending above; Then take a needle, and insert hair from a horse, or goat, or ox, and strong thread. Then slightly bend the needle's tip and insert it under the nail. Pierce completely with the entire needle, tie the nail with a thread, and extend above the finger. Shave all hair near the nail that obstructs the puncture, leaving only the root of the skin fold, using delicate motions and small forces; so the body's natural secretion or sweat does not flow through the incision as usual.
Never extend to the bone only with the needle and thread, just as we have said; Then scrape away all the surrounding tissue from which it is formed.
And ensure that the tumor does not touch or rupture the skin, and that the pus does not leak out.
and after making an incision, pour some pearl powder into the wound, and make a paste of lead salve, and leave it until the next day. then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And if the fingernail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a needle, and the knuckles do not fit in, this appearance of a fingernail is often treated with various remedies.
and as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the patient's side slightly softer, and take a small amount of tumor according to this form. And raise the splinter delicately, and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a swelling afterward, squeeze from your mouth into an oil collier made of litargire and red wax mixed with seal fat, until the next day.
If nothing is opposed to you in the oil, as for abscesses, then wash it out, and cure first the inflamed abscess until it is cleaned, then resume the treatment as before, until it is cleaned.
Then resume the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of flesh at the elbow causes great harm in the oil, soothe it with honey and clove, and cut away part but not all, ensuring tears do not come.
Then squeeze into a red wax oil collarium made of litargire.
Some men's nerves are sometimes red, and cover the swelling and bind above the papers and turn to the contrary direction, appearing like a balustrate rose.
And the treatments are such that the patient places their head in a chair, then works on their eyes, and does all of this with suitable devices for use here; and supports it with strength.
Then apply the first treatment, and work completely up to the end with a razor, and make sure you do not cut the oil at the site of the treatment.
And make the incisions of the swollen areas as we have described in the incision of the nail and small forceful methods by which one obtains them, as demonstrated after this treatise.
And when the incision is complete and all treatments are done, apply oil of seal or distill it with red wax balm and similar corrosive medicines, and place a cotton ball soaked in alcohol on top if needed to ensure warmth at the site of abscess.
If it remains for any length of time and the swelling rises up, causing you concern about an abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
Then return to your work as soon as it is healthy again, and thus the shoulder can be set into place using this method.
But nonetheless, you must align the treatment for each weak point of natural passageway; and in the work of iron tools.
and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from the work.
Red wounds are covered on their surface with oil, and they obstruct the field of view and weaken the eye daily.
Thus it is necessary then to first look where the limb protrudes outwardly, and there is nothing else wrong except that swelling. Then you must hold the joint thusly:
Command the patient to place his head in your hand, then tie off those veins along the entire arm according to your wisdom, and let the ligatures be subtle and double as per this method:
And let there be two lines drawn by degrees in one curve following this form:
Then you wrap the veins subtly, and let out blood slowly afterwards, until you see that the veins are free from the bandage.
And ensure that you do not bleed the tips of the stigmata, and perform this procedure in the middle of the day before sunlight, being very attentive to your work so that only those veins are bled.
And once you have done this, if there is discoloration in the neck with green and red fluid to dissolve what remains of the boil.
If you cannot grasp all of it at once during that hour, apply a poultice with soothing substances to ease the pain in the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and abscesses are secure, then continue according to this method which is described here until healed.
It's a matter of strengthening his constitution:
They call the wound "Ariassati" fistulas:
When you treat the wound with cauterization and hot ague medicine as I have previously described, and it is not healed, then fashion an instrument to cut into the abscess where it must die, and extract all the pus that is there until the bone is revealed.
When the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, return everything to its original shape.
And it is called "sharp head," and made of iron in the same way as described here.
And place it on the spot of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the decay has been healed.
and do this once more, then restore the spot with medicinal herbs.
if the wound is swollen and pus appears, and the body of the bow is also swoln, remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen or form a sore, and there are no complications, know that it is healed.
If not, there is no other remedy but to return the hernia back through the nostrils according to this method: And you shall expose the bone a second time with iron and medicinal leeches, and when it is exposed, take out with forceps according to this method, making the shoulder of iron have three angles, and make the shaft as thin as possible as you see here:
Then place it near the bone by the temple, and keep your hand away from the oil pot. Then turn the forceps completely as long as they penetrate the bone until the patient feels pain if he holds his hand over his nose:
And then restore the original position with dry remedies as I have instructed you. When the wound heals and hardens, proceed with injecting into the nose: It is a more manageable task for the patient.
When all nails are pierced entirely without causing harm to the nose or any diminution, it is necessary that you bind the patient.
Then the vein is cut open and applied to a suction cup or tourniquet that does not hurt in order to draw out blood. Then apply it with oil made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and myrrh, and then compress the area with linen strips and bandages.
And you arrange the bandages so that they are sufficiently pliable, and each one is folded four times, then place them on top of each other according to the amount needed for the wound.
Then strain above a hard bandage of furze, and resume using blisters to draw out the fluid without causing pain.
Then remove the blisters and let the strained area rest day and night, and if it softens sufficiently, you may need to re-strain greatly.
Then remove the bandage after day and night, and if the area heals well afterwards, it is good.
If not; If you resume bandaging and dressings and the strain and blisters until it is safe.
The breaking of a veil seen When disruptions occur in the woven fabric, and then open up, and come out like fine paper dust, and are hopeful to see;
Then if you see the wound covered, the procedure is such that you insert a needle to the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the shin. and make it pierced, leaving the first needle according to its arrangement.
then cut the place with a double thread and tie part of the eyelid around it, straining well, then extract the needle and put oiled cloth abundantly on it.
and let it be until the thread breaks with the eyelid, then treat the comforting measures of things until the wound is healed.
and at no time should the wound be strained by the eyelid on each part of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the hairs show great growth, as a very fine thread appears from the sebaceous gland at the base of the oil duct, and runs with clear moisture, then descends into it, and enters quickly.
Then extract until it is clean.
This disease called "alcuncatium" is not just water that has gathered in the oil, appearing as if clear fluid descending, and it is not truly such.
and the manner of its appearance in surgery is that you make the patient sit on the operating chair properly arranged, then take their head with your hands from both sides until you see the water rise above their hair. Then it must be fixed, and not lowered or elevated, and release the lightness, and show the patient how to do so as usual.
And if it does not descend on its own, tell the patient that this is acute, and assess whether the bowels are prepared as we have described.
If the patient sits between your hands, then take the subtle linen and rub over the swollen eyelid gently by continuing with the conjunctiva on the cornea and the crown until relief occurs.
And when it is resolved, pouring in hot honeyed oil or water infused with fenugreek boiled and mixed with honey, then be treated with another remedy until healed.
From the waters of the joints We have tried similar methods as in water divisions, and what is appropriate for cutting. If in practice according to healthiness.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light and sun, and apply strong oil to it.
Then place the paper soaked in oil on your left hand if the eye is also turned to the left, or on your right hand if it's also turned to the right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is also turned to the left, an instrument called "almadala", or with your left hand if it's also turned to the right.
Then place the tip of the instrument close to the crown by making an incision with a razor into that part below the lower eyelid near the oil area, then insert the "almadala" gently, and twist your hand until it pierces through the oil layer, feeling when the almadala reaches the empty space.
And it is necessary that the width of the Almadian way be at the forefront of the measure of space from the protrusion to the end of the knuckle. and this is its circumference;
If you see the bone on that paper due to the whiteness of the torn cloth, then place the instrument up to where the moisture is, and express it from one way after another.
If water now flows out, then see the patient lying before you with the instrument in his hand.
After resting briefly, if the moisture reappears in the second way, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly placed and does not rise, gently extract Almadian by slowly turning your hand a little at a time;
And then reintroduce some pus into the wound, and leave the bone inside as it is. Then insert the tube or soft linen soaked in rose oil and abundant honey, and secure with a clean instrument.
Us and those from our time, insert the camphor paste plentifully with honey.
et ou.
And pierce thusly the joint only, and do not go too deep, but make it somewhat subtle, then apply cataplasm as we have said.
And for the completion of the work, instruct the patient to lie down as they are comfortable, in which place they should rest on their back in a dimly lit area.
And they should abstain from all movements, and consume light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left, and remain lying as per their inclination until the third day.
Then they shall be moved to the same dimly lit house and tested their vision, and have them see certain things, and then you rejoin the sinew until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this immediately during the treatment or right after the incision now, but you must elevate that area because the swelling rises quickly.
If an abscess occurs, release the pus on the seventh day and apply a dressing to soothe the affected area.
And when it is calmed, release the scab and place a bandage on your face for one day to keep it covered, and let it remain in that darkened house.
Then gradually leave the house and get back to normal activities as you can.
And remember that no one should interfere in this case. And there was once a man from Jerusalem who told us that he had encountered an evil spirit causing severe swelling, which led to pus, but I have never seen any such cases in our land nor read of them in the ancient books. And perhaps it is a novel thing.
And these are the shapes of armadillo, for those who do not know them see this way.
and they truly belong to the armadillos: And there are heads of this same subtlety, and they have three corners each.
Never do they hatch or are there various creatures attached, from which some appear to be scorpions with many feet.
and if there are any that have hair of such wild colors, and those that have skin of the flesh tone. In which case for these creatures that are without hair and not wildly colored, it is fitting to make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun;
In which case for these creatures that are without hair and not wildly colored, it is fitting to make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour the salve on those creatures, and treat their fur. Now grasp what you must support at the subtle tip of a finger, as long as you know that entire piece is all bone.
And if there remains anything that cannot be grasped, cover all the surrounding area lightly with delicate movements, so that nothing is left. and without any doubt or abscesses, straighten it as it should be done.
and if it is malignant abscesses, hurry up and cauterize until the wound is closed and all bones are exposed, then pour oil or wine to cleanse and soothe. If it does not heal, and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is safe;
If there is no puncture as it should be, know that there is softness in the bone above, where strain does not come to cut.
Then it is necessary that you insert a flax thread of some thickness and moisten it with your hands, leaving space or less between each one. and place the patient's head with the flax thread at their neck as much as possible, pulling gently until it emerges from within the mouth.
and this method is often done for children in schools, and it is an easy task for those who perform it.
then hold the head that emerges from the neck with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, feeling each in turn between our flax thread.
Do whatever you know to make the child's bowels pure, then lay them down, let blood flow out, and wipe the string with Egyptian balm, and place it back correctly on their nose as before.
Do this for three days or more until the salves dissolve all that remains of impurity.
And then place cotton on their nose for several days until it is cleaned, and if dry medications are needed, use them.
This is the form of the instrument used to purge the head where one can distill oils and medications onto their nose.
And it is of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cone, and direct them thus.
And if you see it, make a tight bandage, and let the extremities be straightened to purge the head.
And place your hand on the head when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis
Many times emerges at the head a disease called "telulus," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to sight.
And therefore you must begin by cutting it off entirely, then use a strong bone saw or burning ointment on the wound.
And if it is not cut soon after it grows large, take care to observe if it is hard, of fiery color, and poor in sensation.
if it does not yield to iron as it is an encrusted abscess, because when cut once, great harm comes to the patient.
If the abscess is from severe touching, not from sudden color change, and you see that it can be fully covered, if the patient empties his cup and feels no fear while dressing, then treat everything dry and contracted.
Know that when there is a continuation of discharge from one of these sinew-covered wounds, it brings little benefit and may occur in some men.
It is therefore necessary for each case where this occurs to examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood supply intact; and then approach the two lips of the incision for stitching, then treat until it heals soundly;
and if the lips are bare on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all areas of flesh until they heal, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, bind them tightly, and dust between layers of blood powder from a dragon's blood. And apply the powders a fragment of veratrine or other veratrine adhesive on it, and let it ooze until then, and treat with anointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is that you assemble the stitches. or by needles, as we have said in the belly suture; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
For abscesses on the lips
Often happens in the skin abscesses hard lumps, resembling grains of barley, some small and others larger;
Then it is necessary to turn the abscess lumps, split each one with a knife, and pick them up with tweezebrushes and apply to each part;
Then place it back after the incision of bladderstone bruises, as long as the wound is closed.
and then provide ease from movement, and heal the limb of dry things until it is sound.
Often occurs under the gums displaced, which the ancients called "bulbus".
if it is necessary to support with forceps, cut off at its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
then place on the incision of bladderstone bruises, or other powders that bind and dry out.
and if it returns after the incision, which often occurs, then cut again on the second occasion, and perform cauterization. If it does not return after the fire cautery;
Never are they gathered at the head of the teeth, between the gums, sores that are ugly and sharp; And never are the teeth black and yellowish-green with pus until the infection reaches the gums, and the teeth become foul.
If it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and his head in your lap, and remove the teeth or sores as they appear, until there are none left. And do this for darkening and greenness, and jaundice and other defects, until they are healed.
If one removes what is at the first cause, it is good. If not, begin anew on the second day and the third, until you have regained everything.
And know that the teeth need various types of treatments to heal, according to how the work appears, because the razors which do not fit between the teeth have other shapes than those which fit. And these forms and others should be made with you.
It is necessary when treating the teeth to delay their pain as much as one can, for they must not be neglected at all. because it is a matter of great importance until there are no more reasons to delay the treatment.
Then when the patient's mouth is strained by chewing, make sure to check for any broken teeth. Many times did the pain trouble the patient, and he thought it was or toothache, so he tried draining the bad tooth. And yet the pain did not leave him for this reason, until the illness is over, as we have already tried with such methods.
And when you are well-assured of the aching tooth, it is fitting that you scrape around the entire tooth, with strong pressure to protect the gum from all sides;
Then move your two fingers or delicate pincers gradually at first and then more frequently until well aligned, then firmly secure the forceps. And let the patient's head be in your steady hands between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth directly with a break, if it does not fall out, take any of these tinctures and put them inside each part lightly, and move it as you did first.
If the tooth is pierced and broken, it must be filled with cloth where the roots are. And if gently extracted using pliers, that it does not break when removed.
It is necessary to work carefully around the gums to remove the tooth.
And make sure that you do not break it and leave a piece behind, as this may cause the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness.
And be sure not to act as the ignorant surgeon does, who through their haste and boldness breaks a piece of cartilage without restoring it as we have described.
but they bring upon the patient great illness from the roots that remain or from the cartilage that is broken, as we have often witnessed.
and when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine or boiled water and salt.
If there is a spreading of blood, it often happens, to empty the place with vitriol paste.
And if this does not work, then you should cauterize.
The forms of the tides, wherein one first moves the bones with long points and large masses, do not double when you draw out the tooth.
and these are the forms: They should have large bodies such that they do not bend when extracted, and be well-made of iron, with teeth to grip it firmly.
From the root of the teeth When the root remains when pulling, you must place cotton soaked in butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then put in tweezers called "algofri", whereupon the head appears like a physician's beak.
and they are bone shaped like files and it is their form:
And if the roots do not come out with all these pliers, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali," which is a chisel; herein lies its shape:
And it is outside and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps from its socket, that is good.
If not, assist with all supports, as follows are the forms that come afterward:
And if one uses this instrument which has two prongs; its form is as follows: and other instruments used before on teeth and of this instrument which appears to be large pliers, its form is as follows:
And these supports should be strong so they do not break, and know that there are many such dense supports. and similarly of other supports, which may not always be counted.
and the wise master subtly examines by himself with his instrument, according to his practices and the diseases they indicate; for there are certain illnesses where the elder did not teach any instruments due to their variety, or if it does not break on the cart or other bones, seek the supports that I have mentioned, and assist with the gestures of which here is the form:
And they are large and firmly held to grip the bone, that it does not slip out but can be held and removed.
And then restore it to its place with suitable medicine for this case, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then the surgeon possesses all these instruments.
When the tooth appears not in accordance with natural anatomy and its form is unattractive, especially in young maidens, it is necessary that you discern if the root is dead after the tooth, and it is neither on the right nor left, so it cannot be extracted or filed down.
Then cut the gum. And if it is fixed with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is depicted here, resembling a small beak, and made of iron sharp on one end.
And the tooth becomes harder over time for its hardness and because you dore moving others, and if it is visible that one can file it down, use a part of this file as shown in the shape.
And it is similar to the limb of which needles are made;
and in the limb, one pulls out small pieces little by little until it cannot move anymore.
then the surface is smooth at the end with no roughness, and if its density is too harsh and it blunts the tongue, one must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it neither dulls the tongue nor disrupts speech.
When the teeth are loosened by percussion or fall out, and the patient cannot apply pressure to what they bite on without them falling apart, and if you have treated it with constricting medicines, but that is ineffective.
If they require it to be bound with a thread of gold, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
And make the cord neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the bones;
And if you see the bones are aligned, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy bones, then place the head between the misaligned bones, continuing until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then resume covering up to where you began, and gently and skillfully pull the hand until it does not move.
And secure your ligature at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then wrap the head of the bone with iron wire using pincers, and join them together so they do not irritate the tongue when placed between healthy teeth.
Then let it remain as tightly bound as possible for a while, and if it loosens or the wires break, they should be secured with another wire.
If it stays in place for its full duration, it will maintain the shape of the two teeth and the alignment as if two healthy teeth were present.
And when a tooth falls out, you should replace it in its original position repeatedly as we have mentioned.
And only those who are wise and patient should be involved in this process, never shaping it like a cheese tooth; place it where the gap is, securely as we have said, and allow it to remain and serve for an extended time.
At no time is this condition which arises from under the tongue or swelling; such as we have seen. Or by accident of a sutured wound;
And the treatments are such that you operate on the mouth with the patient awake and hold their head steady while lifting the tongue;
Then cut the nervous ligament of the tongue so that it is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and this is a sutured wound, then use forceps to grasp the wide ligament.
And ensure that the incision is not too deep, near where the artery lies below;
And once done, lift up a vein of rosy and easily accessible blood, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue.
And apply a poultice to the patient each night so their limb cannot settle.
And if bleeding persists, then place sulfur on the wound. and if pus emerges, then use a slow-burning caustic agent that is effective for this purpose; then proceed with another remedy until it heals.
and if you observe that the sore is colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
and if it is starting to ulcerate, and there is moisture, then pour the unguent on it, and it stinks of a subtle pus, and cleanses from each side. If blood does not flow into your work, then apply crushed powder of vitriol until it clots, and return to your work as long as you have finished with the wound.
Then raise the limb gently and loosely, and treat other ailments until it is well.
For boils in the throat Never does food go down the throat that is called "swollen tonsils," and they are properly called two almonds; when you treat them as we have said in the section on it, if they do not heal well, be careful.
If there are small abscesses of little size and with a hollow feeling when touched, avoid them using iron.
And if they are red with large roots, do not use iron on them either for the flow of blood; But let it lie until it heals, and then you will separate it, or it may break on its own.
And if it is pale in color and the roots are delicate, have an instrument prepared for covering, but first ensure that there are no inflamed areas or lingering irritation.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun with their head exposed and their eyes closed, and have them perform mouth exercises while pressing an instrument between their hands, and press their tongue away from the tool as instructed.
And it should be made of silver or a delicate copper similar to knives.
You can continue pressing the tongue against this tool and observe any abscesses, if there are any, take a thread-like instrument and insert it into the wound, then pull gently above as far as possible.
And from any threads with it, then the cap to the instrument, which is its form, that appears as if by some force. And so the head is curved, and one place to another, it becomes very sharp, and made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument, use tongs for that form which is shaped like it: And it has a sharpened edge on one side and no name on the other.
And when you have grasped one of the roots, then cut the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and soothing liquids, and if bleeding occurs, continue to gardarize the patient with hot water, or boiled quince peels, or mugwort fumes, until the blood stops. Then treat until it becomes well again;
And no more abscesses appear in the throat other than two almonds, if they heal as do the two almonds.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was within her throat, which is to say, one small abscess.
and had nearly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like this for one day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had been torn open twice through its two narrow points.
So I acted immediately, making an incision in it with a needle, and the pus came out in large amounts.
then made another incision on the other side for the small one as well, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue.
After inserting a needle into these abscesses, and cutting out a part, no more blood was extracted. And thus the throat duct of the woman was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop treating that abscess for long periods.
And the abscesses would return again, filling up the emptied space I had made until it became quite large.
Then I deceived her and cauterized inside her throat. Thus, she stopped growing in size.
And from these parts I departed, and only God could heal her after me.
The phrase "de l'uvre" translates to "of the work" or "from the work." However, without additional context, it is challenging to provide a more precise translation or interpretation of this term within the text. It could refer to a specific medical procedure or treatment mentioned in the larger document from which this excerpt comes.
When they return to the eye, and it becomes swollen and long, one should be called "perpendicular." (Note: This last sentence is somewhat cryptic due to the possible variations in medieval medical terminology. The word "apelé" could also mean "to call upon" or "summoned by",
If it is from a large and round source, it is called "yew".
When it has been opened as we have said in the cutting method, and the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the abscess wound is soothed, but it is subtle, then it should be lanced.
And those that are round and compactly formed, and are not long. And if it is bloody or of the flesh-like color or black, then one should avoid its incision. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its width and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press with the instrument that we have previously mentioned. Then insert the pin through the eyelet, remove it from below, and make an incision as described for removing two abscesses.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess beyond its natural boundary.
because if you cover too much, it will hinder speech and language.
and after the incision, follow as we have said for the removal of two abscesses, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear from covering, then you must apply a method for easing their fear in the process of cauterization.
The manner of cauterization is acute fever. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand and then presses the tongue with the instrument as described in our book on fire cautery, and rinse with hot water so that it is not too thick nor too clear. And with the use of this instrument, here is the form:
And it has that you insert or push in the medication with a hair or pipe, as with the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument beneath all the medicine on the vein.
and let the patient lie on their side, so that they spit and belch from their mouth of the medication inside, such that it does not come out to the throat, and bubbling.
then hold your hand all the medication and press it onto the vein, the quantity of a small hourglass, until you see it working properly and the stinging from the medication is soothed.
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap around any instrument, wet the cotton in the medication, and place the instrument into all the cotton down to its base on the vein until the cotn is adhered to the vein.
And often do this until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after IV or V days.
And if you need to repeat the medicinal cauldration, do so afterward, and around the eye, apply a cloth stuffed with butter, and cleanse what is there surrounding the medicine.
And rise up from cold water, and be treated with gargling until it is healthy.
This treatment is more beneficial than the incision, only the cauldration;
If it is treated with smoking in this manner, take calamint and wormwood and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of these in a pot, and place over low heat, and let boil.
And the piece must be firmly glued with strong clay, and within the vessel there should be an instrument fitted according to this manner: And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads is inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the canal until the vein is constricted.
After frequent recurrences, until the vein dries up, and ensure that you do not cause pain at the beginning of the abscess's heating, for many things can happen. and not to act just when it is nearing the stage of hot abscesses.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a canal and insert an eagle feather in the head so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot. For the crack of a tooth does not greatly trouble the mouth, and it is good together with healing.
Many times there are bones or spines from fish in the throat, or anything else.
Therefore you must remove whatever you can see and press the tongue to the sun on all instruments, so that you may see movement in the thing.
And whatever does not reveal itself and is found in the throat, it must be made to vomit by the patient as soon as possible so that the meat can cook in the stomach. Perhaps if you extract the thing through vomiting.
Or perhaps the patient will swallow a piece of sponge, or a scrap from a cloth, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread. And tie to the sponge strip, and then slip it across. And when it reaches its place, if it becomes dry, then you will re-dress the wound.
and if it does not come to this as we have said, take the instrument of a spatula in this manner:
And let the strums be bent over so that they can more easily enter into the throat, and keep the head raised high. and ensure you do not touch the epiglottis so that it does not close, nor push in the bone inside.
and move as if the patient is inserting the instrument themselves, because it should be loose or the place is dry. If you have drawn out all of it, or when pulling up with the entire tool until it's dry.
And in a similar manner; and then remove without getting deeper; or you do not penetrate further.
At no time is there a self-healing without remedy, as I have said in the section on treatment with medicines. And when this does not benefit the patient, then you should examine their throat in the sunlight and press their tongue with the instrument I have told you about.
And if you see this suction, making it resemble all small hooks or delicate pincers that are suitable for such things.
And if it is not suitable, then take a twisted rope, and put it in the patient's throat, then make several efforts to pull the rope tightly, doing this often. And if the patient has water all day long.
Then take a full glass of cold water and work on the mouth, causing the patient to swallow involuntarily, and move it often with their hand. And as soon as he feels relief from the pain, then urinate.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then use sage to fumigate the patient with an instrument in the smoke treatment of the eye.
Do this many times, for they will seek their position less aggressively.
And the method of fumigation is such that you take an iron vessel where there are coal fires, and it should be covered with a ceramic lid pierced in the middle, and through that opening insert the shoulder of the instrument.
then you pour the fumigation, and have the patient place their cheek in their mouth, and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but it rises up to the brain.
and now the brain will seek [to be cleansed], and if it does not come out, repeat the fumigametn many times.
and let the patient suffer thirst, and give them salty and sour things to eat, and do not drink water.
And then it is necessary for him to go out by this government.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats swelling is such that when it can be seen, it appears like bent pincers to enter into the throat. and has the appearance of a surgeon's spoon, and it is rough like limestone, such that whatever enters, cannot slip out.
There are many types of abscesses, as recounted here from one to another in this book, and they vary between puncture and incision.
And it is in two ways that one is similar to the other because of its moisture content.
And the second way is for boils that occur within the body.
Because abscesses in the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses within muscles differ from those that occur in joints, each has its own judgment in practice.
And if there is an abscess where one must not pierce it until the bowel has completed its process.
And if there are such that one must pierce when they have matured and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
When abscesses appear near joints, and they are left to rot there, sometimes the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, causing contraction in that limb.
Or if the abscess is near a limb, and you delay the piercing until it has matured, harm will come to the main limb.
or if it is near the foundation, one should pierce only when it is matured.
and one must only pierce an abscess when matured with digestion completed, avoiding those near the foundation that may burst openly, elongate internally, and form a fistula. And cannot heal completely.
And it is necessary that you assess the time of abscess perforation when fully formed, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of redness and heat, and softening and debilitation at the top of the abscess, and other signs.
And it is necessary that you let the perforation sit or be placed further down from the abscess, and wherever it opens.
And the perforation should be deep in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or at joints and veins, and arteries, and everywhere else similar without a protrusion. In those cases where they are dislocated, with the concerned limb.
And when an abscess is in its chronic stage, it should be allowed to drain until complete digestion has occurred, as we have said.
If you pierce it forward near his head, then there is poison spread throughout the body, and it is full of much filth. And sometimes harden the lips and the deepest parts within him.
And if there are abscesses that can be felt over a wide part of his body, according to what the limbs require.
And it is necessary that you treat small abscesses and small wounds. and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many openings according to the size of the abscess.
and if such abscesses need covering or sealing, do so. When it becomes just like a cloth, and is numb, then one must treat it as with blisters.
And if there are ones that are split into three corners, and those cut as one would the bellows of a mill, like arrowhead abscesses.
And if there are ones where a round wound is made, and other shapes and appearances.
Those who have no head, like a surface abscess, one must simply pierce it directly;
And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once but drain part of it. Then dress the abscess for another day, then completely empty it. Do this many times gradually, until the bow has fully healed.
However, if the patient is weak in virtue, or women carrying, or small children, or old and infirm men. For the arrows sometimes leap at the time of pus release; it may happen that it kills the patient, and do not be dismayed by this.
Therefore, avoid this treatment with great caution, and when you perceive the abscess, open the wound, and examine if the wound from the abscess is small. and if it's a simple tear, then prepare threads or old cotton for stitching. And if it is a large abscess with much pus, it must be drained in each one so that they come into contact with one another.
And if you have cut into the abscess and woven around it with thread, then fill it with fine cotton or flax cloth strips without moisture, and bind until the third day.
Then bandage, and apply a healing salve until it is healthy.
When bleeding occurs at your wound site, treat with cold and soothing water, and apply a damp cloth, placing it over the area multiple times.
And if the bleeding persists, manage and treat it well, and apply the powders mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the wound or abscess is very sore, then place warm cloths and bandages soaked in wine and hot oil on top.
If it is inflamed, and the flesh is raw, then you must wrap it in clean cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cooled oil, until the third day, as we have said.
And then drain any abscesses and exudate and heal it, as necessary, until it is healthy again.
It is important to know generally how to treat abscesses in wound care:
As I have told you before about how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
When small abscesses come to the head and are handled like linen threadworms, just as shears on a young sheep, there are many similarities.
There are some that are swollen and such as hairs;
And for those which are hard and painful to touch at the tailbone, there is no doubt if the arrow does not act against it.
And the work of cutting is such that you try with every instrument called 'intrusive', from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Because if it contains moisture, they go up along the long. (Note: The translation is not entirely clear due to missing context or possible errors in the original text.)
And when the moisture is emptied, scrape away all hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave nothing.
Then dip a piece of cotton in Egyptian balm if available; If not, use water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; And if there is a fever, take care of them during the night.
Then resume the cotton as before on the second day and every other day until you are certain it does not remain at night.
Then treat the wound with ointment as is appropriate, until it heals.
And if an abscess remains unclean, then apply this fat according to these directions for a long time. and pouring in the herbs, and peeling off all sides, and applying your entire treatment of treating with poultices wherever it is located.
and if an arrow protrudes unfavorably, do as I have instructed you afterwards.
And similarly treat an abscess if it is bloody, and with cutting and scraping as I have told you.
And the cut above a bloody abscess and wet area is more lightweight, for there is little blood involved. And if in any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and in those abscesses that I wrote up before from an old woman's head.
and found the abscess as hard as a long stone, rough and scaly, that could not be broken. If one had struck it with something, they would have also made a wound like that of a stone.
In other abscesses coming or at the top, especially those that come from the heads of children and roots of ears, the opening should be done completely every day at the earliest opportunity so they can drain.
and treat them as necessary.
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the shoulders, and in the armpits, never appearing elsewhere or on limbs, and they are very large, and closely related to each other.
And each scrofula properly arises within its location, just like the head and the abscess at the top, as we have said. and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities to these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and others which are of an evil nature and do not wish to obey health.
in that one where you see good condition at touching, and it appears to have the color of the body, and is not swollen on any side nor red over the neck or artery or duct, and it is not deep.
If it is necessary to handle from above, and scrape each part, extend the inner lips white as bone, if needed, as we have said in head abscesses.
And tear slowly and carefully, ensuring not to cut the nerve or vein, nor causing swelling or bleeding, that the hand does not escape, and do not go too far so as not to cut what you must.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not stop working, then put in the wound of bloodletting leeches, or any powders that remain staining blood, and tighten the wound. And let it be until the abscess is soothed and the wound softened, then start to heal.
When blood is stopped, return to your work until it is completed.
Then apply the correct remedy if there are small warts remaining; cleanse and heal them.
And if the vein in the root of the wart is large, do not scrape out that wart at its base; instead, tie it off with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm.
Then treat the wound with fine cotton soaked in Egyptian balm, then heal it.
And if you remove the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and sew them up without leaving excess due to the size of the scrofula. If necessary, you must expose and remove the root (of the disease), pull out any pus-filled abscesses, and close up as we have previously described.
If necessary, you must expose and remove the root (of the disease), pull out any pus-filled abscesses, and close up as we have previously described. For excessive warts, pierce them where they seem to protrude most.
and do so as previously mentioned, then dress them with ointment and similar substances if they show signs of deterioration. And when the wound is properly cleaned, then apply an ointment fragrant with herbs, until it heals completely.
The ancient ones spoke of throat surgery; However, I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
For those with stridor, it is necessary to excise the "epiglottis" from the throat incision; And this is not done by it, because all the veins and the painful tumor are found in those with abscesses burning in the mouth, or throat, or two arms.
When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to sever the epiglottis, it should be cut below three circles or four through a small incision across the second circle, not in the spine nor by the amount of the incision.
And those who are subject to it must undergo the cutting of the epiglottis where there is no humor, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is fearful, then it must be stretched with a leather strip around the throat to its full extent, and incise until reaching the windpipe. and drain any vessels of blood, if you see nothing else, then clip off the fats as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe's lumen which has fallen due to rupture at the location that was cut, and resulting in a loss of voice.
and leave the open wound uncovered for some time.
When the time is past that one doubts the stranglehold, bring together the two lips of the wound with skin, and the stitch feels all through the cartilage;
Then administer medicine to generate heat, until it is healthy again.
Not until the throat is completely blocked will you do this; and if the patient appears to be dying, and lacks breath. Then you should cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and they will breathe from the wound, thus preventing death.
and so they instruct the physician to leave the wound open until the malady of the disease has passed, which takes three or four days, and then command it be stitched up and healed.
And I shall tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden take a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting off part of the windpipe.
and I hurried to treat her, but found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it, but was well that it had not caused swelling or a tight band to choke the throat; however, there was severe bleeding through the injury.
I tended to it urgently, stitched the wound, and treated it until she was healed.
and there occurred to the maiden only that her voice turned red, and she returned afterward to my care.
for this is why I say in treating the epiglottis there should be no fear.
These abscesses are called 'throat hernia,' and consist of large abscesses the color of jet, occurring mostly in women.
and they occur in two ways: By nature, and by accident;
Or natural causes have no remedy.
And accidents occur in two ways: one is similar to us being overfed, and the other is like an abscess that arises from our arteries. and there is fear, and it does not need to work with force in large cases, but rather test and seek all possibilities. if you find it as in being overfed and not caused by any vein, then treat it as we do ourselves, and address the root of the matter, if there is anything. and search thoroughly, and heal as necessary until it is perfectly healthy again.
There are many ways to address this issue, of which I will speak all kinds.
And it is necessary for me to tell you the entire distinction that lies between cause and effect.
I say that issues are heat and fever-ridden until the boiling over is past, and decay is complete. Then rests the fever and heat.
With ours there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sack and according to the color of the body, beginning like a lead weight and growing larger.
And it follows certain appearances or grievous conditions, or dampness, with many colors as I have described in the classification.
When attending to this matter, first examine and inquire about the entire instrument called "entromissor," according to its form or chapter that follows.
And the method of investigating boils is that you insert or find more moisture than exists in the boil, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that pressure has been felt by the pus, then according to the size of the boil.
Then remove the entrapment, and take care to ensure it does not move again.
If moisture runs through the vein, observe its color as I have described for other abscesses;
And if no moisture flows through the entrapment, you may know it is fatty, so treat it as I have described for other abscesses, and scrape lightly on each side, ensuring to cleanse with a tool.
And if you cannot cure it thoroughly, treat it in sections so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
And if it lingers a bit and causes no grief, apply the wound with corrosive powders from certain herbs, irritate the wound, and apply soothing substances until it is healed by other treatments.
And if it is large on us, cut along the edges of the wound, and treat what has been caused by a charm.
And if the boil appears contrary or otherwise, hurry and apply a lead poultice of antimony, leaving it for two to three days until the wound heals, allowing the blood flow. Then return to where you left off previously.
See here the forms of entrapped hemorrhoids, and they are in three ways: large and medium and small.
And there are three areas which are called "albarets", and one which is called "breb," and they are in three ways. large, medium, and small, to treat the boils of a fistula.
Like needles used for witches, they are made of citrine crystal, iron, or silver. Those that are yellow-colored hold value, and those of black color are more effective in searching for the toadstools of a carbuncle.
They exist in three ways: Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures.
The shapes of tumors are mostly similar, as you see here:
and if there are tumors with three types of protrusions as well;
and if there are tumors that have three protrusions and come in the same three ways;
and if there are tumors with two protrusions, and only one-protruded tumors, and come in the same three ways;
and all of these must be present at their respective locations.
The head of these that cut is sharp, and some are such that they only pierce in one place, which we scrape off the skin because thus one does not sever the vein nor the nerve;
And among these inserted ones are reset shoulder blades held in clutches so the patient does not wince at the opening of abscesses.
and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and they are only used in a place like the shoulder joints, such as legs, arms, elbows, angles, and similar places.
and never made is another small instrument like lancets for incision, according to this form which stanch blood. And you put it back into place at times with blood flow from veins, and arteries, and sometimes they return according to this major form:
Never inflame the eyelids of any men when they begin to be corrupted, until they resemble women's eyelids.
and remain ugly and swoln, and whoever wishes to cleanse them should be according to this form of these lines b.j. until g: Then scrape off the fatty tissue, and dress the wound with medicinal pork grease, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and bandage until it is healed.
And if the patient becomes dizzy and weakened due to its severity, similar to what happens with women, they may faint into two ribs above, by two like splits. For one to be held by the other at the end of both, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. up to line g. Then scrape the skin between the two edges and remove fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and all that is necessary for healing, until it is healthy.
If it is not clean or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a pile of cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. And leave it to heal and accumulate fat and grease, then cleanse until it is wholesome.
These abscesses that arise from under the elbows are forms of hard goiters or swellings, and if there is any containing pus.
Those thus containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: the bat:
And if the abscesses are of similar nature to hard swellings, make an incision as we have described in cutting open hard swellings, and if the wound is bowed out, treat with fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is hard where it's above, so often abscesses occur, and in the same way blood flow and abscesses happen.
And if you extract with this when it's for the artery, so are the abscesses full. And when you feel it in your elbows, and it feels strained strongly;
And when it is for the vein, then a reasonable absence appears.
And it is foolish to attempt this abscess, especially when it is above the joints and bones and various other places, and they are very large. Therefore it is necessary to avoid the application of iron, and those in chief should also avoid this, and for those who have arterial swelling above the long skin.
then work with the knife against thorns, and gently remove the artery from its sheath until it is uncovered.
then insert a needle from one side and cut until the other side is reached, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you for extracting the two arteries that are on the temples.
Then do not move it which is between the two bones of an interposed joint until the blood flow ceases, and let the abscess be released.
Then treat the resulting swelling as long as the ligament sags. Then apply suitable ointment to that area until it is healed.
And if the abscess is too large for the vein, then bandage as much of the wound with gauze as you can cover the abscess, and place the needle from underneath the area held in your hand, pierce it fully, and make a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. Then close the abscess as I have instructed, or bind one part of the two threads together.
If you doubt whether the son is still alive, then replace with another needle through all of its thread at the incision from the first needle, and pull gently in four places.
Then cut away the abscess as much as possible until there is no excess left, then cut off the remaining tissue and leave what is tied.
Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply bandages and salves until it is healed.
is so they le grand. Et so that: the ondce; if: 1  J. If you to not; don’t. Tort (30. JA Dex.
This occurs more often in shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, and it is severe abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and causes pain.
When it is strongly held back, the patient feels intense pain, and it's not entirely throughout the body, but mainly in the head.
And becomes immobile from all parts, and neither goes forward nor backward, nor up nor down, and those with joint issues should not be treated with iron. There may be spasms. And those who are in the head or forehead area make the skin contract at the sphacelation (spasm).
And those who are in the head or forehead area make the skin contract at the sphacelation (spasm). If abscesses are small, use pincers and treat it at its root.
And if it is large, tie it with an incision, then strip the skin, and expose the bone, then stitch the wound closed, and treat until healthy again.
At no time does it occur in other bodies or places than the womb, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, and has fine roots but large heads.
and among them there are both small ones and very large ones.
I saw patients who had wounds in the stomach that appeared more like fungi than any other thing, with no difference, and they were white, with fine roots, split open, and filled with moisture.
I measured them and found one to weigh 18 ouns, the other 6 pounds. The nature of incision is such that you must check if the patient is damp, and the color of the artery is white and moist with subtle roots. If the head is displaced far, let it be brought to your presence, with the fire cautery applied.
If the head is displaced far, let it be brought to your presence, with the fire cautery applied. For in bandaging there come often excessive bleeding and if it does not cease, then urgently apply the caustic.
and if you see the patient hopeful but fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, bind the wound as we have said, and leave it for three days.
and then compressing, do not cease to hold the thread until the wound is closed, and heal by it with little effort.
but if the roots are thick, be wary in covering them completely for fear of the wind, but well cover most of it, then cauterize so that it does not recur.
Then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cover the swelling which is of a furious color, poor feeling, and looks like milk.
For it is an inflamed ulcer that needs to be treated, and I will come for the treatment of syphilis afterward.
When there is an acute fistula If the appearance of gangrene comes from a wound or incision in an ulcer, and is on the belly and there are some swellings as occurs in other parts, or blood flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or inflammation.
and if it is from the ulcer or discharge of pus, then its appearance resembles the body's natural color, and it feels light without pain, but open to various exits. And if it is due to the release of the intestine, then there are more diversities, and when one presses on its sides, so it pops back out again, and sometimes it becomes hardened, and greatly expands at the opening of the bath and requires strong work.
And if it is from moisture, it is a light matter and opens well when pressed with your hand, do not bind it.
And if it is for blood, then open by these signs of a large and hard abscess, which is fixed according to an amount; And if it is for inflammation, then it is sensitive to touching, and the appearance should be examined to see if it is due to blood from an artery or vein, or inflammebility.
And if it is for inflammation, then it is sensitive to touching, and the appearance should be examined to see if it is due to blood from an artery or vein, or inflammebility. If it is necessary to allow the healing process. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is of the intestines or bowels, then instruct the patient to insert a finger into their anus and stretch it out straight, and tie it all around the buttocks. then command the patient to lie supine between your hands, then go around the leg that you have tied at all of the thighs, and extend half of the abscess above the entire great joint. Then wrap it closely with a strong thread or cord made of sturdy silk, ensuring the knot is securely fastened.
Then work on extending the end of the abscess above the joint and insert your finger, followed by gently probing with an instrument. If you find that it is stuck to the joint, if necessary dislocate it, and then insert the instrument into the bowel below the abdomen.
And if you find pus, extract any excess with forceps.
If the artery is opposing, or it bleeds, then swiftly return to your work and take two needles. Insert the hollow ends into the wound made in a cross-shaped incision you previously performed for drainage.
Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and let it be open until it heals, and extract the dead tissue by yourself. Or you may cut when it is slender and required, then treat as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said.
Or you may cut when it is slender and required, then treat as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said. And extract any blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound as needed, and sew it shut.
Of a canker We have said in the section similarities to cancer, and how one must work with remedies, and how one should drain a wound of pus.
And say the canker is deep in the bone, and requires great caution in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place or on the skin where it can be scraped off like cancer found in armpits, thighs, and similar areas, it should all be removed at the beginning.
Nor has anyone ever been able to treat it before me.
And the treatment, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, involves purging the patient of black bile once.
Then you should make the healer fast if there is apparent fullness, then adjust the patient to bring them into place for treatment.
Then squeeze your boils or cancer, and the hair from all parts, and bones in every part without leaving anything.
and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the site with your hand or anything else, and if there is any bleeding contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until it stops. Then provide other treatment until it is set right.
Of dropsy. Then we have said in the section about dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done by medicine, and that which is treated with iron.
and one should not touch with iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanitis and hypochondria, for it is a deadly thing.
Therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "eclites" by medicine, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsebesides dropsy, as well as vomiting and similar things. If you do not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
And if you see the patient of strong vigor, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then thus must one work: Raise the patient upright with your hands, and let the assistant press the belly firmly from underneath to push the water towards the lowest part of the body, then take a spatula made of pine needles according to this form: And take a sharp knife of two parts. At the tip, and at all times it must not be inserted so deep that it reaches the intestines when you insert it, nor should it cause bleeding:
Then look to see if dropsy has moved towards the intebines: If it is necessary, you must split above the forehead II directly from below under the elbow. And if there is dropsy due to a liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the forehead II.
And if it is due to scabies, make the incision on the right side, and ensure that fluids do not run to the weakened area through the incision.
Then puncture the entire skin with the instrument, and tie it off, then elevate your hand to all of the tissue between the skin and fascia as when draining an amount equal to that of a fingernail or slightly more.
Then puncture the fascia until you reach the vein properly positioned, and that is the source of water (lymph), then ligate it tightly, and tie this instrument which has this shape: And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and of hair or thin wire, and at the part below the small hole. and with its edge from one side, near the hole. and two on another side, and three elsewhere.
And the head is cut so as a feather, and it has the shape of the incision that the writer carves the quill.
At the top is the nib, so when moisture comes to ink, it flows now onto the instrument.
Then drain the majority or the third part, for if you drain more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient may die by weakening of their spirit from the weapon's impact, or they sweat profusely, or come close to death.
However, according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the condition of the patient's strength means, and his hair.
Then prepare the instrument and retain the water, and it is now held by a key that pushes into the opening which I have discussed, so you pierce according to this manner.
Then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering as such, and drain a small quantity of water.
Do this for any number of days, and be careful not to blow on it until it does not remain but a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and leave too much water, then apply a remedy of burial dust or hot sand, and by sweating excessively or bathing and sun exposure, and drink wine. And the healing with drying medicines until it is healthy again, and caustic treatment to the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
There is never a child born without testicles, or if the testicles are small, they may not be in their proper place.
If it is necessary soon that he cannot pierce all parts of the scrotum very subtly according to this form:
Then place a fine sieve in the bottle and tie it securely with thread for three days or four, and when he needs to urinate, untie him so he may urinate, then re-secure.
And perhaps it is not necessary because the strong urine does not keep the sieve closed.
Those whose hernia is small, if it is treated with a poultice of lead as we have said, will swell.
Those who do not have the sieve in place are afflicted because none are born with it at the top of the penis, which prevents them from urinaturing until they lift their penises upward. And they cannot bend it because the matter cannot reach up to the muscles, and it is a bad illness.
And the method of treatment is such that the patient lies on their back, and extends their thighs with their heads as if at the height of a pen, so that the peritoneum may be cut into pieces appropriately.
And beware of the bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, use the ligature for those that are bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
From boils of the penis Many times these abscesses come in the thigh, and they have an ugly, pus-like appearance.
And there are both harmful and non-harmful cases;
If it is necessary to grasp them with fine tweezers and cleanse thoroughly, then place a cotton ball soaked in Egyptian oil. Then apply the fine salve until it is sufficiently healed.
And if the boil is malignant, of foul color and draining pus, one must apply a fire cautery.
Once you have cleaned it and if the shaft is partly in the vein and partly out, then one must remove the part of the shaft that is entirely within. And when it is completely out, remove what remains outside.
For when you remove it together, ensure the head of the shaft is not pierced, and infection and decay may occur at its location.
If it is necessary to treat all that is black and corrupted, then apply on the plaster of honey and flour made from peel of pomegranate fruits and figs, then proceed with other remedies until healthy again.
And if bleeding occurs, prepare a lunar cautery according to this method:
The caustic helps in two ways together: it is to know, for the running of blood and for the decay.
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert or draw out a bone from the penis, and urinate among the sick.
and when the hairs are seen above the head of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised or due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape with a sharp tool until the ties are loosened, and free the head of the penis from all sides;
If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then one must scrape with a spatula a little from the tip of the penis and hair.
Then carefully separate them (testicles), and place a fine cloth of flax in cold water, so they do not dry out completely.
Circumcision is not an unending disconnection like other wounds; Nevertheless, if we perform this work of our own will and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for their health.
I say the ancients did not mention child circumcision, as they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because most masters and holy men performed circumcision around the time of death, and during times of weakness, and at any opportunity.
If there were keys because they have two locks, and sometimes an adze is cut above and below that one below. Or he recovers the lid, and there is double pain, and in cleansing which is with the lancet's edge is not assuredly at the tip of the limb.
and in the cleaning of the nail by chance slips away the iron, and worms infest, and often they arise so that there is no need for cleaning and I have witnessed this.
Of the mundification performed using force throughout the entire line of thread, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the forces cut exactly both above and below.
For when you press your hand, smoothly cut equally at all times; but that the thread is well thick around the leather;
and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it listens, that you do not tie but only thread the string around the rod solely, and then let it expand in all ways possible.
Then let it be placed between your hands straight, and the ends are moved by the strength of your hands under your fingers so that the child does not see them, nor any straps.
Then place your hand on the rod and blow or cure it, and pull until the head of the rod is straightened. Then cleanse well from any filth that has accumulated there, then tie the head with a double thread, and bind it under one point to another knot.
Then cleanse well from any filth that has accumulated there, then tie the head with a double thread, and bind it under one point to another knot. and hold with two fingers at the second knot on the scrotum and penis, cup between the two threads, then lift the head gently and straighten the rod. then let a small amount of blood flow slowly, for it is mild. And place powder over it and cover the powder with a small piece of cooked egg yolk tempered with rosewater mixed with good and fresh oil, leaving it until the next day, and treating again as necessary until it is healed.
The form for strengthening to this medication is as follows:
Both shoulders should be held and strong, and the eyes equally as large as the hands.
The mistake in medication is if blood flows out at the incision site.
Therefore it is necessary to extend your thumb so that the eye makes an abscess.
And hold equally with both hands, and if you cannot keep it at your thumb, use tweezebar, then cut the abscess.
And if they last for three days, and that which is under the sinew is swollen, let it be left until the inflammation has subsided, and gently scrape away.
And if you know how to move it, but beware of the sinew area, it will neither harm nor benefit them.
Therefore heal the sudden wounds with powder as we have discussed in treating powders, and if a copious bleed occurs, and it flows excessively, it will not cause harm.
Then heal the same, as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Regarding urinary retention
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or an arrowhead, or hot iron, or similar things that we have discussed in the section.
If the urine is not discharged, and you see a retention due to a stone that is at or near the neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to be bedridden with their knees raised. And they should lie on their backs, extending the stomach upward from behind the spine, and keeping the patient straight as far as possible. And then one must strain to expel the stone from above, which allows for the discharge of urine.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with the entire instrument called "catheter", which has this shape: (Translation ends here. The next line would typically describe a diagram or image of the catheter's shape.)
And it is of fine silver filigree weaved like bird feathers; And be the incision one and a half inches long, and subtle at the top.
And the manner of urine release is that you take a double thread and tie it at one end with wool or cotton, then insert the ends into the catheter.
and trim the excess wool, then thread it all the way up to the end of the catheter. Then apply oil or butter and almond meal to the catheter, have the patient sit on a stool, and inflate the bladder and shaft with moistened oil and olive oil and watered wheat;
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the scrotum.
Then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient coming near to emptying themselves, but it is not done in this order because where she goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread through all the hair gradually and gradually, then urine follows the thread, then remove it forcefully, and quickly drain the urine.
And repeat with the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied, and comfort the patient.
When stitches or blood reaches the bladder, where swelling has accumulated, and you see it to be drained with waters and medicines, do so using all the instrument called "clamps", which is its form.
It is closed, and if it has three openings: On one hand, and on the other, as you see;
And for those veins from which the cortex of medicine is applied in such a way that it blocks well without additional measures, and if we can drain the moisture, then put as needed.
And when you see your medicines in a bag, place the head of the cauterizer into the moisture and drain as necessary.
If you drain the moisture with the cautery, then replace it firmly afterward. If more moisture enters and comes to the bag now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of a subtle cleansing for which we cleanse the bag:
And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher.
and from above towards his neck where the ligaments tear apart.
then take a sheep bladder and place the moisture inside which you wish to use as an enema in the bladder, then tie it between his two nipples with a strong double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
then pour the head through the anus as an enema, and apply pressure with your hand on the bladader to allow all the moisture in promptly, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce roundly through. Then insert a strong thread into these points, then form the circle as you would with wool yarn, and put within what you see of oil and moisture and water, and secure it in the instrument.
And do so as if with bladder pressing into your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Of the stone
We have discussed in the section methods of stone treatment and arrow extraction together with remedies;
And I said about the distinction between stones within rainbows, and all signs, and in what stone we must work with cutting. And concerning the bladder, and the penis;
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that stones contained within the bladder often occur in children and it is a sign that water leaks from the blad지 of its subtlety.
And it becomes inflamed, and the patient's strength wanes, he tries many times, then weakens. and from these efforts his foundation is shaken.
And the healing of children up to 4 years is easy, and it is very severe in old men, and moderate for those who are between youth and age.
And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
When we come to treat them, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the feces from within the intestines. Because it always hinders one's ability to urinate.
Then take the patient by the hands, and stand them up and lower their head, so that the stone descends to the front of the blad cuffee, and excretes once from high.
Then make them sit between your hands supported, with their hands below their thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined downward.
Then grasp and touch within.
If you feel the stone in place, then quickly cut into it near the stone.
And if it does not pass with the scraping completely, grease your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is an infant or young child. and push it to its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it at the bladder neck.
then press on your finger, and push up towards where you saw cut.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand and command him to extend the thighs upwards with his right hand and remove the skin that is below the thighs where the circumcision is made.
Then he inserts the spatulaceum filling, of which it takes its shape: And causing between those who are between the joints and the foundation, not inward but to the side of the left leg.
And it is right on the stone, and your legs are placed here or at the foundation, and the body is turned as wide as necessary from behind, and inwardly narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
occasionally pressing on the leg that is at or near the foundation so it moves without effort.
and chips that there are stones with corners and edges: if they need to be removed;
and those that are loose, resembling a clump of earth, from which removal is easy.
At the collarbone where there are corners and edges, make the cut wider.
And if it does not move out immediately, then you must use tongs similar to a file at the top, to widen and extract the stone so that it cannot escape. or you insert beneath the delicate instrument curved at the head.
and if you cannot manage it in this way, slightly widen the opening, and if the stone is calcified, extract with saltpeter.
and if there are more stones, first remove the largest one from the bladder neck, then extract it with forceps, then crush them, and afterwards any smaller ones that remain.
If it is very large, one must sew it up, causing a larger wound. For two things occur to the patient: When he dies or the urine returns through where the eyes cannot join.
Nevertheless, you strive with irrigation, or with a probe and forceps, until you wash it away in parts.
And when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bandage it up, and put over it soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and pink and cold water to cool the abscess. Then restrain the patient'n his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you reset it, the place is greatly filled with oil and water, then treat with diaphoretic ointment and basil ointment until healed.
And if abscesses arise in the wound and tissue erosion, and blood clots form in the bladder, causing retention of urine which is known to sometimes pass with urine without strain. Therefore thrust your elbow into the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will cause swelling of the bladder, and inflammation.
Then lift the wound from water and filth and pus, and heal it in every way you can, until it is healthy.
And it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, bind him with two bandages on his legs and apply remedies at the site.
And if the stone is small, and it is carried from the testicle, and lodged in there, and urine cannot flow out. If you treat as I have described above, perform the incision many times, and be excised at this treatment site. I have already found such a thing to be this way.
Take an iron rod according to this shape and be at three pointed ends sharpened into one tip.
Then take a thread and wrap it around the rod beneath the stone so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
Then insert the drill lightly onto the rod until it reaches the stone; And turn the drill with your hand into the stone gradually and gently until you can pierce through to the other side of the stone.
Soon it will come out as urine; then press your hand on what is left behind from the stone that is inside the rod. It will soon break and burst with the urine, providing relief to the patient.
And if you cannot do so for any reason that prevents it, then place a thread beneath the stone and another above, then make the rod where the stone is between the two threads, then extract forcefully, loosen the ligature, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound. And treat so that it becomes healthy again.
Of women's pierced areas.
Sometimes stones occur in women and if they occur once, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons for this.
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that it is not possible to find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself in front of strangers, especially when she is married.
And the third way is that occasionally one may not find a woman skilled in this art of hands.
And the fourth way is that a woman's stone may be harder than a man's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear associated with it. If necessary for such cases arise, you should engage a wise midwife who knows this well, carefully examine them, and if none are found skilled in this subtle art of the midwife, then caution should be taken.
And this is a woman well-versed in the ways of women's life or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that you follow her instructions for the incision of the stone. And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin:
And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: Then it is necessary for her to insert something or a foundation, and search for the stone.
And if she finds it, then she must bind the stone below her foundation and advise that she inserts something or a male figure, and desires and presses her left hand against the formed bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then encase the stone at the thigh's root against the male figure's genitals, where it is usually placed in an apparent manner, and feel the stone in that area. And does not move its two parts above or below the stone or bone, and it must be made small at first.
And does not move its two parts above or below the stone or bone, and it must be made small at first. Then insert the rod into the wound, if you feel a stone or bone, support the hole until the bone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
This is to say: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with veins.
If you recognize them to understand their nature.
And if the stone does not pass, then put it in the place of saltpeter paste, and hold it for an hour until the stone is lodged.
Then return to your work, until the bacteria are strong, and have the remedies I mentioned for extracting stones from within you to help in your endeavor.
And if the blood does not flow, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the place and strain with ties and bandages, and do not attempt again in that spot, and leave the wound alone unless the patient dies. Then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the joint rests, return to your work as long as the wound is strong.
Rheum is nothing else than a collection of moisture or leprosy, which emerges from under the skin surface where hair follicles are located, containing pus.
and is called "leprosy," and never properly in the fabric of pus; if one believes it to be another discharge. and it is the leather beneath the skin surface that we have mentioned.
This has no cure if it occurs often. And the production of this gathering is due to weakness in the joints, and that material is spread there.
And not from blows to the joints, and this dampness is of many sources: or it shows as becoming yellowish, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this occurs more frequently:
and this is the sign of recognizing this gathering, for if it is white like we have described, then it is swellings on the bones, not long as those seen in an egg, and do not open up joints because they are completely damp inside.
And if there is dampness in the membrane itself, then it is bone swellings with a part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another type of egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white sinew, so it feels well.
Therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, if it feels throughout the entire intermitted area, thus its form is as described above. According to what comes after the intervention, judge according to what is within.
And when we cure with iron, it is necessary that the patient be nourished according to their power and the restoration of their body.
then he lies on his back, upon something slightly elevated, and places plenty of cloths underneath him.
then he sits on his left side, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs along the vein line.
then take the spatulum (spoon), and separate the vein skin along its length up to near the wrist, making the incision straight as you cut through the vein until reaching white fascia, carefully excising it according to their ability.
Then pierce the sack open with water widely from both sides, and extract all the fluid, and then apply compresses, and elevate the sack.
And do not touch the core of the joints, but only the sac itself; Cut it all or in small parts gently its underside, for if you do not cut it skillfully, the fluid will return;
And if the egg falls during your work, reset the joint to its place when you have completed the task with the sac.
Then align the two halves of the joint's core with a stitch, then treat it as other wounds until it is sound.
And if the egg appears to be affected by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are dilated, suspecting an excess of blood.
Then bandage the clavicle completely up to the shoulder, and extract the bone splinters, and treat as we have said.
And if the eagle is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches; If you bandage the other part similarly to how you did the first one, then let out the blood, and apply a cloth soaked in oil of roses to the wound.
If you bandage the other part similarly to how you did the first one, then let out the blood, and apply a cloth soaked in oil of roses to the wound. and apply another cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, and place two diapers above the shoulders, and lay them down with doubled sheets as per this form:
Then take two sheets, and attach cloths of shredded fabric in this manner and sew them together at the groin of the trousers, with one side reaching to the back and the other to the inner elbow.
And the other two heads above the shoulders are secured together at the neck with a girdle.
And never is the medicine this graft of fire needed for a wound made with an iron knife, and take you a delicate cautery tool, and prepare the leather coverings, and heat them as we have said before, so that the white sack containing water is uncovered;
If you take the cautery in this manner, pierce that white sack at its corners, and scrape it with this hot delicate cautery.
And cover all ways you can, until everything is cleared;
and ensure that the fire does not touch the fat.
and you tell yourself that this work is more healing; and move with care to avoid blood loss, and ensure the procedures are performed correctly.
and if nothing else happens to you, or there is an abscess or blood loss or other things, then treat what goes against you accordingly, as has been previously stated.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its severity, then proceed with perforation as I have instructed, ensuring that once you are well-informed by the meanings we have discussed, you place the patient on a raised seat. then pierce the abscess at the part above all the surrounding tissue broadly and insert the perforation along the length of the body.
And let them have wide pores so that all their water flows freely;
Then place cotton at the site, bind it tightly, and allow for the remaining water to drain out; then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the gauze bandage does not allow water to seep out from the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you insert a tube or the instrument used to treat fluid in oozes, as described before;
And if the wound is expanded and it allows fluid to return, and is reconnected after six months or sooner, and when it has rejoined as before, then the patient will overcome their illnesses over time.
Note that in this branch's treatment, there are more fearful outcomes due to various conditions, which leads me to believe it should be left as is.
And I will tell you about the procedure and nature of an abscess.
Thus, many abscesses come in the body, especially in the joints. and it is through various cases.
It is to know by excess of sourness and watering, which spreads to the joints or from impact.
And it is the color of an abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess;
And sometimes it can be frightening and painful abscesses, with a dark color, never coming from our arteries or vein swelling.
When it is from us [the physician], then it is known by the hotness of an abscess when pressed between your thumbs; and one must not touch it at all.
He who is from vein swelling is known by its reaction to the touch of one's thumbs, and can quite well make an incision in this appearance, and on other parts. And it is that you cut off the head of the clavicle, then open up at the top, and trace a line down to the white fascia, and release the suspensory from all parts of the uef.
If the uef is already severed with these cuts, then it is appropriate to trace and cut the uef, and remove the head.
And if it is hard at the fascia or in that which lies within the vessels, then one must release all of that tissue and roundly cut off the head.
If the birthmark is behind or in place, it must be covered entirely and remove the wool as we have said.
, and it the is rense avoir that you to cest l'orent li nt the tissage. And heuist la veill; car covient the beau coure est de, et as tu avie eont lesse est paris s’aveug, se vntet and lea les doth esprove not come cite le rengin luex et est ongli.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a burr, with the softening of the ligaments, and the patient becomes grievously ill as it progresses.
The treatment of this disease is also as dangerous and fearsome as the one mentioned before; nonetheblie we will tell you about its practice according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then apply suspensory bands to their legs, encompassing all bandages near the thigh, and extend them fully.
then cut the sharp spatula along both sides of the bandages until they are uncovered, and then scrape each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries located on the temples.
then insert a needle or thread as appropriate, and fasten it at the first spot where blood has appeared, securing it firmly to the other end. Then bind with a bandage straight and true, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted sores.
Then heal the wound as with other types of boils, ensuring that no vessels burst and either remain intact.
because by this there comes no harm, and if all vessels come into sight, then it is necessary to treat the joints with all vessels. if that the bone loses its nourishment due to vessel incision and becomes hardened and cannot be helped.
The remedies of this branch are through the abscess that comes out or suppuration, or extension in the abdabdominal area causing intestines to discharge into one of the joints.
And this procedure is due to a snakebite or from its spreading, and they come in these two ways from many causes:
or by trauma, or jumping, or screaming, or lifting of heavy weight, and similar things.
And the signs when it's from the spreading of a snakebite are that it occurs gradually over long periods, and does not come suddenly. And the boils are equally spread towards the extremities because the snakebite hastens the intestines.
When it comes to the signs of gangrenous sack severance, as sudden pain occurs at its onset and various abscesses appear near the skin surface, due to intestinal issue and gangrene in the body.
And at no time do they pass with the intestines, and are retained inside, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
In these cases of iron treatment by fear, it is necessary to remove them.
And the manner of treatment is that you command the patient to cleanse the intamenent with their hands within the wound if they can enter it. Then gently grasp its neck between your hands, and lift the hindquarters.
Then extend the head upwards, and scrape all the skin of the thighs lengthwise; Then insert fingers into the groin joints hooked as needed to open the wound, and be such that you can pull out the bones;
Then scrape away the fascia which is under the skin of the thigh, until all white fascia are revealed.
Then insert your index finger into the area that ensures the thigh, between the white fascia which is under the skin of the thigh and between the second fascia, and remove what is behind the thigh, and between the second fascia.
And then move the right hand into the hole of the kneecap, and stretch out the white fascia to your left hand, and lift up all the fascia toward the waist. And instruct the minister that they extend the fascia upwards, and those which are behind the ligament.
And look at your legs if there is any intestine wrapped or thick fascia, and if you find anything, take it from the belly below.
Then take a needle or one made of thick thread, and insert it into the back part of the fascia, which is after the patella's leather. After the waist, then cut the tendons that appear with threads, as long as there are four threads. Then join them together in the manner of a cross and tie with silk thread, which we have mentioned is below the hide between the joints, with a strong bond using two lengths. Then wrap the heads of the threads and tie them from two lengths apart so that no insect can enter inside, to prevent infection. And place the bond according to the first length of two fingers from that person, and after these two lengths leave the silk thread which is below the head of the joint with a width of one finger. And afterwards in accordance with the size of the eggshell it carries.
Then cut into the part that is below the hide between the joints as long and deep as before, just as we have said earlier.
Then prepare fine wool with oil, and apply it to wounds, and also treat them as we have mentioned. And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to fear of blood flowing out. For this often occurs, leaving the bandage in place until it dries on its own.
and if there is delay in healing, then use warm water to cleanse as we have said until it dries.
Then treat the wound with another remedy until it heals perfectly.
line:
In this treatment, I have never seen anyone who dared to undertake the remedy with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like joining branches with twine, after marking above and below lightly.
Then bind the wound, and treat the incision where there is activity until it dries.
And the treatment as we have said, until it is set right.
Never comes gout in the fingers, as we have said, and open the eyes;
And none of the intestines come out with strings, and if they do, it is little, and he recovers quickly.
And in any case, if he remains too long at this point, the wound appears or a hernia, until the intestines come out.
And this happens by the extension of that hernia which is in the fingers, as we have said, because they are extended, then softened and swollen are the eyes and open.
And the treatment is with a caustic, as we have previously stated;
And at no time is treated with iron in this manner: And it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then you wrap the swollen area with a bandage broadly according to the amount of three stitches.
Then you extract the sphacelus that is under the skin that follows, then take the thread and place it over the visible area of the sphaculous.
Then press firmly on the front of the belly, then sew the two visible areas of the sphaculous near the head with the thread, and do both.
Then remove the head of the thread, and do not cover the sphaculous or extend any other thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of hemorrhoids. Then treat with wound care.
Then treat with wound care. And when you bind the wounds, if they are swollen and treat the injury, until it is healed.
The face is swollen, has no appearance in the normal position, and the cautery moves easily at this spot, closer to healing.
For softening of the thick skin of the joints
Often the skins of the joints become soft in some men because the cartilage within them is moistened, and there is fluid to see.
And it requires, when one wants to treat them, that the patient be laid down on their back and the bursa is pressed onto the softened cartilage underneath the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with stitches, and if you see swelling of the softened cartilage, do so first with three or four firm sutures.
Then press between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it heals, and spit out the thread.
By means of cauterization
Believes that excoriations are forbidden in our law, and therefore I would not like to discuss it in this book.
And there are not necessary two ways:
And the one is that the muscles respond when asked and they heal.
And the other, because we often need to tame certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and rabbits and other animals.
I say that taming is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by piercing.
In the one where we do taming by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until its horns are softened and pliable. then grip them with your hand, until they return to their original shape and you no longer feel them.
Of the taming of size: It is necessary that you hold it firmly, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the bandage, and wrap each one well after you have properly scorched them.
and leave no trace of external or internal sores that are upon the vessels;
and this manner of treatment is different from that done by attraction because with the latter method there may be nothing left on the joints, hence the object seeks dislocation.
then treat the wound until it heals.
Of hermaphrodites: Those are individuals who possess both male and female sexual organs or characteristics, often seen as a medical anomaly in old texts. The translation should address this directly while maintaining sensitivity to modern understandings of gender diversity. Here is the line-by-line English translation for clarity:
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among humans: the one where both joints are open as similarly to that of a woman's body, or it may have hair and sometimes void in urination.
And the other manner is for women, and it is on their thumbs just as with a rod and strings.
And the treatment of the person and the woman is that you cover all the swollen areas, and treat them as other wounds.
In the second way, for men whose urine runs through their thighs, there is no cure.
A swelling is an inflamed area on the natural part, so much that it's too ugly to look at; And some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure.
It must be that you grasp the excess of the swelling with your hand or fingertips, and cover it lightly;
And do not go too deep, that no bleeding occurs, then treat it with another treatment until it is healthy.
Et for an injury where it is present at the mouth of the marrow and the bone, and sometimes breaks loose, and appears similar to a cow's head, and therefore they called it in ancient times "the disease of cows. If it is necessary to handle it as we have said in testing, and treat until healed.
If during the woman's monthly cycle her natural condition is not well understood or if the flow is scant. and it is a natural occurrence by birth, or has come about due to disease.
and it is a natural occurrence by birth, or has come about due to disease. or it is caused by a chill, or from the subtle touch of serpents or spiders, and arises predominantly in the bones, ribs, neck, or elsewhere.
and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly having menstrual flow.
And recognizing this is done by looking at the appearance.
If the swelling is often appearing, either near the ears or in the neck area.
If it is a subtle sore, and it extends to two fingers, then act quickly, and make an incision like this:
Place your index and middle fingers together, and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
then extend the two fingers formed, while it is red from a subtle sore, and oversee the bleeding points;
then take wool, and millet in oil, and apply it to the lump, and let the woman lie each day at home until she can sit up.
And if the hernia is hard and tense, it must be cut with a pair of scissors resembling an oak leaf.
If the bleeding is from an ulcer or a wound, then suspend it with catgut and bandage;
And have the hemostatic remedies such as oak gall, blood of dragon, incense, in abundance with egg white.
Then prepare a bandage made of linen broad enough so that the wound cannot heal.
And thus leave it for an extended time, and apply a tent-like dressing with dry linen.
Then attend to other treatments until the wound is healed.
And when there is lead in the bone, it must be treated as follows unless it has advanced abscesses; When an abscess is growing, do not touch it with fire.
Inflamed if it is swelling or inflammation within the genital area: Do Not to be touched directly; follow these steps for treatment as long as there are festering wounds. Hemorrhoids are outbreaks of veins that without proper accustoming become swollen;
And we have said in the classification those similarities among them, and their signs, and I will now mention which ones require treatment.
I say that eruptions and hardening in the muscles are fully embedded, and they do not appear to touch, only heal with iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the muscle can be felt, those that can be treated.
Therefore you must put the woman in a cold house, then spread alum on the root ashes, and apply blood-restraining remedeby means such as oak gall, blood of dragon, incense, and similar things.
Then place its feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse it in cold water.
And if bleeding occurs again, have it sit in a concoction of sumac bark and red apple peels, hawthorns, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix with honey and oil, and apply as a plaster on its back.
And if it is blocked, this is good. If not, make him use poultices on his back and the calf of his leg without causing pain;
Then take lamb's wool and pulverize in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the wound.
And when the abscess rests, cleanse it daily with ointment until healed;
And that which is called "albathir" is red and appears similar to raw flesh, so it should be covered as I have previously described. Then let him heal until it becomes sound again.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the flesh: as cancer and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, erysipelas, skin diseases, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other ailments that I have mentioned in the section.
Therefore, I must describe in this treatise the severe boils that occur on the calf muscle, which are not like the common abscesses one finds.
And if you witness the work of iron [in treating], then observe whether the boils are hard and at the onset of their appearance, hot to touch, red in color when you see them. Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die down until the pain is alleviated.
And then make the patient sit on a chair or bench, and have two small chairs where they can lean back, and support their back with cushions to align the parts of the leg that are out of place.
And spread his thighs apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage.
Then turn the ball towards the right rib cage, and insert the instrument used to work in the mouth of the bone, which then comes into shape.
And it is necessary that when you see this instrument inserted, to push the rod in first to determine how deep into the bone it goes so that nothing from the instrument enters further than it should and does not harm the patient. If the dislocations are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the muscles with bandages so that they do not cause pain.
And it must be placed over the instrument's horn, and you should color or dye the instrument itself.
And when abscesses are opened, and they become soft to the touch, it is necessary to cover with gauze at the head and groin area.
And when bowels are emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound soaked bandages with rose oil or dry green oil.
And place the strong bandage at the beginning of the muscle and over the muscles and along the forearm with clean soft cloths, either in water or melted wax.
Then treat with ointment after two days of healing to make it whole.
and never lift the scab or wound through an enema of water and honey, then with boiled water or lily roots and aloes. Then apply ointment again.
And if the wound is healed by scar tissue, it must be that you avoid iron treatment but treat as we have said in the section on bandaging.
When childbirth occurs: observe whether it is a normal delivery or difficult; provide comfort and assistance to the mother during labor; ensure cleanlinees tools and surroundings for safety of both mother and baby; assist with breathing techniques, position changes, and pain relief as needed. After birth, support the mother in bonding with her newborn, initiate breastfeeding if possible, and monitor their health closely. It is necessary first to the bleeding that it knows the natural form of childbirth, and if you see the woman hurrying with labor and desires fragrant ointment.
Then promptly help the child to be born. Then you declare that this birth follows natural form, and the baby is also delivered with its head, and the placenta along with it.
And when you see these signs, it becomes necessary to gently press its belly so that the child excretes quickly.
For when they urinate on their head, the small streams are with them, and the marrows of excess fluids are cleansed by proper ablution.
And those that come in another way do not occur naturally.
For it comes upon the feet at no time, and strikes the body or head, and hands, where it comes upon the belly or ribs, and is turned by chance on its neck, and other evil shapes.
It is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these matters, and free from error and deception; I will show you all the shapes of how one must help them.
If a child comes onto his head naturally and the woman gives birth painfully, and the vigor of him is weak, so have him sit on a seat or women hold him.
And let his natural essence of oil and fenugreek be cooked, then pour the boiled residue between his two fingers in this manner: And cut the little finger, and wrap it around until its moisture completely dries out.
And rub the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then enema the woman with a mixture of muscatel seeds and fenugreek oil.
Then press and induce sneezing due to condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour: Now straighten the child's.
And if the two hands arise, one must reset them gently and gradually. and if they cannot enter, place a woman underneath him, and lift his feet upwards. then stand the patient on the ground, and instruct the woman not to push during standing.
and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, grasp his hands with a loop placed in front of you, extract the child, and reset him evenly.
From the removal of the child from its feet When the child comes on its feet, one must place it upside down. And then gently turn a little at a time until they are equal.
Then grasp the pieces and extend them slowly bit by bit.
If it falls up to the knee caps, as commanded, and you make them sneeze due to this condition. If it is fallen far, if God wills so.
And if it is not as we have said, if it turns a little and a little more, until it is according to the natural shape. heu's. Morgueil ougt they are not enst;
And if it does not come forth as we have described, take musk extract from the head of a stag, and linseed oil, and melted resin, and pound all into a mortar. and apply this concoction to the area inside and outside of the woman's womb, then make her sit in warm water until up to the ribs.
and once she is softened from it, give her a mixture of myrrh, apply it there, and leave it for an hour. then make her sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and strain her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, as the child is now fallen.
From an issue with the child's knees When a child comes to this condition, place your hands gently but frequently. Then slightly suspend it by its neck and let the feet hang downward, and lay it on the bed. Bend its hands gently but frequently, and then press the hands over the abdomen, and remove the pillows from underneath, until it is positioned with feet downward. If the child does not move, take its legs and form a position with them, then raise the abdamenow press gently on their hands. And now slightly but frequently push on the child. Command the woman to continue as long as the child has moved.
From the dislocation of a child coming out wide with one hand extended during delivery. It's necessary to engineer repositioning of the hand: If you cannot bring it back, lift the woman and move her.
If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed, and raise her legs straight.
Then treat the swelling as I have described;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then examine how to reset it. And deliver the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and command that she push until the baby is born.
Of dislocation of the child on its neck, with hands spread apart, and face turned towards the mother's back. It's necessary for you to wash your hand, then rotate it slightly, and gently ease out.
And when it is even, apply the natural swelling of fat and oil as we have said, then command that she moves slightly.
When you have accomplished this, make it sit on a chair, and command that it bend. And let it sneeze. In the same manner for the entire second procedure
In the same manner for the entire second procedure When it comes to this in the manner of a second course, cover the second course with your fingernail until the moisture is expelled.
and if a child lies on its face with its neck exposed, cover the buttocks so that they are not retained, and let the child move.
then place the child inside, until you have positioned it as is appropriate, and command that the woman should not bend at all.
From the outcome of bones. Know that hemorrhoids often occur, and sometimes they do not appear at all or only three or four times. And this is not a strange thing, and rarely happens. Two are strange things, and do not exist at all if few names them.
Two are strange things, and do not exist at all if few names them. I know that they are multiple, and are distressed by the leech who departs from them, which is linked to bile.
And none of them come out naturally as all things do beneath, as we have said.
And if they come out quickly, then the treatment as we have said, and let there be subtle bile, and make swiftly what it makes. And so that it may move to health accordingly. Of many children
They are not formed in marriages I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they take the form of a child through careful measurement with great glory, and it is fitting that bile governs all this, for on occasion similar things happen. If done according to what is necessary.
le parti clow.
When you treat a woman with the dead child or womb, as I have mentioned in the section, and if there is no force, and you are compelled to perform manual work. if it is necessary that you ascertain whether the woman is of sound health, and has no condition or fears death;
if it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and have her shoulders raised, and legs elevated;
and the minister examines her thigh of two parts, or if she is tied to the bed so that she cannot treat the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mons pubis with oil-moistened musk and fennel seeds, then anoint her belly with these oils and musk;
Then gently insert the curet into the marrow, then aim to place it back or wherever the incision is suitable for suturing, and be careful if the child has been injured so that they do not descend on their head.
If the incisions are made into its joints or on its neck or mouth or behind the palate or below the beard or under the chin or near the hips, and if the patient is paralyzed with their feet touching, then they insert a pin or middle rib.
And it is appropriate to tie the incision on its right hand and place the cork between its index fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the incision into any of these locations that we have mentioned until he reaches his purpose.
Then place against another bump where you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
And then evenly stretch it by moving from one side to the other so that they may come out, and make the bumps aligned for holding, as is their form.
If a part remains, anoint the physician's hands with oil of any sort, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part.
If none remains there, place this small cone or higher up, and keep it until all of it has been expelled.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to gripping, you must wrap it with a bandage until fully. then the splint at the base or ankle joint, and thus you must do so in the other hand, and both feet.
And if the child's head is large and off-center when exiting, or it has an elevated forehead, you should place a cotton swab between your fingers, and press the top and extract the fluid. When you use the instrument called "almidach", it takes shape with the essences or extracts that follow this.
And similarly, make so that the child grows naturally to great size;
And then treat the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out again and is forced back, split them as long as there are any remaining issues from the injury.
And if it cannot come out, break it by pieces with whatever force you can muster;
And if it is swollen in the abdamen or under the ribs, you need to pierce it until all fluids are released.
And if the child is on his feet, then there is slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the marrow is light.
And if it is out in the abdomen or udder, you need to extract it with a drainage pouch wrapped around the hand. And they make a bubble on the belly or the udder, as long as the moisture inside is correct.
And if other limbs are lame, and the head remains stiffened, then they push their hand far into the joint socket, and pull it up to the mouth of the socket. Then he inserts a pin or two, and twists it firmly.
And if the mouth of the socket is contracted due to an abscess that has arisen, one should not attempt treatment immediately, but rather apply moist and fatty substances. And he applies emplasters, and soaks in softening and moistening waters.
And if the child is near its ribs, then place it properly as we have instructed for a live child.
And if there is no power to do so, then cut it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the spinal cord.
And when you have done this, if there are abscesses as we mentioned come in the muscles;
and if blood flow is disrupted, then it must be put on a restrictive diet, with other remed cuing.
And I saw a woman with twins inside her womb; one was dead and the other alive, which she cut loose. cail as it: MID and noit. If yout theme Middle.
I was called to treat it, and pondered for a long time, unable to heal the wound.
I applied strong attraction forceps, and extracted one bone initially, followed by others after some days. I was greatly concerned because the belly had no bones.
dont est the in; do not too that gaspits ou les s.
I will treat the wound, and despite injuring bones with my hands, until it heals completely; And so it was that it remained healed for a long time in this way, then became slightly bent at the level.
and I have not recorded such an example because when masters encounter strange things, they know how to put it right.
After this comes the form of pressure where one finds relief.
And at turning as in the hinges of two joints. Nevertheless, the horn should be more subtle with restriction, and made of iron or boxwood;
And the mouth of the bar should be one foot wide, and the edge of the trees half a foot, and long an inch and a half. And between the two joints there should be two adjustments of the same iron bar, which are firm in both places, half a foot long or a little more.
And these two adjustments are bent in the mouth of the barrel to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of iron or boxwood according to the look of pliers. And it has two heads to dislocations, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide.
And when you see the muscle completely exposed with the instrument, have the woman sit on a bed with her feet and legs spread apart, then place both dislocations together in the groin, holding the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs. Then work your hand with the instrument as you have adjusted the tongs equally, according to the quantity of flesh that is exposed in the groin opening until she achieves what she wants.
These instruments are all similar and come in various forms; And when the wounds have been prepared, the work is much quicker and higher for their quantity.
Do not doubt the instrument that you have prepared it, for its needs are by no means excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it's necessary to instruct the patient to hold her sphincter, and then perform an external conditioning, and restrain her hands by the mouth and nose. If she vomits as a result, that is okay.
If not, take a container and cover it, then place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare (vomiting), such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, yarrow, and dandelion. All these herbs or any of them should be boiled or brewed in water over the fire.
Then place a rag or cloth on top of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the vomiting mare (patient), and wait until the vapors enter her.
Then make the patient sneeze, as we have said. If there is a relapse of the swelling.
And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with oil of mastic or high-quality musk essence, and then apply it as a poultice, followed by a linen bandage. And when she finds it, gently stretch and extend it gradually until the bone does not protrude.
But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then massaged. It will come out and relax.
And if the mouth of the bone is extended too far, we have said to perform sneezing treatment and fumigation with herbs.
And if it is not of all this that we have said, ensure you do not deceive in treatment.
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the gall bladge, tie it to the thighs of the woman and then enema with medicinal ointment of tetrapharmakon. if you loosen and reset it, and strength returns;
but always, when it moves like this, bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and weakens the patient. If therefore fumigations with vapors are needed for it:
None of the old ones have tested fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fans the woman for holding back the flowering and secondary growth is this:
And it seems like a serpent, and place the head gently into its natural position, and wide-set eyes near fire.
And there are fumigations over the embers, and lichen until it is burned away, then start another one.
Children who are born lacking in foundation perceive their existence not as solid but as being threaded with subtle fibers. Therefore it is necessary for the patient to grasp that which is threaded within and not be distracted by filamentous thoughts, and keep awareness so as not to touch.
Then apply lin cloth with wine and oil, then proceed with the salve treatment until it is purified.
by  fairet s the a bo: MRIse bonign tant that son les line; and c’s il ac fu: Then they may be ma;
And never shall these threaded thoughts come from wound or abscess healing; if it becomes necessary to address that which is threaded: If you treat them as we have said of the pain from swelling.
Phlebotomies that arise from beneath the base are inflamed, and those arising near the base increase in size over a period of two parts, or to one or more phlebitides.
and when that inflammation is old, it works, and with increasingly white or subtle pus, these phlebitides are never free from them.
and known by what comes out or evacuation when the patient has an emission, and sometimes they turn up in vomit.
And if to phlebitides that penetrate up to the bladard, and up to the middle of the member. And they reach up to the hip joint, and near our lower back.
And thus one encounters a persistent pus at the base, not drying out. And you should push your index or thumb into it and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, you should insert a thin rod or horse hair, as long as you feel the rod or hair with your hand.
and if you do not sense it, and there is no discharge, windings, or stench as we have said: believe that it does not break through. if needed for the cure.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass through and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tentacled appearance comes near its place. If there is no twisting and the pain persists within, then it remains bent, and no medicine or bandaging with salve helps.
And in these persistent abscesses there is no effective remedy but hard work, and the foolish tricks of people who meddle with them.
In the one that is neither persistent nor old, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have tested, and it requires that you lay the patient on their back.
and lifts the legs up to his hips, with his hips inclined towards his belly. Then apply a tent of linen or silk if there is twisting, until you know where the tenting occurs.
If the patient feels numbness in their base (of limb), then you should apply your index finger there; if it is felt, the tenting has been effective.
and if between your finger you feel pus or blood, then know that it is present. but do not operate on it if it cannot be cleansed.
It can always be cleaned well, but this happens rarely;
And to aid with this is to ensure that one properly uses the subtle fire-cautery according to the size of the abscess as previously mentioned. and it heats everything thoroughly within the abscess until reaching near its foundation; And do this two or three times as long as you know that the charred parts must be scraped away, appearing like an eagle's feather.
And then the curing of soiled rags with honey until those charred parts are removed, followed by anointment ointment binding them and solidifying.
If it is thus healed, it's good.
If this is not achieved otherwise cannot be clean;
And if it becomes torn, and does not puncture up to the proper depth at its foundation, then place between your thumbs an even thickness of char or silex, and observe whether the abscess comes out from under that covering as white?; If you apply the plaster at the beginning of the abscess and secure it before bedtime, then proceed with the fire cautery until it reaches the edge of the swelling. And the abscess will be relieved, and healed.
Then reshape those crooked claws that look like a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
And if blood is won, cutting between you and the vein; cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
For the fire cautery combines two things: that is to say, the drying of these dislocated joints and the coagulation of blood and removal of moisture.
then the curing of stained garments should be washed with butter or soaked in a sieve full of water until they bleed, and seize them as the discoloration fades.
Then treat the wound with soothing salves of tallow, and they are drying medicinal substances.
When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes near to the very foundation, and is distant from the body, you may touch your thumb or wrist, and examine it.
If you feel the tenting, and within it is the bandage or sackcloth or linen cloths, or there are signs to pierce, if there be no remedies but faith and hope, by means of one of the three methods:
or you may cauterize as we have said, or wrap it until fullness, or if possible let it tent and then treat as first.
and do not wrap too tightly, so that you don't constrict the bandage that holds the foundation, and let evacuations occur as they wish to. then treat it, as we have said.
then treat it, as we have said. By chance it may heal, or you remove the covering and clean it after it is dried near the foundation, or by tenting or with another instrument sharpened. then model the false cartilage that is in the wound as much as you wish; then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula in the part further from the foundation.
then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula in the part further from the foundation. if it were an easier matter for the patient.
And no times are there fistulas according to this manner:. and when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is close to the foundation near the skin above, then take a pierced tent according to this form. And it inserts a twisted thread of two, and wraps the dressing around all the thread into the abscess until it reaches the top.
If it is within the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that pierced one and place your hand or foundation.
And treat the head with bandages, and bring together both shoulders as one, and hold them together, and leave it for one or two days.
And do not loosen until the sutures have healed completely, once they begin to split apart.
Then care for the wound until it is fully healed and cleaned.
If the abscess does not burst, make it pierced in every way that you can, if it is not too hard. For do not attempt to pierce the abscess if it is too firm, and then heal it as we have said until it becomes healthy again.
The shape of a pointed tool used to make an anal fistula is very sharp and one-sided with a cutting edge. and on the other side not because it should not be cut as seen here:
Abscesses occur in two ways: or they are embedded in the foundation, like resin grains, and there may be small and large ones, and often associated with some blood loss, and one or more abscesses that undermine the foundation and the head of the foundation.
But those that are dry have little moisture, and accordingly either a bit of clear water or a bit of blood, and they have the natural color of the body.
and the treatment for those who have them in their foundations is that you instruct the patient to wriggle so they can move into beds, until the foundation becomes loose, and cracks appear. If hasty, and you wedge them with pincers or clamp it with your fingernail, then strip them to their roots.
And if the nails cannot hold due to their moisture, they are taken with thread or cotton, or a piece of silk. And you extract them from your two (fingers/toes), then strip them, and dust with hot powders that are at hand for cauterization. When you cauterize them as described or by fire cautery, it heals other ailments until they are healthy.
And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter clister to cleanse what is at the base, so it can come out clearly. If the pain persists, and if threads are strongly placed on the foundation, then there is a light cure.
If the pain persists, and if threads are strongly placed on the foundation, then there is a light cure. And that you pluck them with your fingernail or pliers, then scrape them, and treat as we have said until they are healthy, and he fears an incision by iron. If it is necessary to suture according to this manner:
If it is necessary to suture according to this manner: Take a thread of wire and insert into a needle, then draw the wire through above and make a hole with the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends away from the eyelet so they are apart.
then pulls the wire tautly, then knots the thread, and removes the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one end loose to absorb excess blood.
then place a woolen cloth soaked in rose oil or resin on the foundation and cover it, instructing the patient to rest.
then let them be until they come out, and once they are expelled, apply salve or other treatments until healed.
Doubly firmly and solidly at its foundation Many times it often becomes firm in the intestines and through natural constriction, especially when the disease is old and medicines do not help. If it is necessary to dress the tip of a finger or toe with skin above it that does not allow for wetness. then treat until it becomes hardened as required.
and if it cannot harden, resume the scraping more forcefully than before until it becomes moist enough to be scalded. then treat until it is sufficiently moist.
And the trembling A worm-like appearance occurs near the skin and spreads widely.
And it never reaches the bloodstream, causing numbness like that of a shock and spreading throughout the entire body, more so in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose or a strong vulture feather and place it over the shiver until the purple circle fully surrounds the shiver. Then turn your hand to cover the entire area until you grasp it entirely with friction, and place it firmly, straightening the joint from its roots.
And if you see this tremor as a spider or iron of this form, and be subtle from below and crosswise above. Do not perceive pain, hold by the two, and press together.
And if you see it, then cauterize the joint as with a fire cautery before or after.
At no time is one made to use silver, lead, melted copper, or molten tin;
And at no time are these small and large suppositories used as according to what they have been prepared. Thus, what is administered in the treatment of children who are weak and painsome are small [suppositories].
Thus, what is administered in the treatment of children who are weak and painsome are small [suppositories]. The shape of the small and large enemas is as follows when broadly applied or if the belly is bound according to this manner: [translation continues with detailed instructions on how the clistere (enema) is administered, but specific details are not provided in this excerpt].
And if there is an upset or the belly bound, as you see, and the head pierced within;
And on one side it has an opening, and in the other, two.
And let the belly or arm be treated with medicines from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and pierce entirely around small openings, leaving space between each one, then insert strong thread through these holes X times, tying it as tightly as on a goat's skin; And when the medicines are ingested, tie them with strong thread to an instrument in front of it, then administer an enema.
and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicines be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply to the anus of enema oil or butter from eggs, or similar substance, then gently insert it. then the physician inserts with both hands together until fully inserted, then withdraws the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to expose the thighs, allowing the medicines to exit as much as possible. If he sleeps all night without interruption, it is better assistance.
And if you administer the enema when the patient is suffering from a bowel issue, and the medication quickly leaves, it may recur until they are well again.
And if the hemorrhoid is at its foundation or abscessed, make the enema as subtle as for a child.
and it is the method of giving the subtle enema in which the body is restrained thusly:
We have said earlier in the section on wound care;
or we shall say about treatments for hands and medicines, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and where they are located, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are through cutting of stones, and with a sword and knife or lance, or staff or arrow, or similar objects;
or made according to the body's locations, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, thigh, abdamen, liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, because memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, if it's due to stone movement or similar causes, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess of heat. If the head wound is almost immediately sawn off completely if it comes from blood of the wound, and let the skin be opposite to the injured part.
And heal the patient with a diet rich in wine and large meats.
And if it does not want to be healed, then reduce its meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat flesh.
And place on the wound if an abscess appears there, apply a cotton ball soaked in oil or in a thickened wine.
And if there is no abscess, then apply to the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by air or dust, as I will mention later.
And if the arrow has been moved, apply certain ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword's grip and similar, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, then join them by suturing, just as I will describe for abdomnent injuries, with suturing.
If the wound exposes bone and is deep, and holds only slightly to the touch; then treat the wound with medicine and restore hardened fat in place of leather, instructing the patient to eat hearty meats as tested wheat, also like fowl, along with similar things.
And if you find or suspect putrefaction, but it does not affect the bone, scrape away all of it and wash with wine, then heal.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be tied without a cord, and it cannot be stopped by any medicine, tie the artery with a thread as you find it dislocated. And if this does not help, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, they require light treatment: and that you apply this powder which dries as soon as the blood moves it.
And the method of the powder is: Take incense one part; Blood of a dragon, two parts; live charcoal three parts, and the powder finely ground, and apply to the wound, and bandage firmly, until it dries well and rejoins all its blood.
and then cover well, and leave it not slippery, unless it swells. because the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
t les mare;
And if the wound moves inwardly, especially at night, do not put this powder on it again.
but apply some digested ointments or finely ground barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals. then continue treating other ailments until they are healed.
And if there is a bone fracture with the wound, and it is small, extract with subtle forceps.
And I will tell you about this concerning head fractures afterwards.
Of the wound to the neck
If a wound comes or in the neck and it is simple, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or arteries of the neck are severed.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to leave the sore alone, and not put anything constricting on them, for this harms the nerves and causes them to recede. And do not apply anything cold onto the wound, because the nature of nerves is cold, and their connection extends to the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
But use the medicinal salt, as though boiled in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, and cook it again in gentle water, and other ingredients according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind and bandage it, then treat until healed.
And if wounds are deep and filled with pus, then pierce or lower them.
And if the arrow is embedded and blood flow occurs, then extract it, remove it, and cauterization may be necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is embedded or a tooth, and nerves are preserved so that the flesh may heal, then extract the object from the laryngeal fold, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form. And then apply suitable dressing and let it heal for some days, then treat with disinfected ointments until healed.
And if the wound has caused damage to the bone, seek medical attention. And if there are bone fragments, if you can pull them all out, and those that you cannot remove, let the wound heal until it scabs over, then clean and align the edges.
And if the wound is fresh, powder as I have instructed. And if there is bone and a sinus in the wound, treat it as I described in this chapter.
If it's a wound from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, observe if there are signs of venomous poison that affect the patient severely. Then you should know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder immediately in the first hour, nor bind it to prevent the blood from flowing out too much, as this can harm the body. Then heal the patient. But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
And if you have no ointment, place a piece of old cloth in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on their back for three days or more. If there is no sign of spasm, nor severe body shakes, nor twisting limbs; And when you see the bone healing, know that the wound is healed. Remove bandages and other dressings once it's healthy;
And if it cannot heal or work properly, then know there is an abscess;
Proceed with the treatment as needed. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, whether it is straightforward or more complicated, treat that which lies before. Or if it is large, bandage.
And if it is small, powder, and embedded in the bone with broken pieces of flesh, attend to the wound, and extract any splinters if necessary. And if they are not protruding, allow the wound to rot, and ease the extraction as needed;
And for other wounds in other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
Doubtless rupture of the belly
The hernias of the abdard are large and medium and small;
From the large wound, none of the intestines or their nerves may protrude, causing an intrusion thereof.
The stitching is easier, and any small wound is worse than a large one, because when you put the bowels back in more often, if you don't do it regularly.
Because the intestines swell soon after feeling coldness, they return more often, and therefore minor wounds are moved because you reset the intestines to their place rather than others.
And know that the purging of the belly is in four ways:
The two common stitches occur for the belly's suturing, and the other wound types on the body and the other specific stitches are common to other injuries.
And yet they are more appropriate for the belly's suturing, and I will say each one and declare it. (Following this line, the text would likely describe the four types of stitches in detail.)
When a wound is small and there's no internal injury present, and if it requires resetting, this can be done in one of two ways. or due to the small size of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swoln by the cold.
And when it is caused by the cold, you should treat it in a certain way: Soak an (linen) cloth or a fine rag in warm water only, or boil and strain the water before use, and apply to the intestines until they are no longer swollen.
and do not repeat this procedure too often; it should be done gently and effectively to relieve the swelling.
When you see the swelling recede, gently prepare the intestines with hot or cold water, as this will loosen its opening to some extent.
And if it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument by which you remove ganglions.
The first treatment is to loosen it up so that no one should cut into it without great necessity or need.
And this is the method for splitting:
If you split deep within the cavity and it does not yield, then examine its shape. When a wound is swoln and the intestines have burst forth, if you can reset it to its natural place in its proper location, because this allows movement.
When the wound is wide and located below the abdomen, one should make the patient lie on their back with legs raised higher than their head. And if it is below the stomach area, raise the head and hindquarters higher than those areas, and similarly when the abdomen's folding occurs on one side, adjust so that the affected part is raised higher than the other.
And thus you should manage as I describe in large wounds and medium-sized ones.
For small wounds, do what you have learned, then take among your hands a skilled surgeon who will grasp the entire folding into his hand and bring together the edges.
This is the common way to suture wounds, and it's that you grasp an awl or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound about one finger's space, and insert an awl where there will be a good strong thread. And pierce the two heads of the clavicle with the two heads of the shoulder blade, which is behind the skin inwardly, until you have cut through that part, and join together the two heads of the shoulder blade into four altogether.
Then strain a double thread through the needle hole of two parts, then immediately join together the two heads of the wound, and leave one inch space, and insert another needle.
Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so according to how many needles are needed, until the entire wound is secured.
and be needles of medium thickness, both subtle and thick, for subtle needles can pierce the entire width, and those too thick may not enter well. Therefore, it is necessary for them to be aligned properly.
And it does not suffice to insert the needles too far from the wound and skin, lest they cut through and disrupt the wound before healing.
And then remove the needle heads so they do not pierce and hurt the patient while sleeping, and place towels or cloths over the needle sites to keep them in place, until the wound is healed.
And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds because they use a single or double needle therein.
The second method of suturing is common and involves bringing together the two edges of the skin with both ends together onto one needle or using a strong, medium-thick thread.
And when you have located all four together, reset the arrowhead in the part where you began, following the manner of stitching garments.
And place space between each stitch as wide as a small finger.
These stitches are the home, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his abdomen, which was afflicted by a knife, with the wound more than one span long, and the intestines were well two spans large, located within the abdomen.
I brought back the intestine as it had been for twenty-four hours, and the wound was bound up until the fifteenth day, and healed through care.
And the physician judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
and did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where there was none to be found, nor any medicine. And place softened wool above the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Here are the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle and push it through to the inner part up to there.
When it has pierced the correct width from right to left, then lift up the sinew or edge where you inserted the needle, and make it pass through on the other side from within to there.
And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as a furrier does with furs, leaving one edge once and then picking up the other, until the entire stitching is completed.
The second manner of suture, as Galen properly says, is like any other method that joins the two parts together naturally and applies one head of the sac to the other end in such a way.
Pierce with a needle or nearby thorn and make an incision just enough, leaving both ends of the sac. Then turn the needle, and further pierce it until almost to its end, at both ends of the sac.
Then further pierce each part towards its end in two other thorns that are opposite to it.
And this is the proper way of suturing, and it is most common.
Galen says this word, and many attest to it, that one must sew the abdomen with two needles, where there is thread in each.
And one need insert a needle from one side and another from the other in the manner of those who sew straps.
And sutures that when the rupture is within the belly are more painful than those of other abdominal wounds.
The assessments of the wound are such as the assessments of other wounds:
and it is so when you find the fresh wound fully bleeding, as if the arrow has moved it, return to the intestines and stitches:
then apply a dust of alkanet with charcoal and if the arrow has moved it, place any ointment that is available until the wound closes: And they pull out the hair, and let it grow smoothly, and observe the markings. Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healthy again.
And if you have no medicines, then apply the following as soon as it starts to ooze: wool or old cloth and move it twice daily until healed.
For in certain simple wound situations, you need no other medicines besides these.
And if you suspect that the wound is affecting the main body parts, it is necessary to grind linen in lukewarm oil or rose oil and apply it around the joints and below the knees.
And if it causes pain or swelling in the belly and occurs frequently, administer a black wine enema, especially if the inflammaturms reaches the intestines.
And it pierces within, knowing when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is diseased because of the weakness from wounds and its delicate condition throughout the body, and its proximity to the nerves.
And if the pus exudes from the wound, reposition it as before like the intestines when they are fresh.
and if it is old and become dry or blackened, one must lie the wound flat that is black, to prevent any bleeding from occurring there as veins and arteries may be present.
then cut out what is between the joints and place the two heads hanging from the area above the wound downwards to ease the extraction when pus comes out, and the wound swells up.
them: it is f, which cannot be the following them if not the unt;
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, one may attempt to restore it in some cases, as I have seen a man afflicted by an arrow or a stab in the belly.
And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and became infected and turned into a fistula, causing pus discharge and winds.
I gave care as best I could based on what I knew, and did not stop draining until it was healed, and the boils subsided.
And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the patient might have harm in their belly; and there was no pain, but stayed in better conditions, eating and drinking.
and said some experimenters that when it is a small wound in the intestines, it must be tied off in such a manner: Take fine thread to large heads, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the thread has pierced through one side, tie it above the two sides, stretching its loop out.
And then wrap the head, and it holds so that it cannot dislocate again, then apply another motion afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed. And close the wound.
If the head enters into the intestines and brings no harm to the patient, one can reattach the intestines with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a way:
Take the head of this thread from the intestine that is cleaned thoroughly, and then tie it to a thin flaxen string coiled tightly, put the thread through the needle, stitch up the intestines, and return them in place.
And this method of suturing with fringes is not different except following the path of trust and hope.
And if the wound is large, especially when it's in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, requiring subtlety.
of a fistula, or if she may be That any wound or abscess, when it festers, is universally called "fistula," especially if it rises and flows outwardly.
And a fistula is due to improper vein growth, hard and bloody, where there is no pain, and it grows like the feathers of a bird.
and at times clear as bowl glass, and at other times thick; and sometimes little, and at other times enough;
And I have spoken in the classification of wounds, that any wound not healed has no cure, and it's only due to one of the nine causes: This means to say, by the cleansing of blood or flesh; Or due to its wickedness; Or because there is hardness within it and along the lips, so do not allow any growth of hair; Or where there are too many knots. Or if the skin is dry, and the material is of poor quality; Or if the medication is not good for the treatment. Or because the decay is a form of plague. Or due to late digestion and slow health deterioration in that area, fleeing naturally. Or where there are wounds or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the healing methods with herbal medicine in that section.
Therefore, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by manual work.
Leaches occur in all parts of the body Know that leaks occur in all parts of the body because there are fistulas from large veins and arteries, nerves, or spleen, or intestines, or bladder, or some ribs, or spinal column of the back, or any joints of hands or feet. and if it is in the primary property of the limb, and like blisters.
And all such fistulas require serious healing, with only labor and ignorance involved.
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned earlier, but you trust in the healing, and witness its cure, then take a tent of silk or iron, depending on whether the faster straight.
And if there is a twisted abscess, gently probe with a fine instrument to bend it, for the incision must be made around its curvature.
And if the abscess has multiple openings and you cannot thoroughly explore it with probes, dilate it through one of the openings, for moisture can spread from one opening to another, and cleanse.
Then you should examine it carefully with your hand to know if there is bone or nerve involved and whether it is swollen at the front, and ask the patient about the pain felt upon pressing with your hand, and where they feel it.
And when you truly know the location of it, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the locations I have mentioned to you, treat accordingly as I have instructed, including broken bones and corrupted cartilage within.
And then the healing until it is cleaned, and if the fistula is well placed in the right spot, it must be cut open at the front as much as you see fit, then place woolen tents soaked in medicinal water, up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine dissolves the excess that has accumulated at the bottom.
And then apply balms and unguents with a holy charm, ensuring it is thoroughly sanitized.
And if it's not cleaned thusly, proceed with the cautery as we have instructed, and if the bone is compromised by the fistula, then cut into it.
If veins or nerves trouble you or principal limbs, as we have mentioned;
If the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, treat as long as the decay affects all of the bone, then care for various matters until it is healthy again.
And if it remains unhealthy, and forms a bow as before, understand that you must not stop until the fracture is healed.
If exposed and worsens while at the core, remove all decayed tissue, then return to normal.
And if it becomes so healthy, that is well. But if not, understand that the decay is too great in advance, and you cannot proceed with treatment. If there is no other remedy than waiting for natural healing.
And if there is a small piece of corrupted bone that you can extract with pincers, use an appropriate tool for extraction, and if there are many pieces, remove all of them without leaving any behind.
If the moisture works against it, there is no error or fear; use cautery and moisture, and free the bones.
And if you cannot extract them within an hour, place something that prevents decay on the wound and leave it until they are properly positioned around the bones, then afterwards they will more easily have their bones.
And if it is a large bone, like of the leg or thigh, remove all decay until the blackness covers the entire bone, then heal the wound.
And if there is a large part affected by decay, and it comes close to molting of the bone; If necessary, sew it up completely to the point of decay, and then treat until healed.
And I will tell you about a case of an abscess that occurred in a man's leg; take it as an example and guidance for your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, as materials emerged on the leg, and it formed a large abscess, with no obvious reason to open.
but the physicians worked so much that they opened the abscess, and consumed a lot of materials from it, which turned into an anal fistula, and there came a great amount of pus affecting all areas with wetness in the body.
And many doctors tried various treatments for two years without any success in the art of healing, until I was called upon, and saw his leg and the remedies used to care for him, with what was needed through great orifices. And it became red in a youthful body, and had a lemon-like color.
I built a tent on one of these supports, then searched all the supports, and found that each one came from opposite sides of every part of the leg.
So I hurried then and examined one of the orifices until I discovered part of the bone, which was found to be decayed and infected, with the infection reaching the inner side of the bone.
I thought that what appeared to be the decayed bone was all there was of the infection, except for what I had shown.
And began to heal the wound with soda remedies for long periods, but could not unite.
And then I resumed and discovered the bone as before, found continuous decay in the bone, and fat, and bone fragments, and sought to unite the site. but I could not even grasp an inch of bone, and all its power was lost, then I reset it with remedies. And it was quickly healed and united, and did not restart the work except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and out of fear for his life that I had for him. For the evacuation of blood often caused him to groan, but he was otherwise entirely well, and in place of the bone grew a hard planking, which was of good condition and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither on arrival nor departure.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated thusly: Take hold of the ligaments, and strain at the head of the bone that opens, and command no one to extend it upwards. and place another larger ligament along with the first, and tie it below the cartilage that is over the bone, and extend its head, so you pull away the corrupted cartilage from below, revealing the cartilage at the location where it should be seen to heal properly, ensuring the cartilage does not remain attached.
and insert a piece of wood or a spatula below the bone to scrape away the corrupted cartilage;
And let it heal as much as one can see and feel the decay, and do so again if necessary.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the decay is within or in a part of it, expose the cartilage completely;
Then apply a heating irons off it, and then join the two parts of the putrefaction with heat enough to melt it completely, as we have said.
and if the putrefaction is at the joint, cut away the corrupted joint, and join the bone from which it was separated on the other side.
and if the putrefaction is in the continuity of two joints, there should be no other operation than cutting them apart.
and if the putrefaction is at the knuckle of the hand or foot, it may be a serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire about that rotting, how it affects you. and cleanse yourself in all ways possible, but let the vein or nerve not harm you.
And you should know that the incisions and sutures for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance of their flesh, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore it is necessary for each type of procedure to have its appropriate instrument.
And you should know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways diseases manifest. If you consider the instrument needed in accordance with what is appropriate for it.
The head can become dislocated or due to humidity, or because of force.
And when you have applied the medicine for that corrosion through medicinal treatment, and they prove ineffective, it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes either by death or malice (witchcraft), which is greater due to the failure of the limb.
And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and afterward comes the corrosion of members in one member through the whole body.
If you hurry with the covering, and if it is by the sting of certain venomous beasts such as scorpions, snakes, etc., then if the corrosion is at the top of the hip joints, cover them quickly and do not give any space for it to reach the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then protect the joint so that erosion does not reach the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, then protect the shoulder.
And if it passes beyond the shoulder, it is death, and there are no remedies except for the amount of its usefulness.
And so do this when erosion comes or festers: If it comes to the first joint, then protect the other joint after.
And if it festers or swells, then protect everything that is affected. If it rises to the leg, then protect the knee joint.
And if it comes over the knee, there is no other remedy than having the patient die from exhaustion.
And the manner of using leather or silk on the limb is such that you bind it above and below, extend two sticks one from each side of the binding, and another set of tools to sever the tissue between the two bindings at a width of an inch, until the bone is exposed.
Then remove the leather or silk and place a linen strip on each side, ensuring that the material does not touch the healthy area, to prevent further injury and infection to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you work, cauterize the wound promptly or apply some constricting powders.
Then return to your medication until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to one of us during sickness:
It happened a blackness that seemed like scorching fire, and the corrosion first came to his right foot, so much so that it consumed the entire foot.
And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastily cut off the foot with a sword and was saved.
And long time afterward the corrosion came to his hand, and it happened to me, and I applied counteractive remedies after bodily cleansing, but could not stop the corrosions.
And I vowed to cauterize his hand, and although I did not want to do so, hoping that the remedies would suffice. And he doubted as if I were to cut off his hand, that he would not die, for the vitality of the man was weak.
and he despairs greatly, returns to his land, covers up with a coat his hand, and is well again.
and I have not counted these examples as mere coincidence, but for those who need to know this practice.
Never does an abscess occur in the nutritious part, and it remains so long that it causes a great swelling of fistula. and then they protrude and burst, causing the fistula to open up, and remain as if it were a vein. and the skin above is as delicate as fine cloth torn, not reaching bone nor nerve, such illnesses are called "healed," and they are not called "fistulas.";
However, if it is so swollen that it reaches almost to the bone at its core, then it is called "fistula";
And if the wound is so deep that you must remove all of the flesh, and especially when it is fine, like a fabric. and this should not be done due to its decaying nature.
And if you suspect that the flesh is hardening, and there is no decay at its core, and the flesh consists of cartilage, then treat with a cleansing enema thus:
Check if the breasts are large, and the bowels that are there emit a foul smell; then administer an Egyptian medicinal cleansing enema made thus: Take ease, and oil, and leadwort (litargire), in equal amounts, and put them to boil in a vessel over the fire until the medication turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take as needed according to your necessity, and do it with water and honey, and clyster the chest, and strain the urine. Leave the medication in for two hours, then extract by squeezing.
Do this many times until the chest is reshaped, and it becomes loose again.
And never clisterize with water of ashes when this medicine is not prescribed, and that you draw ash from oak wood, pour water over it, then strain the mixture, until you know the chest is properly shaped.
And if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes should be used for clisterization, but use water and honey with some crushed lead. When you cleanse with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes it holy.
And when you have done this, and ensured that the chest is well purified, if the suppository causes a stench to arise in it, then take an empyema of roses and oil with wine.
Or you administer a suppository using certain medicines and unguents, of which I have mentioned the properties in treating unguents.
And if the opening in the chest is small and nothing can enter through the suppository, slightly enlarge it with a tool, and then insert a tent of Egyptian unguent or basilisk unguent until it expands.
If the wound is too wide, if the edge and leaves it enough so that the enema can enter there, and if pus with blood flows above, place a cup either higher or lower than where it is located.
And if you cannot cover the chest from beneath as you see, arrange it in such a way that the bowel descends to the lowest place where it is located; because when the bowel is at its beginning, do not leave open sores and if you cannot cover the chest from beneath as you see. so that the bowel descends gently downward, and let nothing remain of the bowel.
so that the bowel descends gently downward, and let nothing remain of the bowel. And take binding medicines to put on the wound, and extend over a linen bandage covering the entire wound. Then apply pressure to the puncture on the skin that is not more than twice as wide of the first one. Apply ointment under another bandage according to the size of the puncture, and place it over the wound to reduce swelling, without removing the large bandage until after many days once;
And those who have a puncture on the skin often want to remove it when there is swelling and blood coming from the wound, depending if it's poison or little or enough, digested, or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness and whether there is an abscess or not, and depending on how much medicine has been used, extend it and observe the nature of what comes out at the puncture in the wound, knowing that the vein will heal soon, and approach health.
And then reset it in the morning or after a day, and when you reset the wound, change into another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if you encounter subtle corruption after long periods of time, do not despair over health, for healing is nearing.
For there are those who delay healing in their wounds by using coal, and others who do the opposite;
and suffer from an unhealthy swelling of the breast after many days, believing that the breasts are not affected;
and they delay drying of the breasts, becoming protracted, applying nearby medicines composed of moist substances in body but dried in virtue, as with an ointment ending, for there is a significant part of vitriol, and it is this final medicine;
Take the ointment that ends with an oil rose, and add the essence of old wine equal in substance;
Then you bind it and apply thereon;
Then you do the same with it and use it; applying more effective heating when ointments of daffodil are not available, or taking mirra, aloes, and incense, grinding them, powdering them with honey while on a fire.
Then you attach a gauze, extend it over the breast, and never apply an aspersion long-term, using roots of heavenly lily which are similar to barley flour and quinoa. And use simple or complex remedies: Grind them, turn into powder, and put with the honey I mentioned, and apply.
If the illness is chronic and not healed by this treatment, then understand that infection has taken hold, causing pressure on the bones or hard parts of the body. If the treatment of a fistula as we have said before.
Pus is an abscess that arises from under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or sometimes occurs in other areas.
and when it becomes ulcerated, and is not taken care of, the abscess may develop and run, ooze blood so much until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly consumes the entire nail.
And it leads to erosion up to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain and swollen fingers with discoloration.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and if the treatment does not help, then one must cut off entirely the excess tissue that is attached to the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward. Caustic applications are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
If the nail then hurries to prick and begin to poke, and bleed, it is necessary that you place your knife underneath the nail causing the bleeding, and lift it upwards, carefully cutting away the subtle vein blood, and apply medicinal substances on fire and corrosive properties to remove everything. Then treat with ointments until they are fully healed.
And if there is corrosion in the bone, cut it out and treat with fiery remedies, for as long as the bone becomes corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the jaw deteriorating, cut into it as previously described, then treat until it is healed.
And if it is thrust out and swollen, and it causes great pain, then one must first soothe it.
Then cut the thick hair with a sharp blade diagonally above it, and ensure that the cut does not reach to the bone which is below the hair, as this would cause the patient great pain.
And if it occurs, then apply something soothing on top of it.
The dislocations that occur in the shoulders of some men by chance are all flesh, and sometimes there is bone or an epiphysis, but not always, and they do not form at the joint root, where their growth occurs within the shoulder.
Those who are born with deformity in the groin do not move, and those who are born at the hip joint may sometimes move.
The cut for someone who is fat should be light, in this manner: Cut it at the base with a wide blade.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: If you hold with both hands.
In the one whose shoulder forms afterwards, it is necessary that you first cut round to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate thread, and treat until it is healthy again.
The dislocations that occur with joint assembly happen by birth, or from a wound's healing process, or from the scorching of fire, or similar things.
If it is necessary to treat that swelling, so that the wound heals according to its natural shape; then place between two pads or cloths soaked in oil of roses, ensuring they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of parchment while the wound is swollen, as it should be.
If the dislocation comes to either one of its sides with the palm, cut that swelling accordingly as it ought to be.
These are large sores wrapped and filled with excessive melancholy fluid, which come upon various body parts;
and more often occurs in the legs of those who walk on stone and work hard, than elsewhere.
It is therefore necessary that you provide no excrement removal at all times, and then the basilica washing of it.
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is that it's cut and the black blood drained. And the other way is to lift the vein, and pull it entirely taut.
The cutting is thus according to this method: The first leg arises with very hot water, until the large without is sufficiently softened, then hold the leg on the patient's thigh from the hip to the area above the knee.
Then cut the vein in one place or two or three, with a wide incision, then extract and pull out the black blood into your hand from top to bottom until such quantity as the virtue of the sick can bear.
And then tie it off, and instruct them to be dyed with black meats.
And begin evacuation and healing when veins are clear, and do not harm the patient.
The movements of his limbs follow this manner: Raise the limb of the patient if there is much hair, then give him a bath, and warm his leg in hot water until it turns red, causing veins to swell.
And if you don't have hot water, heat it over fire and then wrap the veins with long cloth at the top of the knee or in the area above the ankle.
Then cover it with cowhide and scrape off the veins from both sides until you can feel them under your fingers.
And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or passes through skin, it appears as a frayed rope.
Then remove the shaft from underneath the skin, until it is fully withdrawn, and then tie off at the incision site lightly, then cover in another place above three days.
Then scrape the skin around the wound until it appears raw, then lift the edges as you have done before, and tie off at another incision site similarly.
Then make another cut or more if needed, then lift it, and wrap around the two pieces of skin, then pull tight up to the second cut.
Then extract from incision to incision until it is completely removed, then bandage.
If you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a strong, double-threaded needle through it entirely, tie the thread securely, push up from underneath the armor, and turn your hand back and forth until it slips out. And ensure that it does not tear, for if it tears, you cannot pull or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
And when you have completely pulled it out, place a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on the wound site. And dress (treat) until healed.
And if the vein is twisted and wrapped together and not straight, as we have said, it must be cut lengthwise, but do not seal it. And the treatment is as we have previously mentioned.
The form of iron used to pierce the vein should be curved and not sharply pointed so that it does not cut the vein.
and is of considerable thickness because if it were too fine, it would cut the vein; however, let it be large as we have said, and this is its form:
This vein should be located in the legs, warm areas or places where no plants or trees grow and on dry land without any moisture.
and perhaps it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which occurs from putrefaction that comes out of the skin like it happens within the body serpents and worms, embedded between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning are such that a great swelling comes to the leg, then the limb changes, and begins to bleed out, like the root of a plant.
When the head is open, it must be wrapped with two pieces of linen about three to four fingers wide along the leg, and leave the swathe in place each time there's no issue.
And if it is too long, cut off a portion, and wrap the remainder, but do not cover it completely at its root until it has fully come out. because if you cover it, it may re-enter the wound and cause an abscess or decay, and bring about a bad illness.
for this reason it must be treated little by little until the head is fully out, leaving nothing or flesh behind.
and anytime this vein is treated with V or X hands lengthwise, a man came to me after it had been X hands long. When you cut it, it bleeds out one finger or more, and is pierced all the way down to the bottom, so everything flows out.
And let the matter inside be emptied, and restore it with poultices and medicinal herbs for a certain number of days, then treat as abscesses are.
And never strike at this vein with hands or instruments, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or ankle, and much blood flows out.
then treat as we have said before.
From worms that arise between skin and flesh. This illness is known in our land as 'ox disease' because it often occurs within veins and consists of a small worm that develops between skin and flesh, traveling up and down the body. The patient feels intense discomfort from limb to limer wherever the worm goes until it pierces the skin where it moves, releasing powerfully.
And it is caused by putrefaction of some bodily fluids, as worms and snails and ascarids or belly come.
And there is doubt about its harmfulness, because when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance entering, and destroying the eye. And this happens many times.
When you see it need to be drained or milked, one cannot stop it when it occurs:
Therefore it is necessary that you bind the area above and below a strong joint tightly, then cut away some flesh and squeeze out fluid, and if he vomits up everything in his stomach, cauterize with fire on top until it dies.
The greatest harm it causes is that it runs the vein, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or near the vein, grip its eyebrow firmly, then cut around it, and tie off.
And the patient must use the cleansing of body parts with soluble medicines for bad humors and wash with rotten meats to purify it.
From the pain arising from inflammation of blood vessels This illness is known in our land as "Vakirir," and causes pain that moves from one limb to another.
and I tell you what I see. I was called to an unwell woman, and discovered swollen arms, with a small inflammation in the veins of her arm.
Shortly afterward, the vein rises just as a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything else, like quicksilver when it jumps from one place to another.
The pain disperses in that place, and shifts to the shoulder, and then shortly after spreads throughout the entire body, until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me that it turned around within the body, as I have seen.
they: Nevertheless, I had wanted to ensure that the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman.
and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and exposed veins, so appeared those vapors of constraint.
And they do not appear following this reason for those who are paralyzed, and who have wet bodies and veins restored.
And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it manifests as we have said, then remove both above and below swiftly, and then close until the swelling subsides back into place. and cauterize at the site.
And if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat as you would stinky pills and soot pills, along with similar remedies.
The arrows are various, according to their appearances and the places on the body where they emerge.
The variety of them is such that there are some with large points, and small, and hairy, and smooth. And of those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are breaks.
and that which flows in no limb if it leaks by any means: or in the principal member (the arm), like the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it flows in no part of these members, the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter become apparent: if it must be that you attempt the extraction of this arrowhead, for death comes in various forms thereafter; and when these bad signs do not become apparent, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then try to extract it and treat the wound.
When the arrowhead enters and pierces the bone, causing a cerebral blow that affects the brain, resulting in hemorrhage, swelling, pressure, redness of the eyes, inflammation, tongue redness, mental confusion, and bile vomiting. And sometimes without strength in the nose or ears. And occasionally affecting speech and voice. The wound with white moist flesh resembling hairs, and healing like the redness of coal.
If these signs appear to you, provide treatment, and remove the arrowhead if it is not deeply embedded.
The signs of the arrow when it enters or exits are as if they were close to the left breast, feeling as though it had been embedded in a hard object, not hollow. And sometimes it moves like hairs do, resulting in black blood coming out, accompanied by chills and cold sweat, leading to fainting. Then he has doubt that death will come.
And the sign of the arrowhead is that there are no traces in the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes complexion, and breathes deeply and seeks cold water.
And if the arrow falls into a cavity near the ribs, it is close to small intestines; and pours out much blood and causes great pain and sighing. and they move all the limbs of the shoulders.
heuze d; 1 (h: they s of gk: MDP.
If the arrow pierces the belly and does not burst out through the intestines, there is no hope in treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, causing it to leak and frequent urination, the patient feels strong pain. You say that the wound is deadly.
The other limbs, depending on how they are made and the collarbone and throat and shoulder and upper arm and spine and ribs and hips, and similar parts, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man whose arrow fell just below the eye socket near its root: I tried it, and on the other side removed the grease from the ear, and was found to be completely healed.
And he removed an arrow from the fat of the ear below the skin and paper, and the arrow was reinserted, but could only reach the tip towards its base, and it was a large Turkish bow without any iron except for the ears.
The joint was healed, and nothing adverse occurred to him again.
And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an Arabic bow with ears.
I dealt with the Saracens and carefully handled it as much as I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
And when an arrow is lodged in one's body, where it has reached the belly, thinking that he would die.
and then after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut near the arrow, skillfully manipulated it, successfully withdrew it, and there was no harmful outcome.
And if you see a person to whom an arrow has fallen on the back, and his wound is freshly dressed above;
and if the arrow remains within him, not disrupting his natural state or causing harm in any of his natural functions;
And when you see another man to whom an arrow has fallen on the face, and his wound is dressed above; and it remains in such a way that they suffer great pain.
And many similar things.
And he suffered from an arrow in his forehead among the nobles at the king's court, which was somewhat tilted to the right side. and the arrow was fully embedded (or 'set back').
I went for treatment after it had been there for three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
I removed it with all subtlety and did not feel anything (or 'it didn't hurt'). and there was no pricking or pain from his right ear.
I thought it was the tip of the arrow that caused this. So I applied a warm poultice with soothing and digestive properties because his eyes were not swoln. and then it seemed to me that it was an arrow wound.
and then it seemed to me that it was an arrow wound. The next day I applied the embolaster to his hands and thoroughly dressed the wound, allowing the patient to endure thus for a long time until he felt the arrow in his nose.
And then he told me. I applied the medicinal acid to the wound until it was healed, and tested it, feeling the head of the arrow dissolving in place.
then I reinforced the opening of the wound with that medicinal acid until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
and it traversed fully within four months, then I loosened the edges which I had clamped with pincers, on both sides, but could not be removed.
Then I ceased to subtly and ingeniously devise methods of reduction, until one day it was taken in hand well-made pincers, according to the form that will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it, and return the wound.
And they judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: Then I shall reset it accordingly, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed completely.
And I have told you the quality of arrow extraction, so that you may focus your care on what I do not mention here, for the book cannot cover everything.
but the wise master physicians say a little about many things and that which is present and failing, nine works are done, and nine instruments are used in dealing with strange matters arising in this art.
I say that arrows do not exit from limbs where they are deeply embedded but according to two methods: or through the same opening or by another way.
and that which exits where it entered is an arrow entering living flesh, and never exits more than once.
And if it does not exit now, let it remain as long as the flesh is rotting around it, and be swollen at the point of entry.
And similarly if it is lodged in the bone and cannot exit, let it remain so for several days, moving slightly each day.
And then if it exits, and if not, make a very fine hole around it until the flesh is loosened, and then extract it.
And if the arrowhead is back in its place within the body so that one cannot see it, then wrap all around it. And if you feel it, use any suitable instrument to remove it.
And if you cannot for stretching the wound, and piercing deeply into the arrowhead, there being no bone or nerve or vein, then bleed as long as the wound is large.
And treat the arrowhead if you can, and if it has ears on which it grips, then apply a sticking plaster that is firmly set in two parts to what you can move, and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead as much as you can.
And subtly ensure that you do not break the arrowhead, but pull it out more firmly.
And if you cannot at once, lift up to the nearest resting place and then draw it, as pulling might relieve the strain of extraction. And if bleeding occurs in the opposite direction, apply as we have said of treatment in this chapter;
And watch over the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a method as you would draw out an arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
And place the patient as they were when the arrow fell on them, for that is the greatest help you can provide; and if you cannot do so, then place them according to what their signs indicate to you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or where there is no visible injury, or the skin is swollen in that area if you can see or feel it distinctly.
Therefore cut accordingly as long as the pincers can grip, and then extract it. If it is still present now.
And if [the arrowhead] is caught in the bone, twist your round hand, until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot exit, let it remain for now, then resume extraction until it fully comes out.
and if the arrowhead remains in place, remove it entirely from the body.
and if it comes loose while administering the cautery, if you use a tool with a sharp point, then the tip of the arrowhead enters into the handle of the instrument.
and then remove it entirely; if the arrow is loose, put the tool with an inward-pointing tip to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrowhead pierces or hits the belly or bladder or ribs and is recent, you must apply pressure there.
And guard against puncturing the vein and nerve, then extract it, then close the wound if necessary. And continue the treatment until it is healed.
The form of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and this one looks like this:
And there are many ways to do this: large, various, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowheads.
The form of the forked beard is also like that of a bird's feather, to thrust at the tip of the arrowhead, as here shown.
There are veins to be opened numbered thirty-one, from which sixteen heads emerge, that is to say: Two battens located behind the ears, called "herbecs": And two arteries visible in the temple areas: And two veins located in the upper lip area of both lips, called "aspiers": And the vein that is above the forehead: And the veins that are near the neck. And the two nerves which are there, above. And the veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are called "aquae ducts."; And two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins of which there are five in each arm commonly found:.
One is the cephalic one, and it's on the left side, called "the principal vein" or "voinnes du chef".; And the middle one is called "fast", and it's composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, referred to as "the body's vein" by some. ; And the basilic vein is on the right side, called "the belly's vein", and it's above the fossa, clearly visible near the armpit when observed. ;
And the savior is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it has two heads.
and in the leg where there are three veins: one is from below the hollow of the left breast muscle, and the second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle joint. and the vein called "nesse," that is in the ankle of the other leg.
and on the other leg, there are three veins below those.
The pain from the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines.
Et the quality of the ointment, as I have told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub their head or veins with a rough cloth. Then tighten the neck of the patient with a tourniquet so that the two veins appear behind the ears at two levels depending on the head. Afterward take hold of them by your thumbs and where you feel hair growing from above your thumbs, be careful.
Then take the lancet, and insert it just above the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein towards its origin, cut through both sides of the skin tract, ensuring clear cutting of the vessel, allowing blood to flow as you see.
Then strain and bind it until it is well aligned;
And I have already mentioned the incision and caustic in the first book.
The cleaning of the two veins that are in both temples, if they have been swollen for a long time, and hardened, and ulcerated from habitual use, and cause tears to flow on the sides.
and the quality of such cleaning is as I say: and it's that the patient must stretch their neck so that both veins are clearly visible. and they feel pain under your thumbs, then tie them off.
then lift the skin over the vein under your index finger and insert the lancet below it, and lift the vein upward, and tie it off, just as you did with the other two veins, and bleed according to your need.
Then dislocate the patient's limb, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place a cotton pad. And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is cleaned.
And we have spoken of their comforting and extraction, where the book begins.
The cleansing of the veins in the forehead is worth as much as the cleansing of the cerebral vessels for ancient face diseases, and migraines, and redness.
and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. then take the instrument called "auger," whose form is as follows:
And place the point over the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see. Then loosen the patient's neck and bind the vein so that it is straight and not widened with any cloth or bandage.
However, it must never be too tightly wrapped. and the vein is twisted, because the bone is near, and by chance it may break when it is thin.
The veins in the two forearms should be tied up at the elbows, wrists, and joints, and with skin conditions on the face.
and the condition of their veins should be such that the patient loosens his neck by twisting any bonds.
Then cleanse it, and let the wound heal completely with some length of fine thread that is somewhat wide, as there is no need to tighten. And if the sutures are delicate, they may sometimes tear;
then apply sufficient blood to what is needed, and then cover with gauze, and wrap it securely.
The healing of the wound is not to be hindered by cold or sweat, and other skin diseases such as migraines and rashes that occur on the face, especially when it's longstanding.
and the quality of healing is such that the patient should strain their neck, then extend it with your left hand, and take some delicate suture lengthwise, and insert it into the space between the two nostrangs, because the vein does not open well by itself, and blood will begin to flow now.
And do not go too far with it, and follow correctly along the blood according to your need, then let her rest one night, for she is often quickly restored.
The bandaging of the II joints assists in stretching of the limbs, and at the onset of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and erosion, and herpes, and itchiness.
and the quality of the bandage is that the patient must remove its head from both sides, as we have said.
and the master stands above the head of the patient, and the patient cuts slightly over one seat, then let the vein bleed a little bit widely, then stop the blood timely, or as much as necessary.
Then redo on the other side of the vein, then realign the joints, and compress the veins moderately so that the patient is not strangled. And leave it until morning, that the wound may be healed.
of the liver ailment called jaundice The cleaning of lice from the lips helps to clear infection in the mouth, and gum disease, and cracks on the lips, and bad breath and itching.
And the quality of healing depends on making the patient sit in front of you and tightening their neck as I have described. Then turn the lip and look at the veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they can be identified by their blackness and the small dark vessels around them.
So do both, and if you do not recognize them or have doubts, cut the larger one from each side, and likewise with all the veins above and below, as it is of the same kind.
of the jaundice underneath the tongue The blood of the veins that are below the tongue is assisted after the bleeding from the head, and it's through the extension of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth.
and its quality of bleeding is such that the patient cuts between his hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down each side for a black vein.
Then you should bleed both [veins], but not too much at once, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the elbow that we commonly bleed are bled in two ways:
or by gripping all of the forearm firmly wide apart, or with an olive-shaped and sharp instrument like scissors; called "anchisile."; And they are wide and subtle according to the width and extension of the veins. The form of this mistletoe plant is much renowned and very broad as you see.
And it is necessary to open clear veins with visible blood, and that contain much blood and impurities; and this is the form of an olive bubble:
And it is finer pointed, and meant for collecting subtle veins, where there is a subtle yellow blood.
The vessel of the veinous network, which is one of these veins, helps in diseases that are from under the throat, and neck, and sides, and belly;
And it is fitting for the vessel to be filled adequately, and that it cleanses from the artery which lies beneath. And if he pierces the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it should be stopped, as I have said; And it must not be pierced by the flame, but cut as one shears.
And if the vein does not open clearly, you should extract it and use another. or if you wish to avoid any blood from it, or you find it in place within the arm vein: it opens clearly; and the vessel is sheared by flame as we have said.
And if you know the place of the vein, then as I instructed you to extract it and move away the arm, touch its location until you feel the hairs. Then signify the place with a mark, and then lay the arm, and shear the vein by flame as one shears. And ensure you do not injure the artery when you see it swollen, for it is the artery. Then escape quickly.
And if you see it protruding upwards like a child's urine, and the wound is red and slender, know that it is from an artery. Haste yourself away, extend your leg fully, then remove the object if jammed, as often happens. If the arm is involved, leave it thus, and do not move the patient's limb.
And be in fear, and do not move the limb until it is safe.
And if the wound is not blocked and it bleeds, and there are no medicines at hand, clot the artery should it open, for the head of the limb retracts. And he becomes numb.
And take a slice of pine resin and heat it, then select one half and apply it until the next day.
if he is numb, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that numb the blood.
and the numbing is not harmful in most cases for a slight location of the wound, and possible flexibility at the joints of the arm.
The cleaning of the vein helps in bleeding from above and below because it is composed of basilica and cerebral substances, as we have said.
and it behooves the saigneror to wash out the nerve beneath it, and if too much is taken, and they sever the nerve, which swells and causes severe pain, and perhaps cannot heal.
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then you should sanitize the instrument carefully. And remove the nerve with your hand.
And if there is no touch it the veuine, then they are l'a cauterisee.
The cerebral sinus helps, attracting blood to the head, and aids the eyes.
It is customary to heal in pinching the flax oil or myrtle vein, as it's the most effective of all leeches, because there are no nerves or arteries there. Nevertheless, one must seek the lighter ones and avoid causing pain during the first treatment, then repeat it. And sometimes it enlarges the glands in some men when doing it for the first time, but does not cause pain.
The quality of the wound is according to your judgment.
The first thing you must know about healing is that the cure is not performed soleebut to maintain health and prevent future illnesses.
And there shall be the sinew made within one of the three veins mentioned above. This is to know, cephalic, saphenous, and basilica [vein types]. And it should be sinewed at the beginning of summer and autumn after eating, and in winter when signs of fullness appear.
And it should be sinewed on the first day or third, two hours or three days later.
The sinew treatment for diseases has no set time, but when needed is by day or night, at all hours and always.
And it does not require sinewing for children up to fourteen years old, nor women pregnant in their seventh month onward. Do not let them raise their hands who are old, those who have passed 60 years.
When anyone wishes to heal themselves in any way, it is necessary that they clear the intestines with a gentle enema if there is much feces retained so that excessive waste does not harm the main body parts.
Not even those who are too fat from meats or drunkards, no matter how severe their condition may be.
and heal after suffering from colic, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent intercourse with women or men, insomnia, waking up often, and whatever else weakens the body, whether by a thing of the weapon or in the body.
then subtly remove the humors if it is heavy with meats and drinks and medicines, provided that you have them to spare.
Then use a bath if nothing hinders it to refine the blood and cleanse the vein around the area of the third finger as we have said.
And protect yourself from work, pain, lust, and similar things;
Be bound and elevated, and the healer's hands should be higher than that which is being treated, then rub the arm two or three times, then gently remove the bandage for a moment because if it is too tight or too loose, one cannot cure it properly.
Then rub the limb with hands until the veins swell and he can feel them.
Then moisten the healer's fingers with a small amount of old oil, then place his thumb from his left hand over that vein below the limb slightly or as much as he wishes to treat, so that the vein does not break upon striking.
There are veins that flee like strings in the bow, and some of these that are hollow from windiness. And when you place it over fire, it recedes to fire without being able to open the vein, thus such cases occur. And if it works on the vein, and the wound is too narrow, so one must have skilled archers knowledgeable in such matters.
And if the arrow works once, it's good. But if not, then try again a little from where he was or with haste, unless the wound is swoln.
But if the wound is swollen and the patient hopes, let him rest for one or two days without binding the arm. By chance, they may come upon abscesses with caustics.
If it pleases him, he should not enter or bathe, then resume the washing.
And if the projectile is small, or the wound is subtly deep and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, then cauterize the same opening throughout the entire edge.
And quickly perform the procedure, so that the eye may swell. Because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the eye swelling, do not resume washing immediately, and place a little bit of oil mixture there, because it will ease their body with gentle blood flow, and is healing in this place as if by the oil.
And so administer oil in each wound to stop the veins, in order to staunch the flow of blood.
and likewise make a truss and bandage when it is put on the limb; if subtlety he slips out and spreads apart when too large.
And if it comes to large abscesses, which often happen, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you rush, place a moist sponge in warm water and salt on the limb for an hour.
and it is necessary to do this afterwards when the blood has drained from the vein, and if there remains at the limb for several days any blackness or green discoloration, then it harms not. And if you see it, apply on any matter of ointment or balm made with wormwood, myrrh, or similar substances.
And often an abscess and the appearance of a sore within the church occurs.
So place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot hard to compress with your hand, that is the male appearance. Therefore avoid applying anything as we have mentioned, for there might be an artery in this vein;
but make the wound dry with poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And treat each of the four humors according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Because if the vein is black, allow it to bleed until it turns red; And if you see it large, let it remain until it becomes subtle. And if it is too hot, allow it to cool down.
And for those who are thin and weak, and in need of bloodletting, they make a wider wound, and the veins are wide.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and strengthen him little by little, and he should be strengthened by cutting across, not pulling.
And this way of strengthening is safe from blood flow disruption and nerve compression, and it's better to move the limb little by little than quickly or widely.
And for those whose body requires strengthening, one should give them millet bread in pomegranate juice; If it is inflamed, wash three times or four; and if it has a cold disposition, serve the holy bread moistened in syrup mixed with honey, or sweet syrup enhanced with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, and fragrant syrup.
If the patient's limb is numb after a great loss of blood, it is necessary that he drinks boiled wine mixed with charcoal and fragrant syrup, and uses other remedries as we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if you wish to drain his arms, and otherwise bandage again as needed when they are greatly swoleby moisture so that he may be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his humors continuously.
they lete and t; (fudse ; but.
And who wishes to heal on another side, shall do so on the second day or third.
For there is much blood within the body that has become inflamed, leading to fever; if it requires drawing a large quantity of blood and dilating the vein as much as possible; then you attend to all the holy conditions and place your hand over them as soon as they heal, that death does not come in the area of inflammamoines, and this often happens when the caretakers are neglectful;
And it does not matter when you see dislocating the arm, causing blood to bleed a second time, and the orifice is closed, so press firmly above. If it is an artery, extend the arm quickly, for that would be harmful.
but let it drain until it bleeds a second time; or you insert the pointed instrument there until the blood vessel is frozen at the abscess and allows for drainage, and place slightly in water again, and press lightly.
If the vein is empty, leave it alone and do not bind it until the abscess is eased.
And if bleeding is necessary a second time, either from the same place or another vein, or the other arm.
and do they pus mete s’er in:t that f, or cite:
And the manner of draining should be that the patient places their hand in hot water until the catheter turns red;
then bind it moderately, so that the vessel appears well, then drain now across, neither wide nor long;
And let the wound be wide, and well near the joint of the hand, and without any exit, reset the hand in warm water, and allow blood to flow into it until you have enough.
And if this is the case, do not reset the hand in warm water again, because it becomes more frozen than thawed.
And this vein of this wound is easier to save than all others; there are no arteries or nerves present.
The vessel of the salvation of the right hand is suitable for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
Stretch the hand, and place in warm water until the veins are flushed out, if you see them. If she leans to one side, and if you encircle it completely all around, then do not harm anything.
And do not move it too much, for the nerves are barely covered by skin, and then rewarm the hand in hot water, if it is frozen in the wound, it cannot come out.
And when you have treated the wound as needed, put oil and grease on the vein to quickly bind it, and do this with each cut.
The pain in his left hand is due to the mouse disease, and do as I have told you for the right.
The treatment of sophia is suitable for all diseases from the body such as those similar to hip disease, and retention of urine, and kidney disease, and old ailments of hips and legs, and other like diseebeds.
And the quality of its injury is such that the patient must be soaked in hot water and rubbed on the wound until it softens, and then placed over the joint of the foot. and if the wound is at the ankle, there are many cuts above the foot.
cleanse it or make the incision wider, or at the anasto-liteau, let it heal.
And if you touch on the bone above the foot, beware of the nerves that are below it, and treat the wound as in cutting.
Then make the phlegm silent (stop).
And if the sinew cannot exit, place the foot in water and ensure that the vein empties well.
And if the wound does not heal on the first attempt, it may start to heal from above a little bit again, because the bone is sore.
Do not doubt of nerves as we have said, and thus apply a bandage to the other foot equally.
The root of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its inflammation causes pain in the hip when it's hot with blood.
And the quality of healing is such that the patient must be kept in or out of a bath, and pull away from the ankle with four fingers by twisting, otherwise it does not open the veins.
And if it opens, then cleanse in every way that you can, and across (the wound). And to move it again you must grab it, for the head is loose, and it has been restored much by hands of men.
And to move it again you must grab it, for the head is loose, and it has been restored much by hands of men. And if you do not catch it, take any piece that is attached to it or at the back of the knee, and towards the small hole, and watch for nerves.
and make a precise cut in the blood you see, then sever the ligament, and apply cotton and strain it. It is now healed.
Vents are made of horns, or ivory, or glass.
and suctioning is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this suctioning that is done without piercing has two ways: When she feels feverish, or shows signs of heat.
And bloodletting which is done by cupping and blood extraction if performed on fourteen points of the body, causing one to be completely bald. And the other is near the neck. And two others are on the sides of the neck. And cupping below the chin. And cupping at both shoulders. And cupping on the heels. And cupping near both arms. And cupping at both legs. And cupping at both ankles.
And bloodletting does not involve much blood loss, but rather tiny veins scattered throughout the body, and therefore no one suffers as with normal venesection. And it is not necessary that she be treated with heat or any burning, in no disease arising from congestion until the whole body has been emptied.
And if for the necessity of diseases it is necessary to fast, or by custom, we shall observe each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day.
because there are some who, when they need to fast, experience heavy weakness;
and for those who encounter congestion and paleness in their face, head, neck, and darkness of the eyes;
and those who experience blood spitting into their mouths, with a swollen tongue, and coughing up blood; And if there are those who think, and see now blood and nausea and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is within the month, we order to evacuate after three hours past noon.
The saint remedy for the muscle helps to strengthen the head... which comes from them, and it is not advisable that this be done after the evacuation of all body fluids.
And this purging is in place of the remedy for headache, and it should not be used by those who are of cold constitution or have catarrh, as it causes them much harm.
And therefore, the vigorizing substance should not be used by those who suffer from cold head ailments.
And those who often get better become negligent, and therefore it is advised to apply the cupping therapy somewhat more cautiously due to fear of relapse.
Purging in the neck is effective for headache and uterine pain relief, and it also helps with urination issues, enlargement of the penis, ejaculation difficulties, and engorgement.
And it is necessary to push a little, for if held too firmly, there may be discomfort or distress in the abdomen and heart.
For treatments such as ribs at the base of the collarbone if it causes pain in the head, otitis and migraines, strangulation, and pain in the root of teeth, and is located near the sacredness of the basilica.
And it is necessary to command the nurse to extend his hand, not to compress the artery and prevent bleeding.
For treatments from under the chin if it causes oral diseases and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth. And is located near the sanctity of the two lips.
The windings of the shoulders cause illnesses arising from heat and fullness.
The swelling of the elbows is as much as from three veins on the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
And instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply because the bone is full of cartilage and has veins and arteries running through it.
The ventose placed on the buttocks is equivalent to hemorrhoids in the lower part and diseases underneath, it is necessary for the ventose to be large and made of flax, as it requires proper extraction. and sometimes, if it were too fine, it could break; and it would cause large wounds.
The ventoses on the legs draw blood openly because they attract blood from all over the body and are equivalent to old pains of the kidneys, groin, and bladder, and reset the flows.
And they are in place of two shoulders and two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and bring about swelling in various conditions.
The manner of applying the blister is to first place it empty and apply it promptly, then secure it quickly, moving evenly, and continue this motion until you see the area turn red and swell, and a small amount of blood appears.
Then rest, and replace the blisters, and monitor the condition of the body, as there are those who have scalding heat and clear sweat. If it is necessary to make an incision just once, and it needs to be a wide and somewhat deep wound; And gently move.
And if the wound is large, it must be pierced twice: The first time to make a path for the thick blood.
And if the wound is very dense, it must be pierced three times:
and when we want to draw out little blood at a time, we do so only once. And if we want a lot of blood, let us repeat often:
and if the wound is dense, pierce it from afar, and finish so that the holes are punctured directly, and for those with thick and hard skin, let them use the lancets of oily aromatic oil and dissolvent: if it is so, with purple oil or almond softening oil or pumpkin seed oil:
And if it is in oil of watercress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or similar substances.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amartine or balm of Gilead, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
If one whom you treat has a tender and broad chest, there is no need to put oil on it, but after ventosation with rose water or cold water, or blackthorn water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
And those with much moisture should get up easily, or use myrtle water, and sumac, and similar substances.
And those who have large excess fluids rise with old wine, or of watercress water, or of fennel or chamomile infusion, or similar substances.
and they should not fasten the bladder with a cupping session before or during the bath, but after the bath one or two hours.
and they should not sleep after cupping therapy, and it is necessary that they bathe when they need to be cupped and after being cupped.
And let those who are prone to constipation take this, and their stool is too hard and inflamed; If it is necessary to apply cold things such as ripe pomegranates and endives and lettuce at ease, and similar things. and mince pieces, and lard of bacon, and moist meats.
and mince pieces, and lard of bacon, and moist meats. And those with cold constitutions should take honeyed syrup and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, a little mince meat, minced pieces, small birds, and pigeons.
and each day when he refreshes himself, he should drink more than eat.
and it is appropriate to give certain individuals triacle or muskat before the incision or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs. and ensure they are filtered, but only those who are ill should drink it.
The ventouses that are applied without using heat are those placed over the liver, and joints such as gout, podagra, and also on the abdomen, buttocks, knees, and elbows, because these members cannot be pricked in any place, and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the nipples when they are not well.
To remove the swelling in the limb, as we apply ventouses to the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the size of the member.
And alleviate the pain when there is congestion or stone, and if possible draw it out by its attracting power occasionally the congestion, or remove the stone from its place.
And thus it is done when placing it over the liver and spleen where there is retained windwassering, and these blisters are made hollow to drain sufficiently. And they are not made together with fire, and never flat from water, as in the case of diseases causing pleurisy, and thus you fill the blister with hot water poultice or warm water after boiling medicinal herbs.
The form of the suction cup administered with heat is as follows:
And it must be two fingers wide and half a palm thick at the base, with a small hole near the middle like piercing with a needle, and made of woolen cloth so that it does not slip off when placed on the limb.
And have at hand a staff of crossbar from reed or iron, to place a candle holder, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who take them.
Because children's bloodletting vessels are different from adults', and thin rather than fatty.
And one should thus place this bleeding vessel on the limb:
take the candle of wax or ointment, and place it amidst the bleeding vessel across the crossbar which is midst the bleeding vessel, so that its glow reaches to the bottom of the vessel without burning the patient.
and then place it upon the limb, and your fingers should be above the puncture site as we have said, so that when one wishes, steam will arise, and the bleeding vessel is removed.
And straighten it as before, and often repeat if necessary.
In the cupping therapy used for diseases of pleurisy, there is neither a rod nor tube, and it's only made when filled with liquid, and placed on the limb.
and this is how it works:
Cupping therapy is only applied to limbs where regular cups cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums. And for other bare areas like the scalp or neck.
And the quality of use is that when you find cups filled with gently flowing clear liquid, take them.
And they place it on an acute wound with gentle warmth until it becomes familiar, and has nothing in its belly. And then apply bandages of veins and compresses, then rub the limb until it is reddened, and place poultices on it.
And when they are full and ready to burst, if there is a place where one can apply compresses, then do so, for it works very well.
If not, lift the swelling gently and then apply water, very thoroughly, and then squeeze it out.
And if the limbs are not too sore to touch after applying poultices, then apply a clean linen cloth soaked in cold water and place it on, until the swelling is reduced.
And if blood is multiplied, put it on crushed vitriol or gallnuts, and similar things, until it stops.
Or you put a half-moon of peeled beans on it and let them sit until they become dry, thus stopping now.
And if more is needed, then take other medicines.
And if the medicines do not take hold, then rub the blood freshly and insert a needle until it stops bleeding, and then place them on top of each other, and as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry.
And when you see that they are leaking, then powder some aloe and silex broken or ash upon it, and they will heal now.
Here begins the book of fractures. These treatises are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they restore broken bones and dislocations.
Learn this, dear scribe, that the foolish seeker delves into this chapter, never having seen any ancient books or letters read.
and for this reason is strange knowledge in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
and I know nothing else, though by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I am familiar with the subject, through experience, and by habit throughout my life;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of tumors that are created, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, we must say that the preamble of this book contains the essence and wisdom of its chapters, so those who are experienced apply their understanding to truth, allowing them to know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs to any limb, it is necessary for you to support the injured part on both sides if nothing completely supports them, as in weakness of arms, children, or old people. If the tension is not too great, or too cold.
And consume cold foods such as cold joints of meat, and fowl or veal, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you are no longer doubtful about a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb.
If the patient's condition returns to its first state that they previously used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that cause swelling or viscosity, such as boiled wheat, rice, eggs, beans, veal, chicken, fresh fish, and strong wine, along with similar things. When with gradual dislocation, movement is soon followed by fractures.
And know that broken and old bones cannot be well mended or joined according to their natural character for healing of limbs, nor those as well who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
But do not worry, reset over the broken bone with strong tendons that are taut and join the limb together, until it is as strong as before. And do not leave all his work undone, and for this reason he must nourish himself with large meats, as we have said.
by the bolejles Que c; If you say b: OU; ça finge t m and so et se ou n'ilz ne bon line: Ca: Jarn’s.
When the break of the head is different from the break of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of breaks. There are fractures that go with rotation, and others by bending, as the length of a quill for writing.
There are fractures that go with rotation, and others by bending, as the length of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture accompanied by a tiny split.
And each person has his own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind in their place.
and is known the bone fracture by how it is twisted, and opened widely at the break, near to the press of the hand.
and when there is no twist or touch it, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
But it may well have twisting, or tearing, or small breaking. If it is not necessary for you to move your hand at all, but apply the medicines that come next and then gently hold it in place.
And know that if the breakage protrudes outward and the two parts are disjoined, they must now be aligned evenly, as with abscesses when they come forth.
and if abscesses occur, leave it untouched until the abscess is calmed.
then make it equal to movements that you can gently and easily perform, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than those with missing parts.
then bind it as necessary later on.
And if the bone is broken into pieces and consists of two parts, whether hands or feet, or to your hand with small limbs, or to both tendons, or to one tendon and to your hand.
And place the limb according to its natural shape. So when the parts of the broken limb are severed, carefully realign them using all methods to put the fractures back in their places as you can move them, and ensure that with your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And well align the two heads of bones according to the best forms.
And feel carefully with your hand if it seems that they are not aligned properly:
If the dressing is done well, and do not extract it too much or press as those who cause abscesses hot and contracture in the member have witnessed many times.
And when the limb is at a standstill, treat the patient well so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, or in any other manner. And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, not even slightly, and one must place it in such position that it feels no pain at all.
And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, not even slightly, and one must place it in such position that it feels no pain at all. and ensure that it is placed correctly, so there are no twists when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb should be according to what I tell you.
; forment the c; The Chir, they so that is: corue me: the Juda de laise:n't. Do not to a. Preter. Here: theu said; in this t.
For there are small bones, such as ribs and thighs: If needed, wrap soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, like thighs and legs:
If needed, wrap with a wide and sturdy bandage because the wide bandages encompass the entire large limb evenly, without any unevenness.
Then lie wraps light gauze, three or four times around the limb, and secures it with a little bit of the entire bandage, then goes above the fracture and tightens less than the fracture site, gradually moving away from the fracture.
And gently loosen the bandage little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy portion, then take another wrap and turn around correctly above the broken area.
Then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it gently, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place between the splints linen or cloth so that they are all equal, then bind everything above it with bandages, and then place well-made supports underneath, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on the abscess heat and which draws out the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
Then restrain with your supports, and they should be a piece of cloth cut one hand's width wide, or wood used for making battens, or coconut fibers, according to this shape:
But it is necessary for the splint placed over the break to be a bit thicker and wider than the others.
and also as long as needed for the member, whether small or large in size; then fasten between the splints just as you did on the first one, and above with a thread quickly, like in the first plastering over the fracture; the tighter it is above, the less there will be.
and it must be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax;
because if the thread is too thick, like the work of those who twist flax for linen cords, it causes great error, as the plaster cannot be evenly distributed if it's too fine, and there should not be less than two spaces between each splint.
And if the patient is in pain from the shoulders of their extremities after being strained into place, then apply cotton or raw wool rags beneath them so they do not slip.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the head is broken, I will tell you the remedy for this below.
And know that it does not happen to pull out all the bones of a limb broken on the first day. When limbs are large, it is not necessary to apply stitches unless after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the risk of an abscess occurring.
And use here the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting injuries:
And take flour that is kept near the mill walls and mix it with abundant egg, then create this concoction, which should not be too clear or too thick, and use it; this is the common method of plaster for restoring fractures in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting injuries: Take lion's blood, aloeswood, onions, asafetida, gum arabic, and myrrh, one part each. Mirror and aloes, five parts each. Alecsei VII, nine parts each. And make powder, and the honey with wheat flour; If the body's constitution is hot, use this emplaster, for it has good composition and quickly repairs broken bones, benefiting many people.
Another way of an emplaster that works well with sprains: Take linseed and wool fleece, soaked for X hours. Mirri oil and aloe, soaked for IX hours. Here comes the first of six chapters; And here begins the first of six parts; it is boiled and well mixed with water or whey, and given to drink.
Another method for treating dislocated joints and bones that have come out of their place; it alleviates the pain occurring, and is used to cut through the bone and fracture. Take fresh linens, and make them soft with oil heated in it, and place on top of the affected area.
These plasters do not heal but are good to soothe of hot abscesses and properly alleviate the pains.
Another method to restore broken bones; Take dried fig leaves and leaves of the earthly poppy; grind them together, and make a poultice with it.
Another way to reset the healing of broken bones and reduce remaining abscesses. Take root of valerian, chamomile flowers, violets' petals, and equal parts of wheat flour from each.
And grind it, and crush with wine, and if the limb is swoln, then crush with fresh water of coriander or just water, and apply.
Another way to treat more effectively than the first, when an abscess comes to heal the limb. Take roots of valerian, and flax seeds, bladderwrack, poppy seeds, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, in equal parts. And grind it, then crush with salt water or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its resting state.
Ypocras states in his book that one should not put anything other than a mixture of wax and oil on a broken limb for healing, except if it is too soft or too hard between two layers.
And it seems like Galen suggests that on a broken limb for healing, one should use dry substances that are somewhat warm, such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Another way to treat injuries and pain: Take mucus and sheep's liver, or feathers of birds, and valerian, in equal amounts; grind them, make a poultice, and apply it to the wound.
And then slightly move it again afterwards, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has moved the bone from its place. If so, do not attempt to relocate by hand alone. And if pain comes at the place, or itching, feeling of relief, or swelling occurs, hurry up and relocate it, and remove the splint now.
and take light gauze, and wipe with damp sponge, and immerse in cold water, and lift up the place, until itching ceases, and pain is soothed. then let the limb rest for an hour, and apply a dry linen or woollen cloth immersed in cold water or rose oil, and bind it to a stool until you are sure of heat from an abscess.
Rest the inflammation of the limb, and there is bone pain, then resume subtle movement, and a bit of plaster, and do not stretch it as tightly as before. And carefully until healed completely.
And if you see that the abscess is red and warm and painful and swollen, and you need opiates and linen, then reset as before, similarly to how it was done initially.
And if there is no improvement in the limb as we have said, do not reset it unless after three or four or five or seven days. and no more than twenty days as seen, until the fracture heals, approaching joint alignment with a charm underneath.
then reset it firmly, and the flesh grows thicker as I have said before.
and if you see that the place dries too much, know that no infection can come. Rise from warm water baths as you feel the need every day, and lightly dry yourself once a week.
Therefore, in this practice, you should cut off the gangrenous tissue from the limb and quickly remove what fools do to wrongly set bones that twist the limb back on.
It is harmful, and in such practices there is fear, I see no other than the lazy ones and those who work directly.
There are many ways to fractures, diverse forms, and their causes are distinct.
because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the joints break through all the bone until the marrow comes out, just like with an axe or stick. And for this reason is called this manner of fracture "chiñure".
Or the sword pierces the bone above without sense and is called this manner of fracture "absolute";
And there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
And if there is an impacted blow, crack, neck bone fracture, or fall onto the spine, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent fissure that reaches the tunic which lies below or above the bone, where the wound may be large or small.
And if there is a wound that closes in the bone as fine as a chamois's fur, and it is a small crack, and for this reason called this fracture "hairline";
And if the wound is made by arrow strike or falling, or similar things, and causes the bone fragment to descend, it looks upwards as when smiths heat their forges. If between the stones inside.
And this occurs especially in those who have moist bones at their heads, as with children;
and it happens in all these ways of fractures where small parts are separated as elements; and I will speak about them in their place.
And let us know all types of fractures by displacement underneath them, and the incisions on sinews, and by the corroded cartilage which is beneath.
And they; (et d do not as he sonte t and ous le trementd; that are the ou pr* est: S, so it.
In the treatment of fractures, beware of accidents to the patient, and if you see any bad accident such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the suffering comes first to you, and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day when you can move it.
If it is like this, and you remove the bone within seven days, so that the tissue under the bone becomes corrupted, then come the accidents we have mentioned.
And if the bone fracture reaches near the cloth that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thusly:
and it is that you grasp the wounded head firmly, and expose to the bone in all ways possible, and on top of the wound's appearance, as smoothly as you can, if bleeding occurs upon exposing the bangle or vein, aid with what is necessary, and ensure you fill up the space with scrapes soaked in oil; And make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, ensuring that the blood flow improves. Then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of treatment:
One method is that you cut narrowly in front, which is the form:
And then make another incision larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have various cuts of different widths, some narrow and others wide, which are pointed, and made with iron.
and work lightly so as not to injure the head.
And if the bone is rough and hard, it is necessary that you perforate around it, making cuts with tongs, not too deep so they don't penetrate beyond the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point where it does not pass through the bone.
And it is necessary that you have several things at hand when each comes into its place on the edge of the bone, so that you may have tools for all tests.
and there are the forms of three kinds of tools:
The quality for cutting near the bone broken is that you place one tool on the bone and turn it until you know the bone is cut.
then place the tool elsewhere slightly afterward and do so all around it, and with the incisors cut out the space of the bone that is between the fractures, doing this more delicately than you can, gently, as we have said, until you pass through the bone to your hand or any one of the tongs that you have like pliers.
And ensure you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
And when you have pierced the bone and created an opening, it is necessary to reset the readiness that has been delayed from the bone to any other instrument resembling a chisel; however, it must be more careful and finer than the other chisel.
and if there is nothing delayed from the small bones or scales, gently move them with slight movements; Then treat the wound with sutures and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks (Galinians) describe, which is more effective. and it holds much strength, and this is its nature. It is necessary first that you expose the bone part where the break opens up; and once you have exposed that part, then place atop the blade of this crescent-shaped incision tool, which has the following shape:
And does not cut cleanly on one side, as the affected area has swelling in two directions, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
then place a small mallet above it, so you tap lightly around the entire bone, and ensure you are careful not to damage the cloth that is underneath.
if it is loose near the bone, so you gently tap the bone, because we do not want to harm it much or cause fear.
And if the bone fracture does not pierce all the way through to the skin and is cut only from above, with small fragments remaining, you should attend to that sharpness again, and remove the scales with a fine razor in which various quantities must be used, so as to apply most appropriately to each location according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If you approach from great heights, then proceed with more subtlety, and continue in this manner until it is done well.
In each of these other haircut treatments and delicate fractures, it is necessary to reset according to its proper alignment.
And this is something that has not been redone by those who have dedicated their study to this art.
And if the patient's face is revealed, it is necessary to take a cloth of flax according to the amount of the wound, and oil with rosins, then apply to the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers and oil with wine and rosins, and place it over the first cloth. And do so more gently as you can, not to burden the face, then apply above it another bandage, and do not tighten it too much until only the wound is covered.
And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then release it, and administer medicines as listed roots, flour of vetches, powdered incense, aristolochia, and similar things.
And from these substances make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and administer such medicines without causing burning.
And guard that the wound is thus clean, not leaving any ointment or allowing a boil to form there, for when a boil forms on the tissue of the brain, it hurts and becomes inflamed, bringing great harm to the patient.
For when one applies something caustic there, it corrodes just below. Take care then, should any unfortunate event occur to the patient as we have mentioned, it is doubtful and uncertain.
If darkness does not come due to the medicine applied, and its power prevails, then it is necessary to take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and woolen cloth, and place it on the sore. Then care for in ways as needed until it is healed.
Know that at no time are the two parts of the neck broken or separated by one from another, for they are two bones.
and that which is behind is cartilaginous and does not break or twist, it simply supports and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should tie your little finger or thumb behind the neck, and place the break equally into your index finger's knuckle, and use a pouch for safety until the neck returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, ensuring the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot bring the finger to its place, it is appropriate that you put a little bit of grease on the top of a small stick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or latest day, when the abscess has calmed down, then bind to the neck with narrow strips of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind another from a different side, if the fracture is there; and the strips should be wide enough to fill the neck opening.
And each healer says one must grease the wounds with butter, and change it every day. It does not seem right to me, but it is necessary that they be made from fine wool and flour powder. Then leave the tent intact as long as the bone is fixed, and the cartilage hardened.
And never place an eagle's feather in the tent opening, and if it is near the window screen, prevent any breakage, and blow air to repel foul smells. Or do what you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the patient while you work on it, then put some grease or cotton wool in oil roseate, or a small portion of diacron.
And if an abscess does not open, then apply plaster promptly: wheatmeal paste mixed with goose egg yolks and frankincense powder, then cover with light gauze, but do not bind the feathers.
and if the feather breakage is minor, with small broken pieces, extract the spicules appropriately for this, then close the tear, and mend other irregularities such as charred or burned areas, and apply suitable plasters and ointments.
And if he has no wounds in the eyes, treat with bandages and apply compresses of warmth until they are well again.
When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound, the fractures are not severe, nor are they broken in two, unless the inner part has swelled, which can be recognized easily.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient. and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand, gently press the fracture, and shape it with the other hand as needed, making it even.
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced by two joints, it should be that you make an adjustment with a length equal to the parts.
And if there are movements of the axis or rotation, strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk, then place a padded cloth on the fractured jawbone, and cover it with two layers of fabric. And place upon the drapelet a large well-made pillow, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and lay it along with movements that you can make, instructing the patient to rest, and serve light meats.
And if you see that the form changes, reset it daily for three days, then return it to its original position once changed. And apply an emplaster on top, with finely ground powder or flour from sorrel, after you have removed the catheter.
And place a light linen over the emplaster, and if the emplaster hurts, ensure that the patient's position does not change until healed. Many times are healed within three weeks.
And when abscesses appear, treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no piece of bone remains unhealed; If the subtlety of the broken tibia has not healed yet.
If the wound is narrow, enlarge it gently according to your necessity.
And once you have extracted all these pieces of bone and it no longer remains in the wound, then dress the wide wound, and place on fine stitches to close it up until it is healed.
The severe fractures occur many times before, at the shoulder, and the fractures are of three kinds:
Or it is broken into two parts, with fragments, and it is the easiest to mend.
Or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the treatments are such that when there is a fracture with a wound, you have two assistants, so one treats the shoulder that feels the severe fracture. And the other extends the neck towards the part;
Then make equal the break to your legs so that it forms as it should, with no visible deformity or discomfort.
And if you need to extend more, then place a round rod made of cloth or leather on the patient's shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary. And extend and lift with strength; hold the rod in your hand to ensure the break is evenly set as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation due to it coming in from the front, then it is fitting that the patient lies over their injured side, and places a middle-sized earring under the shoulder blade, while you, as minister, push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the dislocation rises.
Then bring the break close to your legs and if you find fragments, cut them below as needed.
Then lightly grind the pieces and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, use one of your surgical tools. But place the scapula with this instrument to support it:
And appears like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the hand:
And has two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the edges of the wound made when fracturing the bone:
And when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the edges are small or doubtful about a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity:
And if an abscess comes forth, apply oil-soaked cloths and linens soaked in wine, and place on top.
The breaking of the bone when there are no wounds or indentations, is to put plaster powder from ground mill and goat's milk on it, then place light bandages over it, and set a spindle underne cuff if needed: Then take a very wide band about the width of a palm, then put a double dressing over splints and the frame. Then take a slender staff three fingers wide and long, and wrap it entirely with the bandage, ensuring the head of the bandage hangs. And place the staff over the fracture, turn the bandage around the neck, and remove it from the good side, and remove it from the injured side. And wrap each part separately, and when you see the fracture is aligned properly, and it's clearly evident that the staff does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and if the ligaments heal, keep them bound.
And lay the patient on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder to elevate it. If it lightens the fracture of the shoulder by elevating the arm and binding it to the neck, until there is no improper dislocation occurring for twenty days.
Then resume the splint if you see it's needed, and continue to strain and release it until it is restored.
And it will be restored in at most twenty-eight days, or sooner for some people.
Of the shoulder fracture
It often happens that the broken shoulder does not heal properly, and it remains without any strength except by touching.
If reassembled according to the breakage pattern, and jointed as naturally as possible in all ways that you can.
Then apply a layer of finely ground powder with plenty of egg whites, and soak it in a double layer. Then place a wide and fine bandage over the shoulder, slightly wider than the scapula, ensuring that it is evenly cut at all parts of the shoulder, using flax-linen strips for padding.
And then wrap it all with a large and firm bandage, so that the bandage does not move from its place, and inspect each suture daily.
And every time it becomes painful, re-bandage and ensure the bandage is still in place properly, and lay the patient on their side.
And the shoulder is reset within 20 or 25 days.
And when these numbers are completed, if the dislocation occurs again, beware, for it is not bone that moves easily.
And if a fragment of bone protrudes without breaking the skin, let it be cauterized as we have mentioned in treating an abscess with hot plasters.
And for the broken leg.
The flesh is never broken in a thousand, but this happens rarely. but often at the end.
And when it is broken inside, if it moves downwards, the patient feels great pain, weakness, and swelling, and possibly vomits blood, with fractures visible in the bones that are broken, and everything hurts terribly.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulder blades together with hands, and aligns the rib bones of two ribs in each hand, and skillfully puts them into all possible positions until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
then place pads and cotton over the sternum subtly with salt or another light substance, wrap it in one sheet, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move. And turn the ligament into shape at the back, and restrain it momentarily, and reward each hour of freedom, and if it relaxes, then restrain it again.
And if it needs to be loosed for corrosion or pruritis that comes on the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly and release it, cleanse the wound, and apply whatever curative methods you know.
Then reset the dislocation, and restrain until it is securely in place.
From the broken ribs
Know that the fractures of the ribs come only in large numbers behind the back and within the head, and they bend solecup because they are brittle. And he feels much pain at the touch of the joints.
And the healing is such that you align the break as it should be. Then place the splint, and use a stiffening rod if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending internally, he feels great pain and swelling, similar to fever, because the bone pierces through. and causes pain at the ends, and nausea and vomits large amounts of blood, it is a serious illness, and in ancient times they put great care into treating it.
And if those who say it should be administered foods that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the fracture upward.
We do not attempt what we cannot achieve; if there are no puss-filled abscesses present, they will not appear. And if they have appeared, then apply the treatment.
And some say that one puts cups on the area to draw out blood and apply heat therapy, which seems reasonable. However, there is also doubt that the cupping does not attract excesses to the area due to its weakening effect.
; by a.stir ou the set a. ndest; they haved and# s but that t1 this if you. They are they be sume que laye- that isnt en seie est conti;
And if the patient feels such great pain that he cannot bear it from the bone piercing through, and there is doubt for him, then one should cut above where the rib is broken, and use a tool to provide support.
And then one must cut the bone, and gently draw it, and then sew the two lips of the wound if they are large, and treat with unguents until healed.
And when an abscess occurs, place it under a cloth soaked in oil of roses and apply to the area.
And treat according to what is necessary for an abscess until it is healed properly on the ribs or where they should be.
And similarly to the spinal column of the back.
And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, be wary if you see his hands becoming softened and swollen and lifeless, unable to move or extend them, and when pricked with a needle, they do not feel it.
Say that it has fatal outcomes in some cases, and if they move and feel well when constrained and not, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient will be healed if treated properly.
And if a similar thing occurs to the spinal column of the back, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, pay attention if the legs are softened, and if there are accidents that have occurred in hand muscles, and on the back, there is windsweetness and egestion without volition.
And when you have successfully reset it on its belly, there is involuntary defecation. And when it is soothed on its back and it wants to rise up, it cannot. Say that it can be deadly: If one does not labor in his care:
And if this accident does not occur, then it is a less serious matter.
And the treatment is that you apply something hot to it if there's an abscess, place oil of rosewood or hen's egg yolk on the spine until it's soothed:
Then place one of those comforting and dry emollients on it and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest: And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone dislocates, one must cover the head: And break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat with anointing oil, until healed.
And if the head of the bone is broken, known as "head of the corner," place your poultice with your left hand and make it even with the other hand in your grasp, then position the splint and stake above, if necessary.
Then secure it (the poultice), and if there are broken bones to be set, do so accordingly, treat the wound until healed.
For breaking of the thighbone
It sometimes happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if so, there is not much room for adjustment. And they make a long cut, and descend into the pharynx, and come to cause pain at that spot, and swelling, and break as it grows.
And the repair is such that you stretch your hand over it until you are above the breach. and identify what the breach is and its shape;
and if the breach is solely on the head, then make it equal to that breach until it's naturally shaped.
And if the break is long or it descends to the pubic bone, then place the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of this fracture can be properly set. And once you have made it equal, place a splint on it, then put an upright stick or wood over it and secure the breach so that it does not move.
and apply pressure away from the ribs until they are levelled. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed down, and follow what we have previously stated. And then proceed to restoration, and apply strapping as needed if there has been no further injury.
From the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder dislocation is that which is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of two methods:
One method is that you take a piece of even medium-sized bone as follows:
And cut it into two pieces, and fix the ligaments at both ends, and place the patient on top of it.
Then pour the poultice of bruised branches on the trunk, until it reaches the chest, and take some splints from wood, then attach under any heavy object or extendable staff.
Then apply the bandage to the fracture, equally with his hands together, until the fracture heals as it should.
And the other manner is that one suspends the patient on his hatterail, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers so that one washes the part above the wound with their hands, and the other washes below from top to bottom, stretching each towards its part.
And if you see that the extraction is further, restrain the ligaments from under the fracture, and on both sides of the fracture, and extend each member to its place.
And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade, it must be that you place a bandage underne.chestbone and another towards him from the break, below the fracture.
and likewise if the fracture is towards him from underne.the clavicle, it must be that you place a light bandage gently, without effort, until the fracture heals equally at the site and above the clavicle;
Then properly align the fracture as it requires, and hold if an abscess does not arise.
And if an abscess does arise, do not extract it until VII days have passed, and apply linen soaked in oil rosé (rosemary-scented oil) to the area until the abscess is calmed.
Then extract it, and the manner of extraction is to place a heated piece (emolument) on the fracture, then bring the arm up over the shoulder, and place your hand either under the armpit or above the chest.
and bind it with a bandage, extracting at the shoulder joint and along the arm until the limb is straight again if nothing prevents it or if there is no movement in the bone.
If you doubt whether the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the fracture a wider and stronger splint than the others, with an interval of one inch between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to pass over the fracture by three inches from each side.
Then strain them (the splints) firmly as I said at the beginning of this chapter on fractures, stronger and less loosely aligned.
And if you see the seat of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, at the time when you restore the broken limb, and doubt if the wound is hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then observe each of the three days that neither itching nor swelling comes to this place, or numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow. If done as we have said.
And if such events do not occur, then the dislocation should not be reset until after three days or more, and have the patient lie on his back with hands placed above his abdomen.
and place a linen bandage evenly on the shoulder without stretching it, and watch each hour of the day or night to ensure that the shape of the broken limb does not move or that the ligaments are softened.
if advised by the power of medicine, and give it the flesh that we have previously prescribed, in such a way that the flesh is consumed first. And when it begins to resume, so let it be firmly fixed.
And it is customary for the shoulder and limb to be restored in forty days entirely; Then one should detach them and administer baths and oil-based remedies to direct the healing properly.
And if the stricture is unpleasant and embedded, wait to reset it for days or months.
of the broken arm
The arm is composed of two bones, called "physis," one small and the other that anchors the muscle.
and the other is large, which extends from below towards the smaller joint.
Either it may break solely the larger bone or only the smaller one, or both together.
When the smaller physis is broken, the restoration and healing are relatively easy;
When the great ones are broken, so is their healing poor, more severe than when they were broken together.
If it's only small bruises that occur, then slight extension is appropriate, and keeping them level.
And if it's a large fissure, then it must be strongly drawn out;
and stretch it above the suture, and raise the pocket of the hand higher than others, and the small fingers lower than other fingers, and cross them against each other at once, and the suture to be lifted higher in front of it that the patient suffers no pain.
then stretch the ministers of both arms to the area opposite their hand, or at the elbow, and other ministers above it.
And then place the mirrors evenly, according to their best form.
And if there is a break into pieces, put each piece back in its place; and if any are displaced that they prick the edge, do not attempt to restore them to their place, but instead make an incision by it as we have said before.
And if with the fissure there is also an open wound that I have discussed in particular with the surgeon; If you take this treatment.
And at the beginning of restoration, abscesses arise, if a plaster made of rose oil and white wax is applied, it should not be too hard or too soft. And apply the plaster gently over it until the abscesses are soothed.
Then remove the plaster and place an empolastrone powder with plenty of egg whites, then put in the splints, ensuring that the broken one is stronger and slightly wider than the others.
and ensure it has six or more splints arranged differently: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or two.
And it is strained more towards the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less in alignment, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter. And be cloths that are on the fractured area soft and moist, and should not be hard or sharp.
And be cloths that are on the fractured area soft and moist, and should not be hard or sharp. The bandage shall be of flax, which is strained, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And restore the limb and ligament after certain days. And if any accident comes to the limb, like itching that comes to the limb, you shall wash the limb with warm water until the itch is eased.
and let the limb not rest too tightly.
And then resume the strapping, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones healed, and similar things, so be it.
And if the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too tightened, you must soften it a bit and let it be so for some time until sensation returns, then strain again.
And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, then do not reset until XX days.
or inquire around it, then pinch the hands to its neck and make their sizes even, and watch for movement and turning, and sleep on his back.
And understand that this fracture is restored in 30 or 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, depending on the constitutions and combinations of virtues.
of a hand fracture
That at the back of the hand and on the forearm occur few fractures, and there come only frequent bends many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to lie crosswise with arms extended straight.
then he places his hand over the outstretched limb and extends the fractured bones equally, until they are well joined.
and he applies a poultice and splints, if there is an abscess, it does not come forth, then he places a staff according to the amount at hand. and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is around the heart near the belly of the hand, make a cone from cloth and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken hand. Then use a long strap or leather strip as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it as needed.
If the fracture is in the foot, it is necessary to place a splint underneath and another one on top of the sole, so that the hands are kept open and straight; then wrap around entirely with bandages, ensuring the ties secure the joints between them.
And if fractures come to any of us in the thighs, when they are hernias, set them straight as needed. and strain with a flat object, and if you see that placing a small stake helps to lift the fracture, do not move.
and if the fracture is in other thighs like in the index or another, set them straight, and bind with healthy bone that follows. or you tie all together tightly so they can move a little, or place under a stake as needed if there is a hernia.
And take care in the healing and positioning of abscesses, and seek out those who come with them, as I have said.
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see when they turn forward and backward;
And its restoration is by binding it above the fracture, and another below. The patient lies on their face, then each attendant extends their hands equally to its parts.
And this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the base of the thigh, let one ligament be near the wrist, and the other ligament above the fracture.
And similarly if it's near to the knee, and then the ligature should be near the knee, and extend downwards.
Then place the mirror to balance the bone with his two hands, as according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and tie it securely, ensuring no abscesses come forth.
And if there is an abscess present, leave it to heal first then return to your work and treatment. The dislocation is performed in a particular manner.
It is necessary for you to wrap around the break with a doubled or triple bandage, and secure any excess, then turn the leg so that the ankle approaches the root of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint, and guide the head of the filament above.
then turn the leg and hip with the bandage, then place an esse on the break, and put another esse on the bone of the leg.
then place the remaining wool between the leg and hip with soft cloth to apply equal pressure, then start binding firmly using three or four twists on the break. And when more you work on the breakage, and less it is held back.
Then go to the head of the suture that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and there three stitches are above, then return below at the top of the thread until you reach near the heel.
Hold it back if it cannot move from its place, then let it be so, and ensure that no abscess or swelling appears. And if this occurs, reseat whatever comes out, as we have said many times;
And if there are pieces of bone that protrude, it should be removed, if possible. If it cannot be done, then splitting the opening and draining is necessary. And for treatment as we have said, until it is set right.
And at no time should the thigh be broken so that stakes are inserted therein, as in the shoulder and arm.
Likewise, in restoring it this way does not harm the patient.
Know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, more or less, depending on the different temperaments of individuals.
It is found that in the groove of the knee joint there are few fractures but many times it bends.
And if it breaks, it is not a crack or puncture, but causes all kinds of wounds and feels like everything is well.
And the restoration is such that one places equal parts as are present at its ends, so that they may be joined and moved.
Then place the splint, and if needed, a round stake, and bind it as required, then repair all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, such as abscesses hot and similar. Then apply to each incident what is needed, until it is set right.
s
That there are two bones in the leg, one called 'right' and the other called 'left'.
And there is a fracture as it occurs in the arm, and thus is the restoration just like that of the arm equally, and the workings are all therein. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg completely around.
And if the smaller bone is fractured, it twists forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly. and straighten out.
Then make an extension, put it evenly, and tie the screws equally.
but nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are more fragments, that the reduction be minor and lighter. And align according to your artistry.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of hardwood that encompass the leg on one side and the other, and are as long from the knee joint to just below.
then wrap them with two layers on both above and below, and tie it securely as well, and to this bandage the leg will not bend to the right or left, thus it is good.
and none may administer the two layers along the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and he puts it onto the leg to prevent movement, and properly done in the fracture where there is a wound.
and each day moves the leg, to see if there is any bleeding or other accident. If you treat until it becomes healthy again.
On the fracture of the bone in the foot
To the ankle there comes no breakage, but to the bone of the foot there is never any breakage and to the joints little occurs except strain in various positions.
And if it occurs as a broken bone fracture, and you see the bones protruding from each other, place such poor limb on the ground as if it would walk, then now put your foot under theirs, where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places.
Then place the plaster and padding on it, and apply a small rolled bandage with two finger breadths under the abdomen of the limb, then strain to align immediately, and once you have wrapped in dressings around, and other things which you need.
And when three or four days have passed, you shall remove the ligature, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken bones, restore them, as we have said of the hand's bones; Then break the bone with an iron rod according to the length of the arm, and make it slightly wider, then insert below the elbow the table I have mentioned, and secure tightly.
and if there are two or three, or more, break each arm with an iron rod according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and secure the table under the elbow. and when they are above the head of the table beneath the belly of the arm, that you do well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, just as we have described; and treat each accident as needed.
For the fracture of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if she may sit expanded, then tilt to the part of her back, and be held behind.
Then fill the wound with the patient's own hair plucked out, and place it there as large as possible.
Then have the woman stand up, and gently lift her back little by little, so that the hair then jumps into the wound until it reaches near its opening, reattaching with the flesh.
And when she needs to urinate, remove the hair then, and when she has finished, reset it, doing so for seven days or thereabouts: If this restores the fracture, and if you see it, take a bag of beaver skin, tie thread to its opening, and pour all the contents into the wound: Then blow air through the tube until the contents of the bag are expelled inside: The nature will return to heal the fractures.
Then be filled with cotton and leave it thus for several days until it is sound.
And when the bone of the hand or woman's limb is broken, restore it as we have said with the thigh bone.
and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and listen to my book.
For fractures indicate various ways in the right path of restoration: Thus understand.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and insert the penis; then wrap with cloth around, and leave for three days or more, and it will be sound soon.
Of break with wound
It is necessary for those who have a break with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be examined now so that the signs we have mentioned confirm them.
And if the wound is healed, if there remains lead poisoning, unless you have something else, then continue to restore the break in that same hour or day if no abscesses come.
t he:cordon ; c;t, they can be le se leso's the mele tre la anguille as de ust; please; do not d.
And if the bone is broken and appears at the edge revealed, it must be placed carefully with your hands in slight extension.
If the extension is not properly adjusted to equalize your hands, if you reset with this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight long tines, and the width depends on the quantity of the wound. And therefore the healer must grasp three or four [tines], depending on what is needed for each fracture treatment.
And it should be round and slightly larger so that it does not bend during the pressure on the limb in your workshop, and thick in front, with a greater diameter there:
And it is called "clavicle," for which the patient's head must be placed under the visible bone. and the bandage should be wrapped once so that it returns to its starting point, and they are even against each other. And if the fracture is subtle and tendons cannot properly grasp the bone, it must be that you cut off the bone's head until the tendons have access to it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with the cup of an appropriate instrument, either cutting or drilling, within your power.
Then remove that which is lodged in the bone due to splintering and small shards.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, believe that it is not in its natural place.
If you have managed to put it back in its place, then make a poultice with wine and black sticking ointment, and properly apply as needed. and do not place any other substance or oil on the wound unless it has oil, so as to prevent decay and putrefaction.
then apply linen dressings when you have restored the bamen, and leave the wound uncovered, applying a covering all around it according to the quantity of the wound, ensuring that the wound is not strained with any break.
And many times have the wise men done this to the foolish, bringing about pain or death at any given time. Thus it is the gentle handling that differentiates these fractures from others more severely broken.
And if the wound is bad or large and you suspect it may be contaminated by an accident as we have said, and there is pain at the location, then one should not apply splints. but wrap around it, in place of splints, with stiff cloths, and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days that pus appears in the wound, take off what you have applied on it all along, and apply healing balm to the wound, like tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar substances.
It is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is relaxed and healed.
And it is proper that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the bow is bent slightly.
And if more than one day passes, and it cannot heal but remains bent, as there are small fragments of bone, so you must clean the wound with lint, and extract all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
And if a fistula appears at the site, or another type of decay, you should treat it as described in this chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as with the hip or shoulder bones, and similar large limbs, do not attempt to treat them, for often death ensues, but leave it until it heals.
Perhaps it will attach itself again after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you know how.
And if you don't know, let it be.
We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it's near the joint, and an ugly thing is to see in the affected limb. and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
So be careful, if you are fresh (meaning young or inexperieneb). if you administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and tragacanth, then whether you use any of these things individually or all together, mix them with tonic wine or abundant honey or rosewater. And when it is placed on a wooden block, keep it firmly strained so that it does not slip for days.
And when it is placed on a wooden block, keep it firmly strained so that it does not slip for days. Then dislocate again and repeat with another, until the joints are set straight.
or strain it using a well-made splint; for the properties of the splint are such that they remove all swelling from over the limbs.
and if the dislocation is hardened as a stone, it needs to be removed by making an incision there, and removing the excess tissue. or reset with any razor until it is straightened out, and cleanse as long as it remains healed.
A limb which becomes weak after healing
When the broken bone has been restored, but the limb becomes weak and delicate for various reasons: That is why one was too tightly bound, and it was not loosened as it should have been. This is because there were too many bindings, preventing the member from moving freely. This is due to excessive bleeding; When too great movements are made, they do not occur at their proper time; or if from excessive moisture. Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weakened.
And the treatment should be that you feed the patient well, and make their body supple, until blood is multiplied within them. and administer baths, and give them joy and ease;
then place pitch on the limb, so that it draws much nourishment to itself, and often heals with water poultices, until nutrients reach the member. and returns to its natural form.
After the healing of an injured limb, a member becomes twisted When the limb is twisted after restoration, and bones are broken openly, and the form of the limb is unattractive, nonetheless it does not interfere with its natural function:
If you do not believe those madmen who say that we must break the limb anew in its entirety, and many a fool has done so on our land.
And this work is to be blamed, leading to great harm, and sometimes death occurs as a result.
Nevertheless, if the swelling and torture are fresh, it is proper to apply hot water, or cooked soft herbs such as violet leaves, roots, honeycomb, and similar things.
and the ointment with mollifying properties like an excellent diaper rash cream is to be taken, as well as musk from violets, mixed with lard or sesame oil, and applied externally.
Or take fatty figs, and grind them with fine wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And at no time is there an inflammation of the bone by rubbing continuously and extensively with wet hands. And thus provide movement to each limb periodically.
And if the curvature is old and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be cut out with iron, then it should be coped until reaching bone, with a finely sharp incision. and place splints and carefully study the treatment plan.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs, it must now be gently moved back to its place.
For if delayed, and the joint swells, and perhaps when resetting it causes pain at its original location;
for then one should not move it until it has subsided. many times causes swelling and other pains;
yet, when this occurs, provide the patient with warmth, then leave them to rest until the inflammation has eased.
Then apply a hot water and oil mixture, then gently relocate the limb, and treat each member as care is applied to its place.
f Armf: TI; ça;
Sometimes jaws become dislocated between them, and the dislocation of both occurs in two ways: or they are slightly out of their place, and somewhat loose; or they are entirely dislocated and hang towards the worst part, and spill the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, wrapping its tongue with speech.
When dislocation is small, it may return to various positions.
And if it is complete and severe, one must reset it promptly without hesitation;
and in such a way that the minister douses the patient's head with a small pot of herbs, and inserts the tip into one of his hands at the root of the jaw joint dislocation within the mouth, as the dislocation is of two parts; And if the other two hands are also defective, to set them equal.
and instructs the patient that he soften his jaws, and move them from all sides. And places the mirror evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the patient returns with difficulty, especially when both jaws are together, then apply warm water and oil until they can be moved gently.
Do not attempt to reset it, as we have said.
And when they are returned equally and the patient's mouth feels well softened, then put a padded cloth made of oil-soaked linen in cotton, and loosely bind it with soft threads.
and let the patient sleep on his back with his head between two pillows so that he does not move to either side or strain at all but gently chew tender meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws are well moistened.
And then gently maneuver what it wishes, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is well aligned and healed.
When the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not returned to their places, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal perforation, and sometimes they may expel their contents entirely.
And when you see this, then say that it is a perforation; and many times death befalls those who have it, within nine days.
The powerful ones cannot dislocate within the ribcage from its continuity to the pelvis, and it is never dislocated once properly aligned; indeed this is felt by him.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms. and then press firmly with your whole palm, and it will return.
then place the splint and bindings on, and secure them.
and the joint that is towards the knuckle cannot dislocate. if not, and if it ever does dislocate once, you must reset it to its place, as we have said.
Then place upon the plaster and bandage it, and secure it, and command the patient to rest until they are well again.
And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
Li membieres et les os est desavisez par le movement qui avient quoi puisse ains que il ne teste puisque demorer; mais si li est grandement malsain, se doit cauteriser avec saindsont li est ; mais s’est :
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
because one way is when it dislocates from under the acromion; and another is to the part below the greater tubercle; and sometimes it dislocates above, but this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves.
and often dislocates from under to the scapula, especially in those with little strength, because for these it happens quickly.
Those with enough hair fall easily at times and return to their place just as easily.
And sometimes there are individuals who experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, thinking it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you test it, until you are certain. And then begin the treatment.
And it is known when the dislocation slides towards the socket, and there is a noticeable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their variety evident. And at the top of the shoulder blade, you will find a hollow, and from the socket to where the head of the shoulder meets the collarbone, as if it were some ears. And the patient cannot return their hand to its rightful place nor make any movements at all.
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you can clearly see it at the collarbone.
And this method of dislocation is not to return it when new, or if the child is ill.
And the method is for the minister to lift the sick person's hand upward, then remove splints under the saddle, and gently raise the dislocation back into place. And the minister lifts the hand, extends it upwards, then places a support underneath. if done quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within days afterward, it is necessary for the sick person to be bathed in warm water. and let them soak with something softening and soothing like an infusion of elderberry and fenugreek and honey in water, and be treated.
Then instruct the patient to lie on their back, and place a band of linen equal in thickness neither too soft nor too hard, then put the footstool under the calf, lift the head from the shoulder gently, and guide the hand away from the injured side.
And apply other remedies to the top of the affected arm so that it does not move downward; That shoulder returns now completely, and if you see the joint according to this method:
And that you bring a person who is taller than the patient. And they should be right-side up facing the patient's feet, and lift the affected shoulder from under the footstool, and raise the stool so that the injured arm hangs freely in the air. And other ministers support the patient with their hand under his belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, do not burden them with anything heavy; then the dislocation returns now.
And the dislocation is also approached in another manner:
and it is that a long stick is inserted into the ground so that the shoulder can align like on the spit, neither too large nor too small. then it is lifted from under the patient, but with cloths placed beneath for support, and the patient should be lying on their long back.
then his hand is extended away to the other side farthest, and the joint will return to its place swiftly.
If it does not wish to return due to all these things we have said, then perform this treatment: Take a stick of six fingers in width and two hands in length, with the head bent to enter into the joint from the side as follows:
Then wrap it around with a soft cloth so that the stick does not prick the patient, then place it under the joint of the afflicted.
And extend the arm over the length of stick, and attach the shoulder to the stick, with the hand at the top of the stick; then place the arm on the edge of an egg-slot wide enough, and let the hands hang downwards, leaving the body hanging on the other side: The dislocation has been occurring for some time now.
Et quand elle est ainsi, quelle qu'en soit la manière, si il convient de placer sous l’épaule une spere (tison) d'uneine égale ; puis appliquez la plâtrer à poudre fine sur toute l’épaule et autour, avec encens et aubun d'uef; rétablissez immédiatamenr le lien au-dessus de la plâtré et embrassez la main à son cou, les mains reposant ainsi.
And it is necessary that he rests a little while, until the limb is comforted, because then it will recover sooner.
and then rest more after 5 or 7 days, and move [it]. and if it is firmly set and not weakened, it will be healed.
If the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another cause, it must be addressed with three small fire cauldrons as described in the chapter on cauldrons.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 지7일, and the joint does not stay put, nor can lift either arm upward, then say that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or weakened. and state that the dislocation will never be placed back in its original position.
The dislocation that is towards the worse side, and the muscles or back, it is made by impact, lengthening of hands, and administering another remedy.
And treat until it is healthy again.
And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and later weakness in movement, many times the patient must use it until the stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
In cases of double dislocation
He says that the joint of the elbow has been dislocated by pulling and returns to being pulled out.
and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and back, and the dislocation is not properly reduced because you can see it clearly and feel it. and it dislocates according to each position. And when you join the sickly limb to its sound counterpart, if it appears clearly deformed. For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as soon as the swelling appears because if the swelling appears, then repositioning would be difficult.
and sometimes it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is behind; for it is worse than other dislocations, causes more pain, and possibly leads to death.
And restoration is such, when it can be brought back, that you extend its hand with your two hands. and its arms are spread out, and the hands in such manner as is taught here, above and below, and place the joint with its pieces together or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back as he doubles his hand with his hand, and bends at the root of the palm cord that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, provide strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and you bind with their ropes, so that it does not move during extension;
then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a wide and long cloth around it.
and when the pieces are at the joint with its hand, anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then set the joint correctly until it returns.
When it is in place, then apply a dry emollient with egg yolk, firmly strain, bend the arm at the patient's elbow, leave for some days, then release.
And if the joint is secure in its place, gently release it and let go.
And if you see that the joint is not tightly secured, repeat the emollient and binding, leaving it for several days until firmly set. Then release it.
And if after resetting the joint, it feels unstable and moves, then bathe it thoroughly and rub well, applying pressure until relieved. or you place a fat sheep wool on the joint, leave it for a day and night, then move it, and let the patient take another bath. And when it is ready, if you friction the joint timely, then reset it immediately, and then apply a cold bath. And do this twice or thrice until it heals.
And if you see, place warm wheat flour mixed with butter on it and strain it.
If it returns to its normal position.
The displacement of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates easily, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly at the same time as it dislocates, so that the limb is inflated or an abscess forms warmly.
And the realignments are that you place the afflicted hand on a table, spread out the fingers, and align them equally, so that it places its palm over the joint's appearance and hold it until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must ensure it is properly positioned. Then place the patient's hand under a table with extension and flexion exercises. And if dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's hand on a table, and let the master place his hand under that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is well. If not, the strain of soothing balms and herbs may help; he allows it to rest again after a while.
And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to place it back in position for several days, the dislocated joint may worsen.
then do not let anyone but the patient touch it until his hand is no longer weak and cannot grip anything at all. thus say that the nerves or vessels are cut.
If there is no other means but to restrain by fire near the wound, and sometimes it proves of no further use.
And when the hands are at rest, place it on the plaster we have mentioned, then stretch and leave for 5 days, then release and let be like this.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no weakness, then apply hot water poultice, and rub until clean.
Of the dislocation of the hands' joints
They are never dislocated either side of the hand, neither to the back of the palm nor the belly.
Then they are bent, and the dislocation is pushed back into place until it returns, then support the head of the hand, and bend towards the part where it was dislocated.
And leave it for two days, then set it level on the third day.
And from that time bind it as we have said, leave it unbound for a day, then make it move, and re-bind the nuts.
And do this often until it is tightened, and do the same if dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it becomes healthy.
And do the same when it is dislocated from another part as well.
Pain relief of the lumbar region of the back.
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are many dislocations, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
And the signs are that the discharges jump out involuntarily, cannot be contained, and many times a limb is softened or either both thighs or one arm or one leg.
And often the spine moves in four parts;
That which moves at the rear is called "gilbosis":
The treatment is that you should check if the 'gilbosis' came from childhood: If there is no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, say the old methods of treatment with grand words, where there is no great benefit in all.
However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed extracts in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes on the pubis, there is neither remedy nor health.
and similarly those that arise directly in the groin, which cannot be treated except for those properly on the back, as I say.
and there are times when the patient's face should be stretched for one even length, and have strain from it so that they do not fidget.
then fix a tension in the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the limbs of the patient, and one at the calves, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the joints, among the two shafts.
And they should be firmly closed as we have said, and the healer places his palms along the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a stick three arm lengths long, and sharpen one end, the patient lies on their side, and lift the head of the stick from under the sheet, then place the middle of the stick along the spine. And the healer places his feet on the other end of the stick and presses firmly until it returns to place.
And if you see this, then do the twist which turns towards the hand. And you shall insert two spits on the head of a large arm, one toward each other, and between each spit, there should be an open hand's width of length.
And in each prick, provide a covering or bandage, and securely embed the spits in the ground so they do not move.
And between each pair of spits, there should be another turning prick to which the bands are attached, and in those two pricks, place small pricks one open hand's width long for turning the bandage.
And then tie the band which is among the spikes at the turning point toward the head, and the other band toward the feet at the opposite turning point; each assistant turns their respective turning points throughout the entire bandage, as we have described.
When they are level, place a dry emplaster with plenty of wax, then the bandages, and then the splint from a tablet of three fingers long, to keep the location of the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine in position, then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and instruct the patient on subtle nourishment until they are well.
If no improvement comes at the end of recovery, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, with the splint that we have mentioned earlier. And never administer a piece of lead, and never do the appearance come in the rear spine, and believe that it is a dislocation. And it is the bone which opens up, hence one must not have any false confidence. Perhaps it would bring death upon them.
Say that the hip and shoulder joints only come with dislocations, not like other joints.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: of anterior and posterior, and front and back;
and more towards the inner side, while less is dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of inner dislocation is that when joining the injured leg with the healthy one, the former is longer and opens more on the unhealthy side than on the healthy, preventing the injured from doubling its angle at the fire. And it is the body part near a hot abscess swollen, because the hip joint comes close to it.
And the sign of those who come at disadvantage, so these accidents are contrary to what was mentioned before.
And the signs of those who have this affliction are such that their leg is well-extended as per completion. Nevertheless, do not move the knee causing pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot before, holds its urine, swells with anger, and when it walks, passes over the heel.
And the signs of those behind are that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the vein is softened, and the head of the hip to below the ribs.
The reductions of this type of dislocation are that you must reset it as soon as the dislocation occurs, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment. and one should not be overly confident.
And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways to address it: quickly return the joint, push it back in and secure it, then move it right and left. In case it returns, no further treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must summon a strong healer, and firmly support the leg with two hands or use a bandage placed above the knee. And another healer extends his hand over the thigh in a way that places it below the kneecaps and then tightly wraps a light bandage around the hip. And yet another inserts a stick into the bandage.
And they extend both upwards and downwards at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at one time, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
If not, it requires treatment for its resemblance.
When the dislocation is in the hip, it must be braced with a band around the patient's unaffected side, then place a ligature at the base of the hip, and extend the ligature towards the groin, and upwards towards the abdomen.
then use additional supports for its arms, and wrap around the affected hip joint, extending it forward fully: if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
If you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then you must tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong but soft band above the two heels and over the two knees, and ensure that the affected leg is extended further than the other.
Then it should be hung from a log across its head, and have both arms lengthened apart on the ground.
Then instruct another minister to cradle the patient's chest, and have other ministers hanging alongside with them who also support the abdomen firmly because the dislocation will now return quickly.
And when the dislocation is on its way back, lay the patient down as we have mentioned in those with gangrene, and properly loosen the band around the affected leg and over the thigh similarly.
Then apply two heating plasters, one at the head and another elsewhere on the body; then insert a stick between the buttocks near the patient's anus. And wrap them with wet cloths around, so they do not move the patient; then extend each minister towards him, and ensure he aligns his hand to properly reset the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good.
But if not, place on a bed or similar, and press as we have said in hernias, and move the patient onto their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended with great haste and according to what I have said; then place the minister's hand on the affected arm, and press with the other hand, extending it towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is behind, do not extend the patient towards the ground or upwards, but rather it must be positioned as though his knees were unlocked at the back, as we have mentioned during supine lying on both heels. And it lies across its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and you must gently press on the joint to the bone. and it will be pointed when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then place the heels together, and put in a splint, and bind with a bandage so that the knee does not move. and rests for three days or four, then unbind it, and put in a splint again;
and if you see that they are even, strain as before, and leave for three days.
then unbind it, and let the patient walk easily until the limb is strong again.
Of shoulder dislocation
The joint is dislocated in three ways: It consists of being dislocated by pushing through internally, externally, and behind.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not reach his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if possible, then place your back to his face, and put your feet under his.
Then take its head in your hands, retract it between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the head shape. And other assistants extend his foot until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it slightly feels the leg in its thigh.
And apply the poultice on it, and raise the leg to the hip, keeping them together firmly for 3 or 4 days before releasing.
And do not work the patient too much until the limb is comfortably healed.
And if the limb is not quite straight, it must be strongly extended as we have said in treating knee issues, until it is well aligned.
Regarding ankle dislocations
The ankles are never fully bent or unbent and within them lie the arteries.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and try to move it towards the part where it has dislocated.
The movements should be light, and when reset, gently extend with hands until fully seated.
And if it is dislocated completely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and tie him up with ropes outside the leg, above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand twice, then extend upward firmly and place the foot well above.
And do so twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot.
If it returns, that is good;
If not, resume the treatment, for it will return;
And if it cannot return thus, place the patient on their back on the ground and firmly press between their thighs with a passage, and wrap them with cloths around, so they do not shake.
Then anoint the minister's thigh and have another minister extend the foot to his hands or the line, so he ties above the neck of the foot. Then extend each minister equally, and the passage be tightly between the patient's thighs to hold when stretching.
Then position the splints to stabilize the dislocation with your hands, and use other methods to support the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it reaches a point, apply the bandage and compresses above, make sure to tighten them properly, wrap the cloth around the leg, and protect the nerves behind the ankle so that the bindings are not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if possible loosen the bindings, adjust the straps.
then remove on the fourth day or after that, encourage the patient to move around freely for four days. and if it progresses before this term is up, do not be concerned that it may still dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
: When both are dislocated, they must be extended without much effort, which is an easy thing to do.
If the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it must be made to sit on a flat level or right-angled table, and place your foot under which of these joints are separated, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
And when it is level and nothing is apart, place under the sole of your foot a two-legged table, then strain firmly, and let it be for three days, then release. And make it rest until it is sound.
Of wound and of dislocation together
When wound comes with the dislocation and we see its restoration, many times it happens that patients die:
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compasserate and slow to act, do not be hasty.
At the beginning of healing, apply to an abscess until it is drained, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope for health. And when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess may properly heal.
And when the limb is back in place, apply soothing remedies to the abscess and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments.
And if there is also a bone break and small pieces to be removed, follow what we have said in simple illnesses.
And be wary of falling into despair, as I have said, for it will affect your health according to your Maker, and for the safety of your weapon and body.
