O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its explanation and concluded by its expositions and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this chapter, which is part of the work on hands, namely 'Surgery'.
And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and carried out everywhere, it has been neglected except for a few details from ancient books that describe what the hands have done. And thus arises error and folly, and understanding is closed off, and wisdom has departed.
Or it seems to me that I want to bring this treatise to life, along with the order of its content according to exposure and clarification, and abbreviation. And I shall bring together the forms of instruments for cautery, and other tools of surgery with preparation and explanation as necessary.
And because there are no good masters at hand in our times, the art of medicine has been abandoned. It is necessary for those who undertake this to ascend in the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, understanding the judgment of bones, their shapes and connections and separations, having knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and number of veins, and their movement and active and resting states.
And thus Hippocrates states that nothing without the art is much, and little without it. And especially in the art of hands.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that those who are not mindful of the aforementioned things should be careful lest they err and kill people.
Thus, I have often thought of those who involve themselves in this knowledge but abandon the theory and lose their experience.
For I saw a mad physician who cut an abscess of scrofulous glands or throat in a woman and severed the arteries near the neck. for this is why so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another physician treating a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large; if he took with him a part of the bladder, and he died within three days.
And I had already been called upon to treat it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he was to be cut open, he would surely die from it.
And I saw another physician who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was an open wound;
and the ignorant physician pushed the break onto the wound without proper alignment, and did not let it heal properly, leaving it that way for so long.
And he commands that it shall not be dislocated again;
and remain thus so the leg becomes completely paralyzed, and the fingers too, leading to loss.
I come here called upon him, and hurried to dislocate his leg; and when I did dislocate it, he became at peace and felt no pain.
But in any case the contamination was already confirmed or limb, and could not be cured;
And the contamination ceased to spread through the member until the entire limb was lost.
And behold I see another physician who fells an encrusted abscess, which then inflames due to the spite of his lordship.
For cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humors, does not need to be touched with iron unless in part its location allows for the removal of what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in various conditions;
And I will show, at each place of this book, where there is fear and danger.
For that's why you must guard yourselves well, so the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take your arms in consideration and begin treating the illnesses easily yet firmly, using the best method for by God's grace to achieve health and be praised.
and let the hopeful diseases bring about great health. (Note: This line may not make perfect sense in English as it was probably a general proverb or sentiment meant to encourage
and take up your arms where you find doubt, and have faith within yourself that you may come from this world to the other of glory. (This line is also not perfectly translatable but gives an encouraging sentiment about having faith in oneself.)
Galien speaks in some of his warnings: "Do not treat illnesses poorly, lest you be called mad doctors.
"I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire and medical cauldrons of water, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
And of forms of tumors, and iron instruments for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter concerns cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and arrow extraction, and such matters.
And it is the ordered chapter on tumor forms.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and such matters.
And it is ordered from the head to the feet, and on tumor forms.
So we shall remember our work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of help and the harm of each composition.
I say that the quality of the aid, and its harm, is the longest word and subtle science and hidden remedy.
and what many wise men speak, they agree on this.
And I am troubled by their few words, for I will regain strength.
I say that cauterization helps with all constitutions or matters where it is applied, both of the humors. That is to say, hot temperament refers to matter, and dry temperament also refers to matter.
In the combined hot and dry temperaments with regard to matter, they converse and say that cauterization is of great help. and the other says the opposite: that cauterization does not help with diseases arising from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with hot medicine due to heat, nor dryness alone.
And those who say the opposite assert that cauterebe greatly helps diseases of heat and dryness arising in men's bodies. When you examine the body of the person and their moisture with the fiery temperament, you find the body to be cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it no time through experimentation.
And in any case, it should only be attempted by those who have experience and know well the art of cauterization, the diversity of human constitutions, their dispositions and causes of diseases, as well as incidents and duration over time.
We have no fear for other constitutions, especially those with cold and damp illnesses. And all the healers gathered and agreed on the treatment.
And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the cure, and even greater beneficence than burning medicinal cautery.
thed; Tap. ould that lesquilibtud: O.
Burning medicines move from one member to another by combining them, bringing severe healing diseases to the affected limb; and sometimes it kills the patient.
The fire for its high temperature and the kindness of its nature does not do this, if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, regarding the truth of things.
And so I excuse the length of my words, for it is not my desire to reveal to you the secrets contained within these pages and their explanations, as the philosopher demonstrates how they address diseases of the body. Or receive them into your thoughts.
And know, my son, when to perform the cauteries and praying lines.
And I say that caustery is suitable at all times, for the harm which occurs is removed by means of caustery. and especially because caustery is necessary for sudden pains that cannot wait until the onset of greater illness in the limb.
And never think as do fools, just as they are known to act. because the disease which is healed by caustery does not have a return. And he says thus;
And he says thus; But it is not as they think, because cautery is a remedy that changes the complexion and dries the humors causing pain, and it works more quickly than other medicines due to its potency and efficacy of its action and power.
And some cause is that the disease comes at any time according to the disposition of the sick and their location and its nature.
And they are combined in him the excesses from acquiring meats and similar things, unless caustics are administered at the place where there is little excess and moisture, as with caustics for pain, and other such matters, so that the pain does not return. However, this happens rarely.
And many people do not know why cauldrons are called the last of medicine, and that is true.
However, they do not believe that cauldrons are worth after medicines, but their understanding is false; cauldrons are the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any illness and they prove to be of no value, then we apply our cauldrons, which work.
Then indeed cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
The ancients said that a cauldron made of gold is more potent than one made of iron, and they claimed so not because it was a fork but due to the quality of the gold and its high value.
and they said that the patient does not suffer deterioration from cauldrons, but this is indeed true as I have tested it myself, and found in some men.
And gold cauteries are worth more than iron ones, as they have said. Also when you heat a gold instrument, do not judge its temperature by the color of gold alone, as it cools quickly.
and if you overheat it; If done with fire; and thus there is enough obstruction.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
These cauteries are for moisture and cold on the brain; there are two that are done because of an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors descending from the head into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, as well as all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, stroke, and similar afflictions.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solutive medicine which modifies either III or IV chiefs, according to what the virtues and nature and customary tolerances of the patient can endure. and then address the head of the illness again.
And then make it sit cross-legged between your hands and place its hands on some flat surface.
After that, put the base of your palm over the base of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two ways will come, bleed it first and then warm the caustic which is called "olive oil," for its form is as follows: And he places it back into its place with incision, and does so by drawing and straining your hand little by little while turning. Then lightly lift your hand, and carefully return the bone as you see the small joint. And if you do not see it, then resume the cautery until you see the bone as I have instructed.
After taking a little salt, and placing moist and soft cotton inside, then places it back on the joint, leaving it there for three days.
Then applies butter to the cotton. And leaves it until the scalding is healed. Afterward, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrapharmacist," until it is sound.
And the elders say, when a wound is left open longer, it drains more. and so, if you help move it.
And some of these say that one must thoroughly cauterize the part where bone is burnt and then repair what has been burnt off from the bone, and treat it.
And others say that the fire-cautery must be held longer, and pushed in so hard to widen the hole as wide as a woman's ring inserted into her fingers, so that the fluids can exit.
and it should be left open for a long time. after this, cleanse and heal.
And these two methods of fire-cautery do not seem to me good in all cases, but only for some men who have reason to fear.
and it seems to me that I should leave it out.
For the head is weakened by continuous natural discharges as we testify with other limbs.
Similarly, when the head is weak in the patient naturally, and the first sign of healing is more beneficial and effective for them, then from this treatment I work accordingly with great benefit.
When there is chronic pain throughout the head and it lasts for a long time, one must use herbs and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters. and if one performs the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not improve. Be aware if the patient's headache is of a strong nature, and it should not be too cold; Then you must cauterize below that wound as we have mentioned above. After performing the cautery on each wound of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cautery where it is called "vessel". and are the areas in which you apply cups. and lift your hand so that it does not touch the bone. the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak elsewhere.
it is appropriate that the cauteries of the horns be more delicate than those used to cauterize half the head, and this is the method.
Of fire cautery for the head When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease extends to the whole area, and the head is purged by various medicines, and all other remedies I have mentioned under the heading of diseases are done, yet none help: Then you make cauteries according to two methods, namely medicinal quinsy and wound treatment.
The cautery for quinsy is that you pluck a hair of wool, and remove the scurf and cover it with two hairs, then make an incision at the temple where the pain persists so that you can replace the woolen thread without the skin.
and when it is replaced, let it be tied off securely and left for twelve hours thus. and then untie and treat the woolen thread, and leave the wound so for two or three days. then put a piece of cotton soaked in butter until it becomes healed.
After the treatment with ointment until healed;
And if you see any of the burning remedies I have written or described in treating with burning medicines;
The iron cautery follows this method. Heat the form of that cauterizer:
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like an owl or has little tufts of hair, and in appearance, it has a small similarity.
and the mass is located on the scalp, hold your hand and gently twist the hair a bit until you see the division of skin that begins to scar.
and lift your hand so the vessel does not burn further back, and it flows abundantly with blood.
After placing cotton over the wound for three days on the scalp; Then you place clean cotton greased with butter, and then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if you decide to perform a caustic treatment for this migraine using the cautery called "culutellar," at its tip, and be careful not to burn the artery in such a migraine which is not ancient.
Migraine
When you treat migraines as we have previously discussed in the division of diseases, and nothing seems to help, and you see that the previous cautery is not effective with either medicine or iron, then it becomes necessary for you to heat the "culutellar" cautery until it is white.
and gently touch the tender area with a line half an inch long, then remove your hand once, and ensure that you do not burn the artery nor reach up to the bone.
And guard the jaw so it moves when bitten, and the nerves only have regard to movement and spasms do not come upon the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when cut or severed, where there is great fear and especially for those who are unaware of it, and untrained. And leave the wound open to air;
However, I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you there where it opens in this book.
And if you see that these cauldrons do not help at all with the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize within it as we have said in the head, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
and if you see, administer the caustic we have said or from the chapter on artery extraction, with the caustic that has two blades. and this caustic is better than those and more helpful.
Of ear pain due to cold air
When ear pain comes from cold air and one has tried solvent medicines and other treatments we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then apply this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
After pointing around the ear of the patient, where both sides hold pain, and move slightly above the root of the ear after you have reached there; et have X points around each ear;
After healing, leave it alone until it is healthy again.
For oral torment
The torture that must be treated with fire healing is not other than those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases.
and do not perform a fire treatment on the resemblances that come from crushing and blackening of veins.
When you treat this resemblance of torture that moves due to moisture from dragons and purging of the head and gargling, if it is ineffective, then one must perform three fire treatments on the patient. One at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temples, and the third on either side of the nose bridge.
And place the cautery on the part that appears sound, and make the cautery at the top of the ear just a little below the tip of the outer edge, and another one in the temple as long as a finger. And leave the cautery so that half the head is burned;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And it's the appearance of the surgical knife we have described before, but it is a bit more subtle and it needs that the blade be slightly thicker.
after curing them as I've explained before, until they are sound;
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: On the two horns of the head and in the skull itself, and at the place called "tympanic membranes," as we have previously stated, and the following fire cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
And treat accordingly as we have said before.
Of languor
This disease requires giving the patient large years and purgative pills to clear the brain.
After removing all of the patient's head hair, and placing the sinapis oil scalp bandage written in the treatise on dressings.
And this is how to perform the cauterization: If it turns out as I have said.
If it works as such, then it is good. And if it does not, make three cauteries near the head, descending to the neck, and leave space between each one equal to two large measurements.
And treat it as you would with the others, and if you see them adjacent, and the patient suffers greatly, make one cautery in the middle. And if necessary, place two on each side of the eyes, and treat until it heals.
And let the cauterization be called "olivary," as I have previously mentioned.
It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and fat as we have before said;
After shaving the patient's head, then make one cauterization in the middle and at each corner of the eyes, and two behind and three along the spine of the neck.
And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers much, and the illness is severe, when four fire cauteries are made on the spine of the back. and let it remain until a larger curl appears, then lift your hand; after the healing when it is enough, and be the cautery called "olivary" that we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Surgical methods should not be used on the patient unless they are phlegmatic; first, one must purify the brain with leeches and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical affliction.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, then give him gargling and chewing with medicinal substances frequently on the brain;
then remove his hair from the head in measure, and make a cautery according to what we have said before, and also on the scrotum, and above each horn. And if the patient is outside and suffering greatly, make fire cauteries as I have told to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and let it be an olive tree-shaped caustic according to how I have instructed.
If the patient is a child, give them a subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted dampness and large phlegm, then the fire cautery of parts as we have told should be applied to those with paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is moistly sick, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be cleansed, according to its state in the classification.
After reaching the head of the malady; after making the proper incision, like a circle, if it's placed within the head;
and if the malady is crossed, ensure they are well held from all sides;
after applying the lining, use an ancient sheep's butter balm; and warm the covering quickly, so that they can endure some discomfort if necessary. After emptying the circle within the head, let it cool.
And do this for the patient each week once with good treatment until they are healthy again.
Or if you see to cauterize it by making various points on the entire cauterizer.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly;
and then place soft cotton in butter and poultry fat.
From the heat of the eyes When the heat comes first to the eyes as I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something that clarifies the mind, and protects from all dampness, and they may sweat or take baths multiple times on an empty stomach.
After instructing him to raise his head again, and you perform a caustery within the head, and you make two cauteries over both temples where the fissure of the skull is as two eyes together, or in one they are.
and cover all the caustery veins and arteries that emerge from the skull, and they should be long according to the width of the temple.
And take care of blood loss, and if you see too much blood flowing, then bind it with a dressing as best you can.
And I will teach you about extracting arrows and the precautions to take when bandaging them as best you can.
and never perform a fire or cold cauterization below the two bones behind it.
and if it is due to cold excessive fluids, then you do the fire cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of descending them. I cauterize underneath the forehead, and two fire cauterizations on each temple, and two cold cauterizations below the two bones. And if there is further need, skillfully cauterize above the eyebrow with all small cauldrons.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and it does not help, then give the patient three draugebles of wormwood wine. After the head injury, and he makes fire or millet cauldrons; olive oil cauldrons. And make two fire cauldrons of the 'clavis' type above both eyebrows, slightly off the hairline.
And guard the artery so that it is not burned.
And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavelis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then you cauterize with this cautery called "olivary. This is why this occurs:
And if you see, then make two fire cauldrons on both eyebrows as long as they are like the eyebrows;
And do not leave it unattended except until the third part of the paper is charred, according to the method I have described.
and t they le Clavt y Comis quele ; by: it'issued them. Never does it happen that hairs of old age are converted to a dense mass and prick the eye, and you make cauterizations according to two methods: It is known as being by fire or by burning medicines.
Or the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in good health; After placing a sign on the hair, make it similar to a dartboard, and let its beginning be near where the hairs are.
Then I put fine cotton soaked in egg and musk oil on the wound, then apply the caustic of which this is the shape:
After repeatedly applying cautery to the mark you have made a little at a time, let the color be even in that place.
and the signs of health on the work are such that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the level of the wound.
then lift your hand, leave it like this for three days, then put fine cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed. After the ointment treatment until they are healed.
And when hairs come in again, and the flesh is softened then resume cauterization on the same spot as before.
And if hairs are absent, cauterize until the flesh is raised to its natural position and smooth, without any remaining pain from the hair.
The medicinal fire cautery instructs the patient to let hair grow long and even, then make a paper form resembling a mugwort leaf.
Then take French soap and fresh wax, half an ounce of each, and grind them together well. And do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then gently press on the form you have made like a leaf of myrtle, and place cotton wool over it. And if the disease resides only in one side, work must be done therein, and similarly elsewhere as well. And place a wad of cotton from the oil into an eggshell.
And the patient's head should be in a sound state and your two fingers showing on the medicament; press lightly and move it frequently whenever the patient feels stinging from the medicament, for it stings as if of fire.
When you have done this for a long time, apply the medicinal bandage properly. And when the stinging has passed, raise the wad again, and check if it looks lifted as if by heat or cutting. If so arranged, then well done.
If not, if the treatment is reapplied to its place or the medication has not worked yet, until your workings are equal and your eyes aligned.
Then place the cotton ball soaked in butter until the wound is healed, afterward cleanse the area of ointment called "dyafenis" and others, as long as it remains healthy.
And you must carefully watch your treatment with great care so that the medicine does not harm the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterward and the hair pricks at the wound, restart the medication on that place properly, just as you did before. After the treatment until it is healthy again.
And this is the form of the linden leaf:
And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, let the constraints be.
And it should not be replaced on the straight path for those who study this art.
Of treating a fistula with cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then it is proper for you to perform cautery according to this manner.
Command the patient to place his head in your hand. and instruct the assistant to hold the patient's head between their hands so that it does not move or turn.
after apply soft cotton wool in an egg cup or lemon juice on the wound;
then warm the caustic that is to be used.
and place it near the head as if like a quill in an arch, along with which the caustic should be placed.
If you see it well-aligned from one end to the other, and if you see it as evenly as a tent.
However, this which is at your disposal must be moved for your work.
After pressing the abscess if it's open, and treating the infection, and drying it out. and if it's closed, then operate, and treat with bowstrings.
after applying the hot caustic strongly, and hold your hand on the caustic at the painful part above the hair, so that your hands do not go mad. then put the caustic in the fat of the hair and make it rot.
If you start the fire cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If not, start the caustic again once more, and if necessary, let it be for three days.
After placing cotton wool soaked in butter and treating the drywound with medicinal ointment until it is healed, after forty days pass, apply astringent medicinal water until the bone is uncovered. And you should follow as described in this chapter.
And there is a method of fire cautery for anorectal abscesses, which none of the ancients mentioned. Attend to an abscess and open it up; After placing the subtle thread in the tear where the shape is: and they make up to the quantity of one 20 pence weight; and hold the thread or needle firmly, so do not move the patient at all until the molten lead flows into its place.
and it is appropriate to apply the oil with a piece of cotton wool or linen cloth soaked in egg white;
The place of the pus is like a tumor within the anus, and it heals by marvelous healthiness.
And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer a blunt instrument to the anus, and return the fistula to its proper location in the body as required by its specific location.
For ruptures of lips Often occur cracks in lips which are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small lancet-like cautery according to this method:
And the physician inserts [it] into those cavities as long as it comes near to fullness.
Afterward, he treats the lump of chafing until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become inflamed and hardened and is aged and becomes a fistula. and you treat it as we have said in stages, but it does not heal: then it is necessary for you to have the cauterization according to the quantity of the fastole. After the opening or puncture of a fistula, hold your hand until the metal cools at its source and then place it.
And do so once more after the treatment of what we have said about treatments, until it is healed;
And if treated this way, it is good; And if not, then one must discover the location and remove the decayed bone, as you find in your treatise;
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but to no avail, then place the head of the patient in your lap. After scraping the fire cautery so that its shape will come after, place a caul on the tooth;
And insert the heated caustery inside quickly, holding your hand so that the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth.
After releasing your hand and then resume the cauterization at your discretion;
After filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let it stand for an hour and then rinse thoroughly.
And in such manner, the tooth that had moved is confirmed; the softened gums are held steady, and the moisture which was corrupted is dried up.
From the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold or dryness, and medicinal treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize in the following ways: And cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow and the tip in a spoon of iron or silver; After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, mix with butter fat and place on the aching tooth quickly until cooled.
And thus you often apply it until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; if you see the wool and cotton in butter fat cooled, place on the aching tooth, and keep it hot with a heating instrument until heat comes to the closure of the tooth.
The fire cautionery involves such instruments that you choose either an iron or copper vessel and make it large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautionery, which will then be ready shortly afterward, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautionery has cooled.
Often do this, for the pain will subside on the same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter during this procedure and then lie down again.
and here are the steps for the procedure:
And perform a cautery on the eyelid that you wish to, according to what you can.
and this is how to do it:
Scrofula is an illness caused by tuberculosis bacteria affecting the lymebones or surrounding lymph nodes, often presenting with swelling on the neck's side. It was commonly treated in medieval times using fire cauterization and other herbal remedies to draw out pus and promote healing. When the swellings are of phlegm and cold dampness, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the caustic substance as follows, which comes afterwards in this form, and it has two openings for smoke to escape from the other part of the cautery;
And apply the hot fire to the abscess once or as needed until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, apply caustic according to its size and leave it as such for three days. And place a piece of woolen cloth soaked in butter until the burn is healed.
Afterward, treat the leg with ointments and bandages until it is sound.
When lymphs overwhelm the ducts in the groin area, especially when it comes from cold complexions, then it is necessary for the patient to be purged first with soluble medicines.
After the fire caustic is applied to the throat's root, ensure that you do not come near the throat and only warm the skin slightly.
After performing another cautery on the joint near the neck at the top of the spine, there is a type called "claviate" which we have seen previously.
and treat it as we have mentioned before until it is sanitized again.
When all diseases of the bowels are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an ancient disease, then do two cauterizations on its edges within the veins. and another cautery inside between the nipples.
and there is the type called "claviate" according to the form that has been previously stated.
And if you see it, do cauterization by touching all the type called "points" as in the form that is here for ear diseases.
And let the points reach up to XXX or those around it.
After curing the head as mentioned before, place the cautery thrice according to this form:
And because these cauldrons are lighter, as you make three from each one:
Regarding the shoulder joint dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset in place but cannot remain there, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation immediately. Afterward, place the patient on their back and along their ribs; afterwards, lift up the core that is within the scrotum of your left hand's fingers;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the caustic that has two iron prongs as the shape resembles.
and cauterize the core until it pierces to the ribs, and then come the shapes with four caustics together.
and that is why it was made with the caustic that has three iron prongs, so that there are three figures of cauterization.
and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, it is the shape of the caustic that has three iron prongs.
And at no time is it positioned on this nerve through which there are eight cauteries.
After placing the fire on the wound to remove scabs with a knife. Then let the patient rest and not move their limb for long periods until it is well supported.
And if it is dislocated above, which event occurs rarely, then make a cautery on the hollow of the cauline joint or many cauterizations touching each other.
For the joint is reduced, and bone is dry and patients are free from pain.
When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture until they reach its nature, and there are many catharsis for it, and by usual treatment methods it does not benefit, then patients must be made supine on their back, and stretch out their legs and hands. After that, perform three cauterizations under the cup of the foot for the amount equivalent to two ounces at each one, and then make four cauterizations on both sides until they form a triangle shape, with enough space between them so they do not join together when they exude pus.
and the cauterizations should be placed in such a way that they drain from both sides of the knee, and their formation follows this pattern without crowding.
And if you see a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach following this pattern;
And those who fear this cautery should puncture and burn while pressing above the stomach I times; according to the amount you observe of inflammation. Then cauterize thoroughly at all points called 'points'.
After the treatment of the wound we have had before, until it is healthy again.
When the liver comes with pain from cold and moisture and excess windiness until it is greatly altered by superfluities; And the patient is treated according to what we have said in sections, and it does not help them at all, so it must be soothed over their affliction. And sign of three fires according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, away from the epigastric regions, where the edges of the wound come.
And it should have space between each fire, the width of a thumb; And let the cautery be long in shape, and do not squeeze the hand too much on the entire cautery;
And it should burn only halfway through, and let the patient stand straight.
And if they cannot, let them lie down, stretch their legs, and lift their arms.
And if you wish to do so, if you are skillful and wise in the art, when cauterizing these cutaneous cauldrons, ensure that you do not burn the entire area, for this would cause all of the body to dry up. and that it does not reach the veins, for the tissue is very delicate in this area, and its vessels must be observed.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you need to know if it is in the liver's flesh or its membrane: If it is in the chariot, the patient feels pain but not too severe.
And if it is on the cloth, he experiences intense pain.
And when this treatment requires mirrors, one must place them over the patient's head;
and then determine where the lump or abscess is, and then heat the cautery resembling a grain of wheat; And cauterize with the cautery until the core is burned, and continue to the sciatica, until the swelling is entirely removed;
Afterward, following the treatment of drainage until it is healed.
And one must not apply this type of cautery without the person having studied extensively in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have spread at times.
Then it is difficult to work, and in every case it seems that he should leave the area undisturbed.
by [un su : (tir; you give meest odonz t fd’s:
The ancients said one must make root cauldriform cauteries in this manner: Take a longroot of aristology, the largest that you can find, and let it dry, being as thick and long as your thumb. and coat the mould in oil, hold it over fire, and make a large caustic at the forefinger joint and little ones slightly downwards on the part below the beard.
and make two caustics between the fifth rib and the seventh, inclining slightly backwards a bit. and one on the scrotum, another above the stomach, between the shoulders, and two just below where the caustic was made between the shoulder blades.
And do not squeeze your hand tightly, but make it open as well as when smelling something.
And the ancient ones said that no man should use fire caustics resembling razors, and warm it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess. And if it causes severe pain as we have said in the liver abscess.
But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, as a fistula arises that cannot be healed.
It seems like the text got cut off unexpectedly; it says "de la mort."
When treating the disease of those parts that we have mentioned in the sections on treatments, and it is not effective at all, then there are three ways of fire cautery, which are all good.
The way to do this is by making I or IV caustics in a line according to the length of the liver, following the shape of the liver caustic as we have described before.
And do not squeeze your hand too tightly during all the caustics, and let the patient lie on their back.
And another way of fire cautery is to heat the instrument with two iron rods, as we have shown in shoulder dislocations.
And lift the bone that is where the pain from the patient's left side originates, and make elevations to raise the bone according to the direction of the injury, following the length of the body, with the fire cautery applied according to the width of the body.
After heating the two iron rods until the bone is pierced on the other side, and then pass the fire cautery over it, thus achieving four passes.
And if you see wounds, cauterize the entire area with three passes of the fire cautery.
After curing when it has become congested over long periods, and this is as effective as the previously mentioned cures.
Cautery does not work with epilepsy, only in the manner called "ascluyes.
When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the head, one above the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the loins. And make sure the cauterization is close to the part that hurts.
After leaving the wound open for long periods of time, do not leave the patient's care after the cauterization. And healing would be quicker, and they will together have two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization for the stomach should be as we have shown before. And those who for the back are dislocated, as it was previously explained.
When the fingers are swollen in those who have dropsy and are filled with yellowish pus, one must cauterize on their back between the ring finger and little finger. And lift your hand with the caustic towards you.
And do not insert too deeply, in this way it will constrict the yellowish swelling, and apply the caustic according to this form.
After, make two cauterizations on each leg at the ankle joints. and let one caustic be long, one from behind near the knee and the other further along the leg, within the thigh.
and leave the caustics hanging long enough so that the pus can drain out.
after performing all other treatments as we have mentioned.
When the solution of a cold and wet belly occurs, as long as the retaining and digestive virtue in the stomach and intestines is obstructed, and cannot be treated by various methods. and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, so make a significant fire cautery on the stomach as described before or the fire of the stomach, at which point it circulates. and four subtle fires around all significant cauterizations, and two cauterizations on the sides of the hips.
And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
For the treatment of swellings
When there are old and multiple varicose veins at the foundation or elsewhere, which are large, cold, and damp humors corrupted, and treated as we have divided in sections, and if it does not help, then make cauterizations. III on the spine of the back, that which is gradually below the navel and slightly towards the triangle, and a fire cautery under the hipbone at two points.
and if you think his stomach is cold, and the flesh does not cook, and you see the face swell, then on the face give one great fire cautery as previously described, another at the liver, and another between the ribs with a lancet. and leave the fire cautery for long periods of time. After healing the limb until it is sound again.
When you come to the heart, if it seems pale, first heat the fire that appears weakened, and then set it all ablaze upon that part of the heart. and let your hand as well as the fire come to the opening of the vein, from which blood flows.
Once or twice as needed, if there is much thickness, cauterize each one as we have said. After the ointment treatments that are profitable until they heal completely;
And if you use a large caustic on the thickening, it will have greater benefit.
When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, we will discuss it in this chapter; if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by caustic treatment.
When there is an old fistula with decay and putrefaction and corrupted moisture, you must probe it thoroughly entirely, and be sure to know the extent of its front part throughout.
After extinguishing the caustic that appears to be scabbed over, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered inside of it, then repeat the caustic until the body part is restored and corrupted no more, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount needed;
And be wary of burning the nerves that are there, and large veins.
If the abscesses reach into the bladder and intestines, beware of these false ones, do not attempt to drain them at random places, and think that they are not persevering.
After curing the limb until it is clean, and if the false ones are washed away, and the materials have been worn long ago, then understand that the limb is entirely healed.
And if the materials have not been worn away, deduce that the limb is still infected and corrupts the bone at its source. Thus, as with those we mention in their place.
When cold pain comes in the legs and with great swelling, and has no desire for a woman, then it is necessary to make an incision on both sides of the leg with the pointed caustic lancet that we have previously mentioned.
If we cauterize it with fire, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will provide greater help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is heavy and weak from coldness and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you must make a cautery on the part behind the bladder where the hair growth begins at the finger's point, making one on each side, with each as long as our thumb.
and you make another posteriorly, or two if needed.
and the cauterization should be made according to the form named in front.
When the sperm is cold and moist, not allowing it to nourish itself, and the seeds are corrupted with delayed maturity. And when they come, he feels great pain: Then it is time to make three cauteries around the wound as we have said about the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back;
And let the cauterization be at the clavicle, as we have said.
When the viscous swellings descend to the thigh's pouch, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and the lower lump is discovered in the division of muscles, so it must be that you cauterize above the thigh's pouch with one cautery shaped like a circle, and place it before the bone near the pouch as it turns, ensuring the pouch is within the circle.
And let the fire cautery be such as those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this fire cautery is not present, make three olive oil-based cauldrons, and the cautery should be as much in front as all the colors.
and cure it until it becomes healthy again.
Pain of the thigh When pain comes from the buttock area, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the section on cold conditions, and treatment does not work, and the disease is old. then it is necessary to purge the patient of large humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good smelling pills that seem similar. After performing the fire cautery;
and the manner of doing the cautery is according to two methods: that is namely with fiery medicines, and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization has many methods, among which one is as follows:
that you cauterize on the thigh's pouch with triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make them deep and wide, and there should be space of a thumb between each cautery;
never do the cauterization in the middle under the head of the thigh, for there are four according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery is done in the circle as we have before said for the thigh's joint dislocation:
But do so in a way that the circle contains the entire elbow, and all sides are well-shaped.
And that is how one treats sciatica when the pain occurs in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or leg.
And if it reaches to the thigh and leg, make the cauterization where the patient indicates that the pain is located, with four on the foot above the ankle, slightly to the left side.
And it shall be a woolen caustic plaster, and make the padding thickness as desired.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two of his feet or near them, cauterize where he feels the pain at three points or four on the plaster called "points". And if it works, and if more is needed.
If the pain is below the groin towards the thigh, then make a caustic at the circular or kitchen knife cautery, and give proper care in all your cauteries that you do not remove too much with the cauterization while burning nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen some who made caustics on the ankle below the knee, and they continued until the leg was fully inflamed, with the bone also affected, which were pierced and consumed entirely. After a treatment of the stomach which causes death.
And if pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
And the wise ones say in hip cauterization, as follows: make an iron rod approximately as thick as a small oak leaf or slightly less, with gaps between them and enough space from one gap to another equal to the length of a pea.
and have the gaps at intervals of two parts, and also be as notches, and it must have one inch of well-made iron.
And here are the forms:
And let it be soaked until all are red and tender, then place it under the bandage of the affected elbow, and twist over the sinewy side.
and perform a fire cautery once, leaving for three days. then make an embalmment with butter, and leave the wound exposed for long periods of time. after the ointment treatment until it is sound.
Albuquerque says we use little of this fire cautery due to its appearance, and few do so.
also among the good fire cauteries is one that can suffer it, and where it lodges within.
The fire cautery of medicine is such that you make an instrument with interlocking parts in which to descend the edge of the wound, and it should be made of brass or iron, long enough, and at high heat have two eyes, and between each have the quantity of fat like a spoon. and they are to be put above and below, and join together according to this form:
After placing the vessel of the groin on the sick man lying on his side, and then press your hand much above the vessel of the groin: after pouring between the two circles of the hot cauldron which is heated over fire a little, and let it sit for one hour, and allow the sick man to experience the heat and dryness:
When there are also bites like those of fire;
And when the bites have passed, raise your hand with the instrument and gently lift the affected arm, leaving it so for three days, and apply fat until what is black from bruising has healed. and let it rest for three days to prevent swelling;
and this would be the final remedy after ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, make an instrument similar to what you did with the arm.
and this is how to create a hot compress, which I have written in my treatise on medical corrections. Take an equal amount of alkali and quicklime together, grind them separately, and put in a new jar. If it has a small opening, so that the point of a razor can enter;
If it has a small opening, so that the point of a razor can enter; And place an iron or other suitable metal inside it, and add salt, vinegar, and warm water until there is one handful of powder properly mixed with your hands.
And let it sit so that warm water and lye or metal drain out of it, then collect all the liquid and pour it over vinegar and alkali as before.
And when this is very watery, it will be transformed into a paste of medicinal mixtures and other types of cauterization for different limbs.
Because it performs a similar work as before, and other medicines with which the heel is well-cauterized like thuya and honey from cashew nuts and vinegard mixed with soap; all these things blended together.
And Galien tells us about a cure wherein an honorable man was healed of the pain in his heel and sciatic nerve, and it greatly helped him; and he said that no other treatment was given, and he recovered once when this cure was done, and then he bathed as instructed hereafter.
And he says in this manner that you pluck the fresh and dry lettuce leaf, and grind it well with a little fat, and put on the hock and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and leave it.
And he leaves it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then make it enter a bath until the body is somewhat refreshed, and make it lie down to rest, and the pain will leave completely and be healed.
And understand that no one should use fire cauldrons of such medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat fat candles, it provides much help.
and should be made as follows: Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it over the pit between the thumb and forefinger and the other called phoscoil.
After taking dry goat fat, grasp it with fire until it becomes ashes, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it turns to embers.
and do so again, continuing this process until you think by touch that it reaches the hock, and the pain is ceased.
And these methods of cautery are called "cauterization by goat".
from the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive evacuation, or like cold matter expanding, none of these cases call for cautery unless it is someone who has taken in cold substances.
After the patient has expelled foul pills or similar substances, apply to his back where he feels pain, three lines marked with dots, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the potency and quantity that the patient can endure.
and the cauterization is done as the "points" technique;
And if you see it, make III cauterizations or IIII at the middle of the clavicle in this manner:
Often, this disease comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a narrow chest when they laugh, and fear. And you reach to the last spine of the back, and its appearance that comes above the others' vertebrae.
When you see this wound and examine it, apply the fire cautery according to this method. If the fire cautery aligns each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see it, use a hot iron around the spine with a pointed instrument making two or three lines, and they should be close to each other.
After curing the wound until it is whole according to what we have said, be careful not to perform caustic treatment in an area of thickened tissue that contains a nerve.
On the treatment of joint pain
When joint pain is from moist swellings that spread to each body part, and when the pain comes in the feet, which people call "gout" properly, and if it is caused by cold conditions and cannot be healed with medicines, then it is treated with cautery as follows:
Make the mound of cautery around the foot's joint, and let the cautery be in the shape of an olive:
And if it is necessary to hold the face down towards the ground, make sure to perform caustic treatment all over with a hot iron marked "no point. And if the pains come near to the knee and other joints, which often happens, then perform one cautery on each kneecap, either three or four in each part, using the entire olive-shaped cautery:
And if you need to do more, then do so, but do not hold the fur of your hand until the skin becomes white.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, treat it with the fire cautery as we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if pain is in the hands, make marks around the forefinger and middle finger.
and if there remains no pain in the toes, make marks above each joint and on the hand's hair.
and if pain comes near to the ankles or shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care for the patient and prepare remedies.
For if you take good care of them and purge phlegm, they will be healed by the help of God.
When boils come in groups and pus drains down to the joints anew, it is necessary that when you see them burst, do not mix the medicines of that day. And he must use things that ease his stomach so that the fetus descends from it.
After the child has been born, he should sit on his back between your hands, and command that he washes his ankles until the veins are repaired, and bend his arms at your elbebows, and tie off above the cut of the thumb-bone, and with a sign resembling three-quarters of a circle above the body;
Then warm the caustic which has this form:
until it is white and tastes sweet. Then reset the bones to their place. and instruct the servant to wash his hands so that they do not return backwards.
and work well on the legs of the ill person, and place a pillow under them and the servant above their thighs, and another beneath their feet as they wash their hands.
Then place the fire cautery over the mark with all your hand, and hold it straight and steady until you reach the bone; if not on the first attempt, then try again another time until you go as far as the bone. And be subtle that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery. so that you do not burn it. and by this the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach up to the bone with the cautery, your works are of no value.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and also larger for grown people according to their measure.
After three days heal the wound with butter until the burn is scabbed over.
After other remedies with ointments until it is healthy again, and let the sick person lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
And it is necessary that his nourishments be consumed thoroughly, so that the wound does not break out when he attempts to get up into a bed.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand, if he binds himself with a well-made bandage, and wears it for another forty days.
and he should have good rest, that he works little and watches against too much drinking of liquor and eating, and yelling loudly.
And when he follows this instruction, then it will be completely healthy again.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of tailors in this chapter.
When ulcers come to other bodies and become known, and you see that they no longer grow, do the fire cautery as needed according to its quantity, and be careful of the third part (pertaining to size). After curing it according to what we have said.
And none of the old ones have said that you should causticate with fire at three angles in this form.
But first mark the head of the enge and make a line for the width above the route, and another below, and keep your hand amidst all the fire cautery pointedly.
But the first fire cautery is lighter and more movable.
from ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain persists for a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it should be cauterized with a caustic called "poins", according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, power, location of twists, and its pain.
If it is safe after the first cauterization, it's well done.
If not, continue with another cauterization on that spot because the usual practice is that it should be moved to the member closest to it, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healthy again.
The pain has been eased any number of times by caustics with great help, especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Can you not see it cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in that division, and neither progresses nor recedes, and you doubt that corruption will affect the entire sickness, then make V cauteries on top of the head: I put one above the crown and the other at the end of the eyebrows. and two on the temples, and one behind near the ear.
and leave your hand so the cauterization reaches up to the bone, and as long as scars emerge from it, allowing vapors of thick humors to escape.
and cauterize underneiss on top according to what is in front.
And if the bruises are scattered everywhere; And if it is clearly visible, then you shall use the cauteries we have mentioned earlier: one at the top of the hand, another on the spine of the neck, six along the spine of the back, a large one over the navel and others near it, and two above each shoulder. and two on each ribcage, two over the knee joints, one over each hand joint, and above the palms.
and beware of any veins that are visible behind them, do not burn them.
and never perform a cauterization on the bone of the wrist or the bone of the stomach, nor on the liver.
And know that the more you do with cautery, the more it helps him, and he benefits from movement.
And know that the patient does not feel pain with cautery as a healthy one would, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
And it must be that the caustic treatment is large and small according to the members and joints, depending on what you find in handling iron rods.
After curing them with a poultice of wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until they are sound.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it's not healthy yet, then you make cautery on the limb according to its size and severity.
and let the cautery be slightly intruding into the area of concern. then treat with ointments until it becomes healthy.
And never make cautery and to the hand and foot and back, at the place of nerve that moves the limb, and so there is swelling.
And at all times do not interfere unless one is familiar with the limbs and the exits of the nerves traversing the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is old, and medical methods are of no use, then cauterize with a caustic agent slightly by its edge, according to the amount determined by the severity, until the discoloration is removed, and it changes color.
then apply a poultice of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colt's leg and crane bird (swan), one part each. then mix all together, bind with a cloth, and place hot stones underneath until it is properly healed.
The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
When a sore begins to appear and you can see it, cauterize with the cautery that appears as a circle all around the sore.
And yet the wise say to do cautery as well with millet poultices for cankers.
And yet it does not seem good to me, as I have found them often becoming ulcerated and corrupted.
And more appropriate it is that they be cauterized around the "circulating" cautery, as we have said in many treatises on cauteries.
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying either due to excessive secretion or the state of the patient being weakened (that is, too old) with little blood. and you observe them hastening to die: Then you must cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking. After this, let it be as such. For she will delay dying.
And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, heat the cautery of which there is a shape:
And place your hand in the midst of that illness called "adubeati" until it feels like burns, and let the caustic burns be such that the patient senses them behind as if following the course of inflammation.
After the treatment until it is completely healed.
Another manner of disease called "corrodens," which is nothing but a mixture affecting the limbs, as it consumes them like dry branches are consumed by fire.
If you see this disease in place that can suffer a burning together with fire, then fan the small and large cauldrons as much as needed depending on where the body or illness is located.
After you have burned all parts until you remove the entire corruption, and nothing remains of it, let everything that is corrupted be consumed by fire.
And then let it rest for three days and apply wet compressions with oil until the burns from fire have healed, and all corruption is gone.
After applying oil treatments that produce heat.
And if after three days no wound heals, this is good;
and if not, resume the burning on that which remains from the corrupted parts.
This mixture has sometimes been treated with cold water as a fire cautery.
But always, the fire cautery is of greater help; and I have already described the treatment with cold water in its application. Take the quantity that you need.
Of pus that comes to the joints. Often in the feet there arises a disease which we call "clot" and it is a significant swelling that presses on the foot.
And the fire treatment for this disease is as follows: two ways. It is known as fire cautery, and water cautery hot.
The fire cautery is one that you heat like a penny on a hearth, and it should be made of good iron to pierce through the nail in all directions, and have fine edges.
After heating it thoroughly on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it becomes red with heat. and let it remain like this for three days until it begins to produce pus. Then make an emplaster of well-ground henbane mixed with wax, and leave the plaster on throughout the night, and it will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the limb with soothing ointment until it is healed cleanly.
And if they are infected towards the rear of the body, and it happens many times in hands and feet, then you must treat with a hot water cauterization. and occurs in such a manner: take a needle of copper or iron, or a spatula of silver, and place it on the splinter and the flesh underneath, that is to say for removing warts. and insert the needle so that it perforates all around, then place some hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you rotate until the edge of the needle reaches to the root of the splinter, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply up to the root.
And the patient suffers a little from the sting of warm water for an hour. Then let it be so, and it will uproot all its roots.
So do another after the other, touching all that are on the body, then treat them with ointments containing wax.
When some suffer from shivers due to coldness or fever quaternary (fourth degree) or another type, it is necessary for you to perform four cauterizations above the spine of the back, one between each vertebra. and one on the navel with an olive cautery;
if this will make them shake, and it shall rid them of the illness' cold sickness.
In no case become apparent from behind in bodies bathed or pus-filled, which come from large corrupted substances.
if at first they appear that a cautery is made upon each head of the pustule:; A subtle cautery made of poplar wood, so that the tip is gripped by fire, or from a long yew root, or on a lenticular cautery.
And never should you cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but it breaks off the excess that comes from them, leaving clean.
But it is necessary that this be done after blood evacuation.
Often great harm to the artery occurs when it is cut at the wound edge, or during an abscess incision, or on limb cauterization, and similar things. And this is a very serious thing to stop bleeding.
And yet when this happens to anyone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very much until the blood ceases below your finger, and it no longer flows out.
Then apply fire to olive wood cauldrons of various sizes until they are all red-hot.
Then take one large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is located, place the cauldery over that vein while holding your finger in place, and hold the cauldron until the blood is stopped.
When it bursts out as you lift your elbow over the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And continue doing so one after another until the bleeding has ceased.
And be cautious not to burn the nerve near it and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
And you say that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be properly tied up on its own, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned. Or through cauterization, or through extracting when it cannot be treated well, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding. And is tied and strained temporarily.
Who will perform the proper closing of straining tightly with cloth or applying burning substances above, or similar things; if it does not benefit greatly.
And if it happens to anyone who has no remedy or medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb index over the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch out well until bleeding is stopped above the wound and above the vein. And he must not move it, but keep the cold wet cloth on it often as needed until the blood is congealed and thickened.
Then make incisions forward as required for cauterization and application of medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and blisters, pus, efflorescence, and the appearance of burn marks.
And I have included that chapter on the head up to the temples, and I will go through this chapter by the same method for what is found more easily therein.
And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauteries, hence greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision into an abscess, and wound treatments, and arrow extractions, and incision for stones, and similar things. When there is doubt and fear, death comes to many others.
And I warn you to not undertake folly. For there are many ways that people come for treatment. If they come from those who have suffered so much with their illness that they die easily due to the severity of their disease and its magnitude. And one must fear such things.
And there are some who lose their mind, saying: "Wait, I am healed; and the illness is defiant.
You should not easily give in to those who approach you with this behavior, but show greater compassion than greed, and do not hastily undertake what you are sure of and have confidently accepted.
And make use of prediction and guidance for directing treatments to your patients so that health may be restored.
And this will assist you in gaining good reputation, glory, and the memory of the Lord.
Dearest son of our lords, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as seen in the chapter of cauteries that I have explained from head to toe, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
Know that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the child's head is pulled too hard.
At no time does this result occur if one knows how to reset it properly.
And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and all those I have seen succumb quickly. and therefore it seems to me that one should not attempt healing in these cases.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the skull grew each day until it could no longer bear.
and believed so much in the water that they died, and this swelling is accumulated under the bone above the suture between the skin and the bone.
and such treatments are when the swelling is between the skin and the bone, and abscesses are small, so you should make a wide incision into the head.
And let it last as long as the moisture flows.
and this is the form of a swelling.
If there is too much moisture and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs of gaps in both ends of each part, and it feels sharply when pressed with your hand into the density, and this has not been set right. if it is necessary to split between the head in three cuts according to this manner:
After the incision, remove all the pus thoroughly. After straightening the edges of cloth and powders, and putting wine and oil, leave it so until the fifth day.
Then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to straighten evenly, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is to look at the size of the abscess and the gathering of water.
for it never lies before; for it never lies behind; for it never lies on the right; And never to the left.
So that you may cut where there is an abscess, and the filling of water, and do according to your ability.
And be careful not to cover the artery. and have a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from its slowing and evacuation of moisture.
When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and the illness is long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is to perform cauterization with the tool used to tie off the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see it covered, that the patient raise his head again. After rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the veins appear, then draw out all of the patient's collar. Then look and see where the vein runs, and the lips of one and other are behind the ears, and few have returned.
First mark the edges of the wound with a tie, then cover both sides with a strip measuring two fingers in width, continuing until it reaches the bone or is as wide across the head.
And if you see it, tie off the artery with a stitch from above and cut it just as two points cross over.
When the vein is opened, blood flows continuously from it.
And if the vein does not open upon feeling it, you must measure a space of three fingers in length, then tie and cut up to the bone.
and ensure that the correct amount of blood is removed if it's six ounces or so, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery.
then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without a flap of skin, and there are no signs of an abscess when you cut into it, then strain the wound, bandage it, and apply poultice until it is healed.
From gouty inflammation When gouty inflammation comes early and catarrh with moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headaches and such things occur, if it is treated by various medical methods of medicine and nothing benefits him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have discussed.
The manner of their extraction is such that the patient makes his hairs on the temples and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is not easily replaced as with some men who are too cold.
And if it is replaced, the patient must strain their neck with a piece of cloth, then rub their head with an abrasive cloth, and apply warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the spatula whose form is as follows: Then carefully scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the edges with forceps, and separate well the threads that are opposite each part.
If the arrow is fine, then bind to the elbow's tip, and bandage that area according to the quantity of two joints. If not properly reduced, it will never regain full function again at all.
And treat for six days up to three;
And if the arrow is large, it should be tied in two layers of strong, double-threaded silk cord to prevent rotting at the wound site and ensure blood flow.
Then bandage the excess between the two layers at the same time, and then, if you see fit, use the fire caustic cautery up to the bone until the joints are sealed.
This is the work done if the patient does not have a fever and is of warm constitution. Because the fire cautery is used to end swellings. For this reason, it is of greater assistance for swellings.
Or, when extracting the veins, one should fill the place with fine cotton and apply well-made bandages.
And when they are removed, use dry medicinal mixtures that promote healing and bandages until it is safe.
And if the artery is severely torn as you work on it, quickly apply heat with cautery, and place the location of vinegar there and stretch your hand so that the wound heals. And if it is not apparent, then cover the place with mustard until the wound hardens, and apply cold water to the area until it ceases, and bind it as necessary.
And it should have between the two knives a space of size I, and then when you grasp both edges with your hands, heat the iron until it glows up to the bone, and cut the vein in two parts. and be distanced between the two eyes because this fire caustic is not suitable for all cases;
and this is the form of the fire caustic:
And those who are skilled and more adept in the extraction of an artery should cauterize the vein with this sharp fire caustic at two parts, but the sharpness be well spaced to preserve heat longer. For when inflammation is too hot, it holds less heat.
By tears When the tears from the eyes descend into veins near the forehead, and there is no benefit from medicines applied, and you see the patient's face turning red, and feel a pulsation in their temples as if with fear. And those wounds are held and kept moist so that the hairs of the paper become detached, and the papers wither, and scorched by the heat of tears, if such care is needed. And they call it the "old contusion treatment," and you must do this to the patient who has this disease: shave the hair from his forehead, then make three cuts or equally spaced according to the width of the forehead.
And they call it the "old contusion treatment," and you must do this to the patient who has this disease: shave the hair from his forehead, then make three cuts or equally spaced according to the width of the forehead. and one of the cuts shall be made so that it runs up the middle of the forehead to the hairline, and the others are placed two fingers above the eyebrows, but take care not to incise the arteries that lie two fingers above the eyebrows.
And position your hand with the continuation of two jawbones, so each wound is as wide as three fingers' breadth.
And have an esponge and two cloth pieces to apply pressure for stopping the bleeding, then insert the styptic made of three parts as follows:
From the incision which goes from the temple up to the second incision. And scrape off all the core that is between the two openings completely through to the sac above the bone, then make a new cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this styptic substance. If you put the instrument called "culterale" in the first cut, and it is very sharp on one side, but also soft so not cutting, and that is its shape:
And make the bandage cutting toward the chest near the heart, and the ribs soft to the bone, and continue until it reaches the middle crack.
And tie off all vessels coming from the head that are visible until the incision is continuous up to where the core opens, and then make another cut in the middle opening to the other end.
And then extract blood evenly, and express the place to locate the taken blood.
Then place a piece of fine cotton in each cut, and cover with cloths soaked in wine, oil, and honey, ensuring that abscesses do not form.
And after three days heal the wounds, then apply a large amount of boiled water soak, followed by curing with basic oil of Basil, and other remedies used for treating wounds until they are well-healed.
When someone comes with severe and chronic inflammation, and you see the eyes swoln and small, causing blurred vision, and burnt papers. And the hair falls out, and at the top there is sharp pain, and the patient sneezes. Then from these incidents it is said that such matters and those chills come only from many veins, and the muezzin cares for where they are located, if so be this is true.
And you command the sick person to turn their head backward, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one twice as wide. And it begins from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and remove your hand from the glands in the temples that move during eating;
and when the bone is revealed, let all the blood be absorbed by a sponge, then place it between the two lips of the incision and insert old cotton, and try with thread; Then lay the cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and protect it from heat abscesses.
When it is inflamed, if necessary, rub the bone until pus starts to form, then treat with things that dry out sores, encouraging healing of wounds.
In such a way: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of opium, and make into paste. Apply to these wounds to encourage healing completely.
Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
All that oozes from the ears is one of four things: either grains of sand, or beast matter, or bits of stone, or similar substances like iron. or seed, such as crop residues, peas, and beans. Or when something flows out like water, easily and with similar things.
When it bleeds in the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows within the ear, then set the ear on the sun.
If you see the stone, if it drips any bit of violet oil or linseed oil, then perform an extraction. and the person has a condition causing them to sneeze, and they block their nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place cloth or woolen strips near the ears. and stretch the ear upwards.
It often happens by this treatment.
and if it does not come forth, then a delicate extraction is performed with the following method:
If it comes out through the pinchers, that's good.
if not, then perform an extraction with a fine filament of thin doubled thread;
And if it does not come through there, make a funnel of iron and push the top of the funnel or small hole in the ear firmly, then stuff the area around the funnel with soft wax so that winds cannot enter. Then treat it with a form of fire, as often times wind comes in this way as we have mentioned;
And if it does not come in any way, take pine resin and place the birds there, and use some instrument of sharp point for this purpose, and put some cotton around. Then press the pine resin onto the stone or any other thing, and treat with fire.
And if it does not come from any of the things we have said, hurry to split the ear so that pus may enter and there is a swelling.
The manner of the incision is such that you first elevate the patient's head, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the root of the ear near the fat or bone. And make the incision like a crescent, as you reach towards the bone, then squeeebreze it with your mouth powerfully.
And apply the dressing until it is healed.
And if there are pus and it swells, perform an incision for drainage.
And if it cannot be drained, then prepare a spatulum gently in this manner: And perform an incision on that stone.
But do not attempt this when you think the grain is soft due to ear moisture, until you have done it many times.
Then carefully extract using tweezers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is smooth.
Once the grain has thus entered into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with a first conditioning, and fill the ear with old cotton. And be careful on that same ear where he is afflicted. If it falls out by itself, this is good.
If not, if you take many pieces according to the length of your thread that are thin and light, heat them a bit in fire. And then instruct the patient to insert one or two pincers into his ear, and remove them from there with their pieces on the other side, and extract another stone underneath the stone that is in the ear. And continue to remove stones from stone to stone until all moisture has dried up and so it will heal completely.
And if you see it, then take the joint and insert one head into the ear, and the other head remains until the less painful joint is achieved.
Then reset the rest of the joints as needed until all are aligned, as we have said in the stone.
In extracting a thorn, if it is of small size, as though insignificant and similar to others, treat it as we have said in the section on surgery.
but if it is a large thorn that can be felt, then prepare for using forceps for its removal. and this is the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
In extracting worms from the ears, as you care for them as we have said in the section on surgery and dealing with pus, if the treatment does not work, it is necessary to examine the ear under sunlight. If there are any worms, if they treat with subtle pinchers, and if they do not appear, then take the bone of which this form is.
And it must be narrow below and wide above. And insert the more subtle part into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then shape it fully with the bone. Do this often until all veins are healed.
And if they do not obey to be removed, then plug around the bone with cotton as I have said in the stone.
and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer the dilutions that the ancients have tried in the incision of worms, and you will find or treat with dilutions.
And if you drip your oils and medicines into the ear of this instrument, which is why it takes on such form as you see: And [it] be made of silver or gilded brass from the small holes, and above them for pouring.
And to ensure the pressure of distillation within an adequately made copper instrument for this purpose, and if you see [it], wrap it with tinder and cover around the tip promptly with cotton. Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines into the vessel, and let it be in the ear.
Then [you] fill up all the tinder with cotton and press your hand quickly as long as the oil is dripping or filling of the ear. And he feels pain inside, and there should be a distillation of the pus, which is then applied to fire as such that it's distilled in the ear. And ensure it is not too cold, for the medicines would not be so good.
Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
No child is born without any eyebrows or ears.
And this same thing happens at home due to bleeding from a wound or discharge in the ear, and these eflusions often come partly into the ear so that it cannot be seen.
And sometimes there is no trace of bleeding, and he sees well again.
Therefore, if it comes into the ear and cannot be seen, it signifies a serious healing in various conditions, and when one sees this, you should place the patient's ear to the sun. And look inside: If you see swelling visible, then assess whether the operation involves all of this stretching area from which it takes shape:
And so be the ears and incision in front and behind, all flat, if they do not pierce the ear.
If the swelling is from a jaw or body of the ear, take it with delicate tweezers and gently cleanse, until all bones are removed.
And if the swelling is found in the ear, take a fine and delicate razor and dry it slightly over fire, then return the body of the ear to its place.
If you sense swelling causing the patient pain upon hearing, pierce it lightly, and ensure not to burden the ear's nerves.
Then insert a tent in the ear according to its width at the opening and grease with Egyptian ointment. Do this for any day until the wound is dry; then take a tent and apply fresh red mud, and powder with crushed vitriol.
And if you see the ear flare up, it is fitting to strip off the tent and apply another tent with mud from a ceramic bowl mixed with rose oil and wax until the inflammation subsides. Then let it heal until it becomes healthy again.
And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and wrap in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood discharge such as distillation therapy.
This ointment that comes from paper when it is wet and dry, you must extend with tongs and tweezers, and wrap the stem in a piece of spatulary root; Then apply freshly crushed vitriol on top.
And if not removed by dissection, then cauterize with the pointed cautery after incision so it may move.
and often repaired, as nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots become burnt and do not return.
les que he as a l'ard; that t s;t; puis quivide le ; theta; J. Many times they come as paper-thin things that appear gritty in form and hardness, and thus this disease is called "granulation," consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below the skin. its nature is such:
its nature is such: take heed if granulation moves on either side, and this is an easy thing to know;
Make it wide open, then the scraping of each part gently, then take it with forceps, and bind it up.
If you cannot cover it without slightly piercing the paper, nothing will harm the patient.
And if the crack is large, assemble with stitches and treat until it heals completely.
And if it is small, do not apply too much pressure, as the ointments will restore it quickly and cause redness.
And if the bubo descends into the depth of the ear towards the upper area, reverse the paper and extend it with forceps, bandage, and press on both sides.
And if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm.
When hail is collected, cleanse the oil of salted water, and treat the wound from which it originated until the patient recovers well.
And wash the wound thoroughly with water and soap to prevent infection. Epilepsy is a fat that arises in the loins from papers over, and it happens more often in children than adults, grievously affecting their eyes, causing them to have convulsions at dawn, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
And because of this, they lie on their faces downwards, sleep on their backs, and have swollen papers under their damp eyelids that appear covered by epilepse which manifests in the oil. And when you apply pressure to the joint with your hands, feeling something pass through inside.
And the manner of treatment is such that the patient places his head on a pillow.
And then he takes a cloth of linen and makes a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained by each part, then places it on him. and press his thighs from both sides so that the swelling is gathered within the circle;
then make an incision in the middle of the swelling with a sharp scalpel, and it should not be wider than the wound made on the vein's edge;
and cut through the skin as you find the swelling. and in various cases, swelling arises from the incision, according to the shape of a white lump of fat.
Pull out all at once a piece of patched cloth between your two fingers towards the dislocation, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered.
And ensure that you do not pinch at the tear, that you do not spread it all over the area up to the bone, and do not crush it.
And if the swelling does not open at the beginning of the tear, slightly elevate the tear until it opens.
Then extract as we have said, then moisten cloths with warm water and vinegar, place them on the site, and bind it securely.
And for those men who grind and place them there to spoil the moisture that has lingered.
Then the healer treats it until it is sound again.
And if an abscess comes to a head, then the healer treats with warm plasters until it is sound again.
of hair from paper strips When hairs appear that are misaligned and aged, they harm the eyes, and bring about familiar ailments like tearing and softening of the papers and algae, until it causes the destruction of the eyes.
And there are four methods of treatment: Or by fire caustery alone, or by medicinal ague according to what is prescribed in the chapter on caustery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or with poultices as I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the page of oil to your left hand.
if it turns well, it is good. if not, place an arrow through all the thread above. and be it near the edge of the paper or where hairs grow near these threads, cut the thread along all the paper, then turn it smoothly.
Then make at the part below the parchment, below the hairs close to it, along the entire length of skin and tissue, from the great shoulder down to the small.
Then extract the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth beneath the parchment, then sign on the parchament with an impression as like a raspberry leaf, ensuring that the figure is according to the quantity you see raised in the parchment which is exposed to all.
And if there's a part that requires coping with a large quantity of the parchment according to how much the parchment is softened.
Then make on all the tissue above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the large shoulder down to small. And it should be one of the openings near natural hair growth in the skin's thickness at a root, then insert the needle into one of its corners with care, and scrape thoroughly.
Then stitch together the two lips with a running stitch using one thread of fine woolen yarn, and drain any blood, and trim excess threads near both eyebrows without leaving anything sticky.
And if not, do nothing about it, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days.
Then treat the wound without dry or constricting stitches as the paper becomes loose from the wound and its healing process, but the stitch is loosened (as the ancients say), which is a work without fear. If by another method:
If by another method: And you guide the paper into a shape similar to the hollow of a fir tree as we have described, with three times around in accordance with the form shown here.
Then cover what supports the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here:
And if you cannot hold the tongs and the item is not evenly shaped, then take a needle or one with a single thread, and place it within the hollow of the fir tree. and take another thread near the larger branch, and the second thread near the smaller one, and join between them the threads evenly.
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have marked, as we have described, then unite the two edges of the wound by stitching them together, and heal until it is healthy.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing oil.
And there are times when the hair of the papyrus is turned:
If it becomes necessary to use what we have said about the incision.
But the stitching on one side and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of ulcers follows this form: And you shall convert the papyrus and extend it inside as I have said, then make the ulcers by craft, with fine threads as long as the width of the stretcher is wide. And cut at both ends where you hold the threads:
Then carefully join one and the other according to what is on top of the papyrus strips, and straighten both ulcers from each part. And let it lie thus for a while, and the skin which is strained will die, weaken, and tear until it heals by itself.
If delayed, if the copa has some strengths, then treat it so that it becomes healthy again;
and when the wound is healed quickly, and if the papyrus is raised, then no more hair will grow there.
and it is the shape of the two cannulas that you shall make according to this form, and according to this length and width.
the methods are such that you take a fine needle, and tie one end of silk thread which is soft and subtle. then gather the heads and neatly twist each one subtly, making the lengths of threads a span long.
Then order a fine thread of other delicate silk briefly, and do not let it twist.
Then place the patient's head in your hand.
And be close to the sun so that the operation can be spoken of, for it is a subtle and delicate task, then insert the needle into all threads at the root where the hair grows, cutting through until you reach just beyond the natural hair.
Then extract the hair to its root and pull out that strand of hair, whether one or two or three or more.
Then remove your hand as the hairs turn to face away from all directions on the paper with natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and hair does not grow with it, you will treat the wound from below along the entire thread that you have ordered, until the hair grows above the opening and you see it through the oil's vision.
Then you will treat the wound and the thread, cover it with oil for two or three days until the hair hardens in its place and new growth appears.
And if the hair is short, accompany it with long natural whiskers and raise it to match those you left behind until they are separated and then remove them.
And when you can be thread after them that case, and soil not too much oureatement the place until sile tooth a tides of time or long; et leli the filz, as the dents hairs the luex. 5 days. When this disease called 'aleacrati' occurs in the eye, it can happen in two ways:
One natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens by sudden injury, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the manner of treatment in it is that you split the seam, separate its lips, and fill with flax threads inside, and clean until it's healed.
and one must only use in its treatment things that dry out and tighten. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before.
but with works that soften, like fennel; And the rose of water or herbs be boiled with flaxseed, and anointments of diacron melted in any oil, and one wraps a tent around it, and applies this remedy to that area.
And the essence of your treatment is to ensure you do not bind or wrap it according to its original shape.
and these treatments that we have mentioned are solely directions for this disease, so it does not return in the shape it was before.
This illness that is truly called "axacrati," is natural and accidental.
The occurrence comes from a wound and laceration as well as cauterization and similar things.
and the manner of the treatment is to take an awl where it has a double thread, insert the head into the hole, and pierce from left to right so that both threads come out on either side.
Then they apply heat above all needles, and a cup at the site of the abscess. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good.
and if not, take scissors and place them in the tear, then turn back the paper, making cuts or stitches within the folded paper.
and let the shoulders have cuts at both angles of the incision you made, and make them with such angles that when they are joined together, their shape is like an 'N' in the alphabet.
then remove that heat, according to the amount of cloth used, as it should secure the paper, and bring together the two separated parts with a woolen thread.
Then the care of what we have said about soothing medicines and bandages, as long as it is suitable.
And if the disease comes from a laceration or incision or cauterization, it is fitting that you make a clean cut below the hairline of the papers (skin), and according to what has been said above. then place between two leaves of bandage as I have mentioned;
then place between two leaves of bandage as I have mentioned; and the treatment must be made according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise instruments of all possible means so that they can restore its natural shape.
and the patients themselves, according to what is needed for treatment and provisions in various arrangements.
When this suture occurs in men's hands such that the paper above is sealed with egg white and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it upwards.
and the extension to pinchers, using what is sharp enough for a delicate incision, neither too dull nor too cutting, so that the patient does not suffer from an incision that is too deep or blunts the oil.
and make your incision, scraping it lightly, so that the paper can return to its natural shape.
and cleanse the entire assembly, ensuring no contact with dirty water, instead using soft water and cream.
Then place a tent of lin between the paper and oil, and put woolen yarn abundantly on top. And after three days utilize the bandage and other dressings until it is healed sufficiently.
Know that the ulcer occurs in two ways: It is either of the nervous kind and appears hard like syphilis, and another which is not nervous but resembles a frozen moist sore, that when touched with iron and cooked over embers does not heal.
And both appearances begin near the great temples and grow slowly until they cover all sight and light and movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is that the patient places their head on a pillow, then works out the eyes. And lift the paper to your hand, then cut with the clippers of small double-edged blades, and extend above. Then take a needle, and insert horsehair, or wool, or ox hair, and strong thread; Then slightly bend the tip of the needle and insert it into the eyelet, pierce through the entire needle, tie the needle with a thread, extend above, shave all hair to the edge of the eyelet that rubs against the hole, then cut off the remaining stump close to the head, carefully peel back the skin over the lacrimal bone and delicate tissues, leaving natural tear duct or socket so that by the incision it does not naturally run down as usual;
And there has been no time when the nail was solely extended at the joint or along the shaft, as we have said. Then scraping is done where all the skin and subcutaneous tissue are involved in which this shape is found:
And ensure that the scraping does not touch the fleshy tissue and tear it, and that the puncture is not made.
And after the incision, apply some sallad to it and wrap with a cloth made of lead, and leave until the following day. Then treat as required until it is healed.
And if the nail is not of a nervous nature and you cannot insert the needle, and the knobs do not enter, often this appearance of a fingernail has been treated with remedies.
And so that they grow as I have described in the procedure, and if you cover it, work on the oil of the patient, and take a light-weight spatula according to this form. And gently pluck the nail above and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a rapid onset, then distill from your mouth into an oil made of litargire and red bile blended with silk broiled, and stuff the oil until the next day.
If no other matter opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then first treat the abscess until it is healed, and resume the work as before, until it is healthy again.
then resume the other procedure as this same work, until it is all gone.
And if the appearance of flesh at the temple disturbs in oil by great harm, then suspend it to an oncicle and cover part but not all, that no tears come.
Then let flow on the red choleric oil, which is made of litargo.
Then some people have hair that is sometimes red, covering the gums and tied up at the edges and twisted into loops; it appears as a baluster rose.
and the operations are such that the patient must put his head in pain, then work on his hair, curling it all into convenient loops like nails, and hold them with strength.
then clip the first one, and shave all around it down to the end, and be sure not to pull on the hair at the work site.
and be the incision of the strain that we have mentioned in the cutting of the nail and small forces where one takes off their eyebrow, as shown by how this chapter demonstrates.
When the incision is completed and all the bone is exposed, apply the oil of silex or distilled red collier medicines with corrosive properties, and place cotton soaked in oil above it to ensure the abscess is heated.
If there is no discharge and pus accumulates, causing the abscess to swell, and you suspect a heated abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling agents.
Then return to your work once it is clean, thus making bones aligned in the oil with this treatment.
However, you must always balance the treatment of each weakened part by following natural ways; And from an accidental injury while working with iron;
and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
Red swellings that are covered over with oil, they impair the vision and weaken the eye daily.
Therefore, in the first place you look where the pain is located, which part it is, and if there is nothing else but swelling. Then do so as follows:
instruct the patient to place his head in your hands, then suspend those veins along the entire arm according to your wisdom, and let the nerves be subtle twice as per this method:
And there shall be two veins by degrees in one course as follows:
then you do so with those veins subtly, and extract the blood gently afterward, until you see that the veins are free of pain.
And keep in mind not to blister the oil at the tips of the stumps, and perform this work at noon before sunlight, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not miss any veins.
And when this is done, if you distill on the colored oil (vermilion and red) to cleanse what remains in the root.
And if you cannot collect it all at that hour, then apply plaster with substances soothing eye pain, and leave them for several days until the pain is eased and confident of no inflammation, then continue as before until they are healthy.
And this is the form of power:
The mirrors are called "arrisatis" ducts.
When you treat it with cautery and fiery ague as I have previously described, if it is not healed, then create a channel in the abscess where it should die, and draw out all the pus that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and darkness, return all the instruments that are in its form.
and it is called "aspré chie," and let there be fire made from iron to the tip of that instrument, and sharpened as in the present form.
And place it on the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand until you know that corruption is removed.
And do this each time, then restore it to its original position with exciting medicines.
If the joints are stiff and swollen, and the body of the bow is rigid, and remains so for forty days, and does not heal nor develop abscesses, and if no harm occurs, be assured it is healthy.
If not, if there is no other remedy but to bring the hernia back through the hole in the neck as follows: And you must expose the bone a second time with iron and ague medicines; when it is exposed, take a fortress as follows: let the shoulder be made of iron in three angles, and the rod should be tapered to the head as seen here.
Then place it near the bone by the cheekbone and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn completely until you pierce the bone and feel the patient's pain as if it were in your own neck if they hold their hand over their nose.
And then restore the bone with dry medicine as I have instructed you, and when pus forms and hardens in the bones, it goes towards the nose. If it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When all the nerves have been opened fully and they do not cause any disturbance to the nose or thinning, then you should bind the patient.
Then cleanse it, then apply suction cups or a heated iron to draw out blood without burning, then place oil made of acacia and aloe, incense, and sarcocolla on the eye that was affected, and then strain the oil, and wrap with bandages and linens.
The manner of bandages is such that you choose enough soft cloths, and fold each one fourfold, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed by the wounds.
Then stretch it above a hard bandage board and begin again with blisters to draw out blood without causing harm.
Then remove the blisters and let it remain strained day and night, and if possible soften the tissue, then extract generously.
Then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see it healing, that is good.
If not so; If you resume the poultice and bandages, ligature, and blisters until it is healthy.
The fall of a sheet or cloth used (in context likely referring to surgical dressing) When disruptions occur on the used cloth, then torn, and coming forth from paper as fine grains of resin, and is hope-giving to see.
Then if you see it heal, the operations are such that you insert a needle at the root of the part from below up to above, then insert another needle or there be two threads on the upper edge. and pierce it further, leaving the first needle according to its arrangement.
then cut the second thread and tie a part of the eyelid around it, stretching well, then remove the needle and place oiled cloth abundantly over the eye.
and leave until the threads fall off with the eyelid, then treat with comforting ointments until the wound is healed.
And at no time is the wound constrained by a veil from each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give a large appearance, when through a subtle stab at the bottom of the eye appears, and it passes through the white matter and descends into the eye, and enters almost immediately.
Then extract until healed.
This disease known as "alcunati" is not merely bowing that appears in the eye resembling water descending, and it is not actually water.
and the way it appears is that you make the patient sit on a specially prepared chair and straighten up, then take his head between your hands from both sides, until you see the bow coming above their eyes. Then it is fixed firmly, and does not descend or become dislodged, allowing the patient to see properly as usual.
And if it does not descend again, you should believe that it is healed, and the displacement of the bowstring has been corrected as we have stated.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine styptic and apply it under the sclerosed cornea slightly by the continuous use of the ointment on the sclerosed cornea and the crown, until the bowstring heals.
And when it is healed, then apply the warm oily mixture with honey or water and fenugreek that has been boiled, followed by another remedy until it becomes healthy again.
from eye waters We have found similarities to water in its separation, and what must be done for cutting. If in the work according to one's health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crosswise, away from sunlight and oil anoint his body, firmly gripping.
Then place the oil paper on your left hand if the eyes are left-oriented or on your right hand if the eyes are right-oriented.
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-oriented, the instrument called "almandine," or with your left hand if the eyes are right-oriented.
Then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by moving it like a ray into that corner of the oil on the lower part of the eye socket, and insert the instrument called "almandine" firmly, and twist your hand until it pierces through to the other corner of the oil, feeling as almandine enters the hollow.
It is proper that the measure of the Almadad way be at the forefront of the space from the plum to the end of the elbow. and it is the bend of the arm;
If you see the bone on that paper due to the whiteness of the tissue, then place the instrument up to it or where the vein is, and squeeze out another way afterward.
If they go numb now, look at the patient's face and the instrument against his palm.
Afterward rest for a while, and when the vein rises again in the second way, apply force with the instrument, and once it is firmly inserted and does not rise further, gently remove Almadad by slightly twisting your hand back and forth.
And then introduce a little bit of tying thread, and let the arm inside out. Then insert the stopper or softened linen in oil and wax abundantly, and seal with clean flesh.
And those of our time, apply a poultice with plenty of wax.
And if the splinter cannot enter through the bone due to its hardness, as some people have overly hard nails, it is necessary that you use an instrument called 'alberit', of which this shape exists:
And pierce then the joint solely, and do not go too far in depth, but make it subtle, then apply medicinal plaster, as we have said.
And for the completion of the work, prepare an appropriate cushioning for the patient to lie on their back in a dark place.
And keep them from all movement, and provide light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left, and bind them securely according to their position until the third day.
Then remove them to the same dark house and test their vision, allow them to see things, and then reapply the bandages until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do so during the treatment or immediately after incision now, but you must elevate their head because of rapid fluid buildup.
If an abscess comes, release the oil three days before incision, and apply soothing ointment to the affected area.
And when it is calmed, remove any dressing and place a bandage on the face to cover for one day, keeping in that darkened house.
Then gradually leave the darkened house little by little, and return to normal activities as you are able.
And believe that no interference should occur in this case. And one day to us from Yrach came saying that in our land there were om almagda perciets causing water to flow, but I have never seen any here in our lands or read about them in ancient books. And sometimes it is a new thing.
These are the similarities to forms of elephants because those who do not know them see them this way.
and they truly are: The head of those from this same subtlety lies flat on three corners sharp.
At no time do they give birth or have various dislocations, from which some appear like scorpions stinging their limbs.
and if there are such that they have sharp dislocations of fiery colors, and those with softness in the color of bones. In cases like these where there is softness and not sharp dislocations, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
In cases like these where there is softness and not sharp dislocations, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun. and open his nostrils, and pour onion extract onto those with softness, and apply force to them. thus continue what you have started holding the tender tip of a subtle blade on one side until you know that dislocation is completely bone-like.
And if there remains anything that cannot be handled, try operating on it with all subtle ointments lightly applied, so nothing remains. And if there is an inflammation or abscess, treat it as necessary.
And if it is a malignant abscess, quickly cauterize until the pus dries and all wounds are closed, then pour oil or wine to cool and disinfect them. If healers do not work, and moisture reaches the throat, ensure they are safe;
And if moisture does not penetrate as it should, make sure there is no swelling in the bone above, where pus cannot come out for dressing.
Then it is necessary to tie a piece of flaxen thread slightly thickened, and keep it clean with hands, ensuring space between each knot or less. And place the patient's head back through its neck as much as possible, and pull gently until it enters comfortably into the mouth.
And many times they do so with children at schools, and it is an easy task for those who want to do it.
Then hold the head coming through the neck with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and support one after another as we who are fil (children) do.
Do this as long as you know that they have contaminated the wound. Then guide the child, drain the blood, and wash their hair with Egyptian balm, and return it to its place as before in the neck.
Do this for three days or more, until the anointments have consumed everything that remains of the wax.
Then afterward apply a bandage for several days until it heals, and if drying remedies are needed, then use them.
This is the form of the instrument used to purge by pouring in oils and remedies at its top.
And it should be of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, as in a container, and this leads them similarly.
And if you see it, then make a closed vessel, and let the effluvia be plain to purge the head.
There should be a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
they p s, et w with l’s ount cite of arment:
Many times appears on the head of the nose a disease called "telul," and it grows and becomes large until it is visible upon looking.
And therefore, one must initially make an incision, then stitch it firmly, and subsequently place the fire cautery or hot medication on it.
And if it is not operated upon while still small, one should take care to observe if it becomes hardened, of furious color, and with weakened sensation.
if not touched by iron, for it is an incurable boil, because whenever one operates upon it, great harm befalls the patient.
and if the boil is of soft touching, not furious color, and one sees that it can be entirely incised, relieve the patient from fear and perform the operation without hesitation, curing dry and constrictive things.
Believes that when continuous supply comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it benefits little, even in some people.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood. And then bring together both edges of the wound into a seam, and then heal it until it is sound.
And if the edges are torn apart on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring together both edges into a seam, bind them up, and powder with powdered blood of a dragon, and burn incense. And place over the powders a piece of emplaster of strong or other emplaster binding it with them, and let it heal through it; then treat with ointment until it is sound.
The manner of the suture is such that you assemble the pieces together. or with needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitching. or with thread, as I have told you.
For abscesses on the lips
Sometimes abscesses occur within the thickened vein ends, appearing like grains of pepper, and small and larger ones;
Then it is necessary to return the vein ends, cut above each one, and grasp them with forceps and place them in separate parts.
then put back the piece after the incision of blister bleeding until the vessel is sealed.
And then he helps to stabilize it, and treats the area until dryness is achieved.
Often emerges under the gums that the ancients called "albulus";
If it is necessary to support it with forceps, cut at its root, and let the pus or blood drain.
then apply the lead acetate plaster, or other drying and constrictive powders;
and if it returns after the incision, and often occurs, then re-drain on the second attempt, and cauterize; if it does not return after cauterization;
Never gathered at the top of the teeth between the gums, scales that are unattractive and sharp; At times they are black and yellowish-green and wormy, as long as decay reaches the gums, and the teeth become foul.
If it becomes necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your holy one, and remove any teeth or scraps that are found, until there is nothing left. And do this with blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other afflictions, until they are healed.
And if you extract what is at the root, it is good. But if not, resume again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything.
Know that the teeth require various forms of treatments to heal, according to what the work shows, because the razors from which one removes teeth have different shapes than those found between the teeth. And these forms and other similar things are with you arranged accordingly.
It is necessary when treating the tooth of pain that you delay the extraction as much as possible, for it should not be done hastily. because it is a matter so important up to that one has no excuse for the extraction.
Then when the patient is straining to urinate, it is necessary that you are certain about the condition of their teeth. Often the pain troubles the patient, and he thinks it is a healthy tooth, and pulls out the bad tooth. And indeed, do not leave the pain at all because of this, as long as the evil persists, for we have already tried it with these healers.
And when you are certain of the toothache, if it is necessary, scrape around the tooth completely and thoroughly in order to protect the gum on all sides.
Then move it with your fingers or delicate tweezers slowly and gradually until it is properly aligned, then firmly fix the tweezers. And place the head of the malady in your holy hands between your thumbs and index fingers so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these ointments and apply it inside from every side gently, then move it as you did initially.
And if the tooth is pierced or mangled, if necessary, fill it with thread gauze at the sites of the holes. And if carefully stretched with pincers, so it does not break while being pulled.
And one must work gently around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
And make sure not to break it, and leave a part behind; causing greater pain from the root for the patient initially.
And be sure not to do as the ignorant surgeon does, who through their hastiness and boldness break the instrument every time, without applying what we have explained.
but they bring about great disease through this condition to the roots that remain there or from breaking the instrument as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is extracted, wash it thoroughly with wine or alcohol and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply the paste of antimony to the area.
If this does not work, then proceed with caulterization.
The forms of the strangulations, where one cannot move the teeth first, have sharp points and large loops that do not overlap when pulled through the hole.
and these are the shapes: And they have large limbs that do not bend easily when grasped, and are made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold them securely.
From the roots of the teeth. When the root cannot be pulled through, it is necessary to place cotton or wool in butter for one or two days until the gums are softened, then insert the pincers called "algefri", making the head appear like a bird's beak.
and they should be made similar to files in shape:
the le Mort; 1.
And it is long and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root comes out through this, it is good.
If not, use all instruments, through which forms come hereafter:
And if you use the instrument that has two prongs, thus is the form as follows: and other instruments placed in front on the density, and of this instrument which appears like large pincers, thus is the form as follows:
And these tools are such that they may not break, and know there are many of the same kind. and likewise other instruments, which are not counted.
and the wise master is subtle in using his instrument by himself accordingly to his procedures and illnesses that show themselves, for there are some diseases where ancient teachers did not provide an instrument due to their variety, or if it breaks on the cart or other bones, seek the instruments I mentioned earlier and use gestures as follows:
And let them be large and firmly held to grasp the bone without slipping but can hold and extract.
And then restore it to its original position with appropriate medicines for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, bring all of this instrument.
When the tooth appears not in accordance with natural form and is ugly, especially in maiden women, one must ascertain if the root is still present after the tooth, and it is neither in its proper place nor can be saved or filed down.
Then proceed with cutting. And if it is hardened along with the tooth, take this instrument of which there are images below, and it appears as though having a small beak, and made of iron well sharpened at its tip.
And the wax is taken little by little over many days due to dental hardness, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that one can be filed down, then file in a manner consistent with its shape.
And it is similar to the file from which needles are made;
And with a file the teeth are touched lightly, little by little over time, so that they do not move until they loosen.
Then at the end it shall be smoothed without any roughness, and if his teeth are too sharp they will nick the tongue; thus one must file the sharp edges until they are even, so that he does not nick the tongue nor damage speech.
When the teeth are loose or have fallen out by impact or decay, and the patient cannot hold what they chew without it falling apart, and you have treated them with constricting medications, but that is not effective.
if they require being bound by a thread of gold, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold does not move.
And let the child's stitch not be too large or too small, according to the quantity of space between the bones.
And if you see the bones aligning correctly, take the thread and pass it twice between both healthy teeth, then place the needle among the affected teeth, until you reach another healthy tooth on the opposite side. Then resume wrapping up to the part where you began, and gently yet firmly pull your hand backward until it does not move.
And ensure the ligature is close to the base of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the thread with pliers, tie them together, and place them so that they do not touch the tongue.
And then let it lie so narrow as long as it can remain there, and if it dislocates again, or the children return, they must be strained with another bandage.
If it remains and serves thus for its entire duration, and it is the shape of two bones and the alignment of two healthy joints, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, then reset it back in its place, freshly each time, as we have said.
And let no one who is not wise and patient interfere, nor at any time make the shape of a wolf's tooth, but place it where it is missing, and strain it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for long durations.
Never is this bandage which comes from under the tongue or its natural form found to be like that. Or by accident of a burn wound;
And the procedures are such that you treat the mouth of the sick person, keeping their head in health, and lift their tongue.
Then treat the sick person's tongue, until it is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is a severe wound, apply an incision and sever the ligaments.
And ensure that the incision is not made too wide, for the artery which lies beneath.
And after you have done so, lift up a piece of pink silk or cold water cloth, then place it under the tongue with a linen tent.
And each night wash away any tartar from the patient's teeth so they cannot close.
If bleeding continues to occur, then apply a poultice of potassium iodide on it. And if the wound does not heal, then use a slow-burning caustic which is beneficial for this. Then pursue another treatment until it becomes healthy again.
And if you see the wound is colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre.
And if it is approaching gangrene, and there is moisture present, then apply an unguent with onion extract, which softens the area gently, and release it from both sides. And if the wound does not heal at your hands, apply potassium ipsenate until it becomes impervious, then return to your treatment as long as you have exhausted all means.
Then lift it carefully and gently, and treat other injuries until it is healthy again.
ix, liant it is sore, et cest la ore if fain the l'ariz ot dite, but themes: and then let a bone le telle ise the te pierre d’avise et sereaux to pain dites du temps. And sores, the ou noir; si est de eis seize the cures, et of liant, soignez it the lits with lontaint: or les pren till them es ail not ome le t’em. Never do obstructions occur in the throat called "godarths," and they are properly referred to as two almonds; when treating them as we have explained in the section, if they are not healthy, be cautious.
If it is an abscess of mild pain and size with a pale color, do not treat them without iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not treat without iron either for the bleeding to heal. but leave it until it is dead, and then you will cut it out, or it may break on its own.
And if it is of pale blue hue and the roots are subtle, prepare the instrument for cutting but first ensure that the abscesses rest and are soothed.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun with their eyes closed and mouth open, and perform the procedure using your hands on the jawbone, pressing the tongue away from all instruments as described.
and be made of silver or fine iron just like a razor's edge.
You must press the tongue against all instruments and observe for abscesses, if found, take a needle and insert it in the wart while twisting and pulling slightly upwards as much as you can.
And train any thing with threads, then grip the instrument of it, which is its form, that seems like some force. In all ways, the head is curved, one place to another, and it is very painful, made of iron or copper.
Here's a la est est instrument, et les maintement, you can be all with it the chauquarge d'oftes. ici est to the pliant, and of, but so that the c the instrument, ou sewit is made ongne, just as coi de l’est, here, in a ce que tu pee, et thet ecointend with lances: for you may be any le pain est c. And be sharp on one side, and nameless on the other.
And when you have clamped one of the almonds, then clamp the other in the same manner as before, and after the incision, rinse the patient's mouth with hot water, salt, and lemon juice, and if blood discharge occurs, rinse their mouth again with hot water or boiled pomeghrenate slices, or mugwort leaves until the wound is closed. Then treat until it becomes sound again;
And at no time does an abscess arise in the throat other than two large ones, then treat them as you would with these two large abscesses.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, which is to say one small abscess.
and the abscess was so tightly closed that it nearly choked her throat passage which was blocked, and she could not breathe or eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like this for a day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that there were two heads through its two openings on each side of the neck.
So I acted immediately, and inserted one needle therein, then the wound was turned, resulting in a large portion of pus.
Then reset it on the other side, by pulling the nose, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
After extracting the splinter from this abscess, and biting off part of it, did not result in much blood. And thus was cleared the path of the throat for the woman, and now began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease tearing at that abscess for long times.
And the abscesses reappeared again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, becoming quite large.
Then I deceived it and performed a cautery within the throat. Thus, he stayed without growing.
And from those parts I departed, and it was only God who did for him after me.
after a part of I the space healed with them as if, but did that is often. Et eyebrtee abscessing large I need to do him or not had it so became c which they should be treated by done and throat it was applied over again it back; s untainted, for them after let them long the pass I put then anoints. They were that with stab worm.
When they restore it to its place, and it is fled and long, then it is called "perpendicular";
And if it is not thick and round, then it is called an "eyeball".
When it is cut as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the abscess wound has calmed down and is subtle, then one must excise it;
And those that are round but gathered together and not long. And if it is of blood or flesh-colored or black, then one must avoid making the incision there. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it as I have described in terms of its breadth and length, seat the patient facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument we previously recalled. Then insert the hook into the eyelet, and pull outward, and cut two incisions as I have described for removing the two tendons.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess beyond its natural boundary;
because if you cover too much, it will hinder speech and language.
and after the incision, use what we have described for incising the two tendons, and heal as much as is severed.
And if the patient is afraid of being covered, it is necessary that you apply measures for the reassurance before covering them.
The method of the cautery should be acute gout. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument as described in our chapter on fire cautery, and moisten with clear hot water so that it is neither too thick nor too thin. And for using this instrument, here is its form:
And you have at the end of a spoon or cup place the medication, as with the handle of a ladle, and position the instrument all around the medication on the eye.
and let the patient lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medication, ensuring it does not go down to the throat.
then hold your hand all around the medication and press it against the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see redness has subsided and the biting sensation from the medication is soothed.
and if you see any instruments, wrap them in cotton with the medication, and insert the instrument into the cotton up to its tip beneath the lid.
And often do this until the caulteries are perfect, then let it dry, and fall off after IV or V days.
And if you need to repeat the caulteries of the ointment, do so again afterward, and wash around the wound with a cloth wrapped in butter, and cleanse what is around it.
And be dressed in cold water, and be treated with gargles until healed.
This treatment is safer than the incision, not just the caulteries;
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take expectorants and yarrow, hyssop, rue, chamomile, elecampane, and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of them into an earthenware pot, then set to boil.
And let the bone be firmly fixed with strong clay, and within the bandage have an instrument fitted according to this manner: And it be made of silver or copper, and one should insert the head into the mouth of the patient until they breathe out through the nose, until the eye is numb.
and upon repeated occurrences, until the eye dries out, ensure that you do not apply heat at the onset of abscess inflammation, for many things can happen. and do not use this only when an abscess is hot.
And if this instrument is not present, take a nose and insert an eagle feather in it so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot. For the cracked tooth does not much burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with health.
Many times there are bones or fish spines in the throat or other things.
Therefore you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all your instrument, so that you may move the thing.
And what does not appear and is resituated in the throat, it must be made to induce vomiting so that the meat may cook in the stomach. Perhaps if you eject the thing through vomiting;
Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge or a piece of cotton, or a lettuce root, or crust from dry bread. And lay it with the sponge filament and then transglutinate it; And when it reaches its place, you shall remove it, and then bind tightly.
And if it does not move as we have said, take the instrument of tongs in this manner:
And let the prongs be raised to the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and raise the head high. And ensure you do not touch the epiglottis, as it could harm them or cause discomfort;
And moves must it happen that the patient uses the instrument because it is moved or the thing is loose. If the resetting occurs, then he pulls with all instruments equally until it becomes strong again.
For dislocation of the throat
Medicine should never be neglected, as I have said in the section on treatments by medical remedies; And if it does not work, then look in the patient's throat to the sun while pressing their tongue with the instrument I have told you about.
And if you see it, so treat all small canals or delicate pincers that are suitable for this purpose.
And if that is not suitable, then take a boiled cat gall, put it in the patient's throat, and make frequent attempts to expel the hot gall with iron. And give the patient water throughout the day.
Then take full juger of cold water and work the mouth, causing it to swallow easily, and move at its hand often. And if soon after the remedy feels like water, let it flow.
And if it does not come out as we have said, gently blow the patient with asthma using an instrument mentioned in the smoke treatments for the eye.
Do this many times, because she will linger longer than expected.
And the method of smoke treatments is to take an iron vessel where there are coal fires present and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and from that opening be the head of the instrument.
then you pour the smoke treatment, and the patient places the vessel's top in their mouth, seals it shut so that no smoke escapes, but fills up to the lungs.
and now the lungs will fill, and if it does not come out, repeat the smoke treatment many times;
And sufferers experience thirst, and consume salty and sour things, and do not drink water.
Then at some point it will be necessary for him to pass stool under this regimen.
And the form of the instrument used to extract blood is, when it can be seen, similar to bent pincers for entering into the throat. and resembles the beak of an instrument, and it has the roughness of limestone, such that whatever it takes cannot slip away.
Many types of abscesses are, as recollection comes after one and another in this book, and they differ between puncturing and cutting.
And it is in two ways alike, one from its own nature itself, and because of moisture.
And the second way is for boils that occur within the body.
because an abscess at the top is different from one at the base, and an abscess in the thighs is different from those that occur in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
If with an abscess that should not be pierced, until the bowel is completely healed according to its course;
and if of those that should be pierced when they are ripe, do not heal as is their course, like an abscess near joints.
When abscesses occur near joints and are left to become ripe, by chance they may corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that limb.
Or the abscess is near a major limb, and if you delay the piercing until it has healed, it will harm the main limb;
or it is near the foundation, if you pierce then not when it is fully healed.
and it does not bode well to pierce an abscess when digestion is incomplete, especially one near the foundation, that it may rupture entirely, extend internally, and cause a fistula. And cannot heal completely.
And it is necessary that you determine the time of the abscess's full formation, and when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and mild debates and sharpening of the abscess's head, and other signs.
And it is necessary to keep the incision in place unless further moved from the abscess site, and wherever healed.
And the incision should be lengthy in accordance with the body's size, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, or arteries, and all other similar areas without swelling. In those that bulge, along with that limb.
And when abscesses are in their natural place, one must let the puncture remain until it is fully digested as we have said.
If you pierce it before this wound, there is a spreading of poison in the body and it is full of much filth. And sometimes harden the lips and his deep parts.
And for any abscesses that are pierced according to the size of his body, as needed by its members.
And you must address small abscesses and punctures. and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many ruptures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess.
and if at such abscesses where it is necessary to close the head and cover them; when they become hardened like leather and are numb, then it is done as with blisters:
and if at such that are split into three corners, and as with those which you cover like the bellows of mire, as arrow wounds in the forearm.
And if there are such places where one makes round cuts or other types of gashes resembling shears.
Those who do not have a head, as if an abscess is superficially swollen, it is necessary that you pierce straight through.
and when the abscess is large, with great swelling of flesh, you pierce it, but do not draw out all the pus at once, but one part. then stuff the abscess until the next day, and thereafter drain nothing in particular. do this repeatedly gradually larger each time, until all the swelling subsides.
especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or women carrying, or young children, or old men who are feeble. For the abscess may occasionally burst with the release of pus, potentially causing death to the patient, and do not grieve over it.
Then avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, open the wound, and check if the wound of the abscess is small. And if it's a neatly formed lump, try to treat it with linen or old cotton; And if it's large abscesses, and there are many boils, then you must insert a tent in each one so that they grow against each other.
And if you have cut into the abscess near the skin, and it has bled around, then you must fill it with old cotton or wool from linen cloth without moisture, and bind until after three days.
Then the bone is set straight, and treated with ointment until it heals completely.
If blood flow occurs at your work site, prepare cold and soothing water, and moistened cloths, and place them on the affected area multiple times.
And if the bleeding persists, administer care and treatment as mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is winter or the dislocation or abscess is very sensitive, then apply cloths soaked in warm wine and oil.
and if it is summer, and the dislocation or abscess is swollen, then apply cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day, as we have said.
and then remove the abscess and drainage, treating it as necessary until healed completely.
And this is what must generally be known in treating abscesses:
Then I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
When small abscesses come on the head, and they have treatments that are like pouches, similar to the udders of a sheep, there are many such cases.
There are some that are greasy and such as hairs with moisture too.
And there are those that are hard and pus-like to touch, and there is no doubt as the arrow does not act contrary.
And the tasks of cutting are such that you should try with every instrument called "intrusive," from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Because if it contains moisture, they will go beyond its length.
And when the moisture is emptied, scrape away everything in the hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave anything.
Then dip a cotton ball into Egyptian ointment, if available. If not, in water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving it until the next day; And those who are still dislocated will go back to their original position, as they were before.
And then the process repeats with the bandage, just like before, on the second day and so forth, until you are certain it does not remain dislocated again.
Then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
And if an abscess persists in being filled, then proceed according to this method for a long time. and apply your poultices generously, and scrape off all scabs, and put forth all your treatment methods in treating the area where it lies.
And if an arrow is causing trouble, then do as I have told you afterward.
And likewise treat the abscess if it is pus-filled, and with thorns and cleansing as I have told you.
And on the swelling over a pus-filled abscess and the wet area, it is easier because they have less blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or heads without moisture, and those old abscesses that I described earlier in a woman's head.
And I found the abscess like a hard stone, sharp and bloody, which could not be broken. But if it had been struck anywhere else, one would have just made a wound like that of a stone.
In other abscesses that arise or appear at the head, those that come from children and roots of ears, leave the opening there for as long as necessary, so the pus can escape.
and treat them as needed.
Many times there are abscesses in the neck and behind the ears, and even in the armpits, and they never appear elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous and interconnected with each other.
And each goiter is properly dense in its place, just like the head and abscesses we have mentioned; and there are many similarities to these goiters.
and there are many similarities to these goiters. There are some that contain moisture, and others which are malignant and refuse to obey health.
in that one then you see with good position to touch, and is similar to the body's color, does not protrude from either side and is neither soft on the sides of the neck nor at the artery or duct, and it is not deep;
If it is necessary to cut above, and peel each part, then stretch the skin so that there are no wrinkles, if needed, as we have said in head sores.
and pull gently at intervals, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, nor any small tendons that may come forth; so that hands do not slip, and don't see too far ahead, so as not to cut anything you should not.
And if you cut a vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then place lime-iron slag in the wound, or any powders that stop bleeding, and tie up the wound. and let it rest until the swelling is calmed and the wound has softened, then begin to heal.
And when the wound is stitched up, return to your work until it is completed.
Then you should apply your special skill if there remain small cysts; cleanse and disinfect them.
And if the vein at the root of the cyst is large, do not cleanse that cyst in its roots, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm.
Then apply to the wound a piece of fine cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress the wound.
And if you drain the entire cyst, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and close them up, so that there is no excess due to its size. And if it is necessary, you must drain the root of it and remove pus, and close as we have said.
And if it is necessary, you must drain the root of it and remove pus, and close as we have said. Those cysts causing excess, puncture them where they begin to thrive.
And it is pierced thus as previously mentioned, depending on the situation, then you should dress wounds with ointment and similar things, if they become contaminated from decay. And when the wound is thoroughly cleaned, apply an ointment of fresh char, until it heals completely.
The ancients spoke and wrote about throat surgery; but I have never seen such a procedure performed in our land, and it is the writing of their words.
For those with quinsy, it is necessary to remove the incision in the throat known as "epiglottis"; and this is not done with it because all the veins and the main blood vessels are present in those with abscesses burning hotly in the mouth, or throat, or two arms;
When the illness is in the channel of the organ, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Then indeed, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should split it from behind three circles or four into a small slit across, between two circles or by the amount of the slit on its side, not in the throat.
and such eyes if they are affected by the section of the epiglottis that there is no distress, and the vessels are long enough to see them clearly.
And if the master is fearful, it is fitting that he stretch the skin of the neck to its full extent, then split the flesh as much as it stretches to the veins. and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing, then cut into the flesh as we have said.
And it is shown by the severed throat of a feline that jumped through being broken at the neck, and due to loss of voice.
And leaves an open wound exposed for some time.
And when the hour has passed that there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound at the back, and suture it completely along the cartilage.
Then administer remedies that generate warmth, until he is well again.
by: Then you cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and thus is kept from death.
And they command the patient to keep the open wound until the illness's malady is gone, which takes 3 or 4 days. Then they order it to be stitched up and cleaned out, once it has healed.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
And I went to try to cure her, but found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it; and I saw that she had not bled from her veins or any other passage except through her throat, and the bleeding was strong from the injury.
I hurried, stitched the wound, and treated it until she was healed.
and there was no harm to the maiden except for her being hoarse in voice, and afterwards returned to her usual state.
Therefore I say that in treating the epiglottis there is no need for fear.
These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses the color of jet, and occur mostly in women.
There are two methods as follows: natured, and accidental.
or natural does not have a remedy.
And such occurrences are in two ways, one resembling fatigue to us, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from our artery. And there may be fear, and it does not require working on large wounds except in that which is small, and try and search for everything related to it. If you find it as we have found fatigue, and not directed to any vein, then bandage like we bandage ours, and treat the area completely, if there is a spot. And search thoroughly, and heal as it should be, until perfectly healthy again.
Many ways we have, of which I will tell all the similarities;
And here one must say all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is heat and fever-ridden, as long as the boiling has not ceased, and the decay is complete. Then rests the fever and warmth.
With ours there is no warmth or fever and pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sack and follows the color of the body, beginning as a jet, and becoming thickened.
And it resembles in its appearance, either fatty or moist substance, with colors as I have described in the classification.
When attending to the patient's wound, first examine and question with all the instrument called "intermitted," according to its form or procedure which is afterwards.
And the manner of inquiring into boils among us is that you grasp or find more moisture there than in the boil, and turn your fingers occasionally, until you know that the pus has pierced the skin, then according to the size of the boil.
Then extract the interosseous, and take care so it does not bleed.
If moisture runs through the vein, if it has any color as I have said of other abscesses;
And after extracting the interosseous vein, if no moisture comes out, assume it is fatty, then incise in a cross pattern, and take pinchers to lightly scrape from each side, and cover the coat where it lies with a clean dressing.
And if you cannot cleanse it thoroughly, then cut into pieces so that nothing remains.
Because if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
And if any remains and it does not hurt him, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and put on soothing substances for other remedies until it is healthy.
If it is severe, then cut the edges of the wound, and treat as if there were a festering sore.
And if the boil appears contrary or other, apply vinegar and leave it on for two or three days until the wound heals, and allow rest to relieve blood congestion. Then return to the previously mentioned treatment that was delayed in use.
Behold these forms of intruding sores, and there are three kinds: large and medium and small;
And there are three types that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are again three kinds; large, medium, and small to address abscesses of a fistula.
These are like the needles used in sorcery, made of brass, iron, or silver, and turning ones made of yellow color are more effective, and they are especially tried for finding haemorrhoids from a fistula.
There are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of their openings.
The shapes of tumors are most similar to what you see here:
and if there are tumors that have hemorrhoids of three kinds as well;
and if there are tumors with three types of hemorrhoids, just like the sizes.
and if there are tumors that have two kinds of hemorrhoids, or only one kind, they too come in three sizes.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The primary tools used for these purposes are sharp ones, and among them there are those that do not cut at all but only scrape the skin, hence one does not sever the vein or nerve.
and among these instruments are those used to remove scabs, such that the patient does not feel them during the incision of abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And they are used only where the flesh is toughened, such as legs, arms, cheeks, and elbows, and other similar places.
And never is any other small instrument used, resembling the scrapers of lancet wounds, according to this form, which causes bleeding. And at no time is one placed in such a way that it touches the veins for copulation, and arteries, and again according to this great method:
Never do the breasts of any men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swolled, and whoever wishes to heal them should do so according to the following form of this line... until b: g then scrape the fat, and apply medicinal pitch to the wound, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, until it is cleaned.
and the breast falls forward, and becomes soft due to its size like in women, making it into two rib-like folds above, with two similar splits. to the point where one is held against the other at the end of each, so that the larger contains the smaller according to this form... from line b: up to line g. Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, then treat as we have mentioned with stitching and powders, and everything necessary for healing until it is clean.
And if it is not clean, or the incision has not fully healed because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a pliable cotton ball soaked in corrosive ointment. and leave it to heal until all remaining tissue and fat are gone, then cleanse it thoroughly until it is healthy again.
And often it is found in places or any swelling of, and are from them that the oment wherein lest.
Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g: And when all the bowel that is in an abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles like scrofula, treat it as we have described for the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound fills with bowels, prepare a fire cautery as we have described before.
When the vein is exposed and the skin above it swells, thus there are often abscesses occurring multiple times, and similarly occurs an outbreak of gouty joints and ulcers.
And if it is discovered at this stage for an artery, then there are large abscesses near. And when you feel it in your shoulders, you sense straining severely;
And if it is for the vein, then there are visible signs of insufficiency appearing.
It is foolish to treat this abscess, and especially when it arises from joints and nerves and neck and involves many others, making it very large. Therefore one must avoid the iron treatment, and for those at risk of head injury it is also avoided, as well as in cases where artery pressure occurs above long skin.
Then work the groin glands, and carefully remove the blood vessels from the sinews until they are exposed;
Then insert a needle on one side and pierce until the opposite rib, and tie off the artery with a double thread for two fingers, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are behind the ears.
Then pinpoint the joint which is between the two threads of a trocar until no blood flows out from it, and then open the abscess.
Then perform the suturing as required by the wound, while ensuring that the ligature bites. Then apply appropriate ointment for this matter until it is cleaned.
And if the abscess is large in size for the vein, it is necessary to treat your hand as you would the entire skin of the abscess with an ointment, then insert a needle on one side that you hold in your hand and pierce until the opposite rib, and tie off with a double thread. Then treat the abscess as I have told you, or if it lies between one part of the two shoulders.
And if you doubt that the threads are not all gone, then it pushes another needle through all the threads from underneath the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and pulls the threads in four directions.
Then excise the abscess until no excess tissue remains, then cut away any remaining pus and leave what is attached.
Then apply a compress of wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and salves until it is healed.
Similarly, abscesses come from the artery and vein; they form in the nerves when struck or due to excessive strain, and similar occurrences.
And this occurs more often in shoulders and arms with all the joints, and it is severe abscesses, and its appearance resembles that of the body, causing pain in various ways.
And when it is strongly held back, the patient feels great pain, and it is not throughout the whole body, but from below the head.
And he moves badly all over, and cannot go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and those who are in the joints do not need to be bound with iron. there may well be spasms; and those who have it at the head or forehead cause swelling in the temple area.
and those who have it at the head or forehead cause swelling in the temple area. If the abscess is small, then treat it with tweezeboots and bandage at its base;
And if it is large, then drain it with a hook, scrape away the dead tissue, then stitch up the wound and dress it until healed.
Never occurs in wombs or elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its appearance, and the roots are subtle, but the stems are thick.
And there are both small and very large ones.
I have seen patients with two wombs that appeared more like fungi than anything else, without any difference; they were white, had fine roots, and were cracked, containing moisture within.
I weighed them and found the first to be eighteen ounces, and the other six pounds, and upon incision one observes if the patient is moist, with the arterial color being pale and wet and of a subtle root. If the cloth at the thigh is wide, and have the fire cautery in your presence.
If the cloth at the thigh is wide, and have the fire cautery in your presence. For in cutting often comes great blood loss, and if it does not stop, then quickly apply the caustic.
And if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread, bind it tightly as we have said, and leave for two days.
And then the binding continues, do not stop tightening the linen thread until it heals the wound, and make sure to irritate by it.
And if the roots are large and you fear for the abdomen, but adequately cover most of it with a cup then cauterize so that it does not return.
Then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cover the torn flesh which is of reddish color, poor sensation, and lacking movement.
For it is an advanced syphilis, and I will treat the chancroid hereafter.
When the mouth jaw is injured If the appearance of gangrene comes from a wound or incision infection, and it is on the belly with none elsewhere as occurs in other regions, where blood flows from veins or arteries depending on what is seen before, or swelling.
And if it is from the infection of the gum and by the exit of pus, then its appearance is similar to that of normal skin color, feels like a minor thing with little pain, and has various issues arising from it. If it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed at its limits, it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance it may be swollen, and greatly enlarges the entrance to the bath and for vigorous work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and appears normal when you press it with your hand, do not restrict movement.
And if it is for blood, when large and hard abscesses are opened by these signs, they grow and become embedded in accordance with the quantity. And if it is for inflammation, when tender upon touching, and the appearance of the wound seems to be related to arterial blood or vein or inflamm ization.
And if it is for inflammation, when tender upon touching, and the appearance of the wound seems to be related to arterial blood or vein or inflamm ization. If it is necessary to leave the wound open for healing. For there may be doubt and fear, as I have described in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is of intestines or bowels, then you command the patient to stretch out his legs and extend them straight, then encircle him entirely with a belt. then command him to lie supine between your hands, then go around the region that you have bound with all of the bandages, and extend most of the abscess above over the entire large swelling. Then encircle it with a strong thread or cord made of sturdy silk, ensuring the knot is secure.
Then work on extending a portion of the abscess over the joint, and insert your instrument, piercing it into the intestines. If you find the joint captured, detach it, and push the intestine back through to its original position in the abdomen.
And if there is a boil, grasp it with forceps, and remove any excess material.
And if the artery is in an unfavorable position or bleeding profusely, then return to your work and take two needles. Bore through them with a threaded cord and place the two needles around where you have previously made a cross incision for piercing.
Then strain the abscess into four layers beneath the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the place rest until it heals, and extract the dead tissue by yourself. Then you shall bind it if it is thin and suitable, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said.
Then you shall bind it if it is thin and suitable, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said. And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the place as necessary, and close the wound.
On the ulceration We have said in its classification are the types of cancer, and how it should be worked with medicine, and how to drain a wound.
And say the cancer originates in the bone marrow, and great caution is required for treatment, and the ancients said that when cancers are located where they can be removed like a tumor on the breast or thighs, and it should be entirely excised at the beginning.
nor has anyone ever healed before me.
And the procedure, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said, is to remove all black pus from the patient.
then the physician should drain if there is visible engorgement, and prepare the patient properly for the procedure.
then pour in thy warts or sores, and cut away all hair around them, and bone fragments from all sides, leaving nothing behind.
and allow the blood to clot completely, pressing well with your hand or any material, and if blood flow resumes contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until it is sealed. Then provide other treatment until he is healthy again.
And for dropsy, which means edema due to fluid retention in the body, causing swelling: apply a concoction of rosen with roses and ointment and pour on l'estuin, et les eaux; puis giete li detergens le morsel de l'eau-lui. Then we have discussed in the division similarities to dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and those treated with iron.
And one should not be touched by iron in these two resemblances: That is to say, tympanitis and hyposarca, for it is a deadly thing. - Tympanitis refers to inflammation of the eardrum (tympanic membrane), while hyposarca might be referring to
Therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "oozing" with medicines and the treatment does not help, check if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropseris, such as constipation and similar things. - Here, it's discussing how to approach a case that initially presents like dropsy (a condition characterized by an accumulation of fluid in tissues) but doesn't respond to standard treatments for the illness. The doctor is advised to consider other diseases or conditions such as constipation and so on, which might be contributing to the patient's symptoms. If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
And if you see the patient with strong vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and they are not too young or too old, then so should you work in this manner: Lift the patient upright with your hands, and let the minister press on the belly from below pushing the water to the lowest part of the pelvis; then take the sphincter muscle in accordance with this form: And take sharp instruments of two parts. At its tip, and always ensure that it does not extend so far as to reach the intestines when inserted. Do not make a hole:
Then check if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines; If necessary, you must cut above the elbow three fingers straight from below along the wrist. And if there is dropsy due to a disease of the liver, then make the incision on the left side of the elbow three fingers wide.
And if it is due to scabies, then make the incision on the right side, and you must ensure that the patient lies with their back flat so that excess fluids do not flow into the weakened area.
Then puncture the entire surface with an instrument, and push in the probe, and lift your hand to clear all the tissue between the skin and the fascia as when scraping off the quantity of a fingernail or slightly more.
Then pierce the fascia until you reach the level of eight tissues, and that is the source of water, then the vein, and insert this instrument whose form follows: It resembles a fine silver chain, made of copper or bronze, and is in the part below the small hole. And it has an edge from one side, with a small hole. And it has another edge on the other side, and at the opposite end.
It is the head cut so as to resemble a pen, and it has the shape of the incision that scribes carve their pens.
at its top is the handle, so when strain occurs, it pushes up against the instrument immediately.
then empty the middle or the third part, because if you remove more than necessary during that hour, perhaps the patient may die due to the exhaustion of their spirit from the weapon's influence, where they sweat excessively, or near death.
However, according to the quantity of its virtue, and depending on what the disposition of virtue in the patient means, and his hair.
Then use the instrument and retain water, which is held in place by a plug that stops the hole mentioned above, as I have spoken, piercing it according to this method.
Then use the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering as such, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do this every other day and be careful not to overdo it so that no more than a little bit of water remains.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then apply remedies like burial or hot sand, and through a lot of sweating or bathing in the sun, and with drinks. And the medical treatment with drying medications until it is healed, and caustication on the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
No child is ever born without a foreskin on their penis, or if the foreskin is small, or not in its proper place.
If it is necessary that he must be circumcised very quickly, following this particular method with great subtlety:
Then insert a fine bone probe into the wound, and close it up so that after three to four days, once it begins to produce urine, ensure it is securely closed, allowing for urination.
And perhaps there is no need, as the urine that comes forth does not leave it sealed shut.
If the closure is small, it is a remedy for the clot of blood as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the catheter in place are tied up because none can give birth at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they elevate their penis. And they cannot heal it because the material cannot reach up to the bone, and it is a bad illness.
And the method of treatment is such that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the rod and cap as round as a pen's body, so that the thread can be spun easily, as it should.
And beware of the bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, use the string for sewing blood vessels, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Of pus from the penis Many times these abscesses come in the rod, and it appears as a loathsome ulcer.
And within them there are both harmful and harmless conditions;
If it is necessary to pluck them at the root subtly, and cleanse and purify all of them, then place Egyptian cotton wool soaked in oil. Then apply the fine oil ointment until it is sufficient.
And if the abscess is malignant, of foul color and draining pus, it is necessary that you apply a fire cautery to it.
Once you have cleansed them, and if the cloth is soaked in oil with part of it sticking to the hairs inside, some embedded deep within the roots and others dangling loose, then it must be that you remove the piece embedded first; And when it comes off completely, if the remaining portion also loosens.
For when you cleanse it together, if the hairs are not securely pulled out, otherwise there will be bleeding in the region of the pubic area and darkness and decay may occur there.
If it is necessary to treat all that is black and corrupted, first place it on a plaster of honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranate fruits and dates, then apply other remedies until it heals.
If bleeding continues to occur, then apply the lunar cautery according to this method:
The cautery is useful for two purposes in combination: It is to know, in the flow of blood and infection:
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and receded, it is necessary to insert or guide a tube in the penis with honey and urine for the patient.
And when the hair is loose on the head of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised or due to injury or abscess, it is necessary then that you scrape it with a sharp instrument until the shaft is released and freed from all parts.
If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then you should scrape at the fistula with an iron spatula, not too deeply into the head of the penis and hair.
Then carefully separate them, and place a fine cloth of flax soaked in cold water between them, ensuring it is not too tightly bound.
Circumcision is not an ongoing disjunction like other wounds; However, if we do this work of our own accord, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best possible work, and the easiest to health.
I say that the ancients did not practice childhood circumcision, for it is not done in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Because I have observed most masters and healers performing circumcision in the dawning light, at times of force, and on any occasion.
If it were the heart because there are two layers, and perhaps you could suture that above and leave it below. And he regains his speech, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning which is with vinegar is not certain that the point of the limb.
and in cleaning the wound with vinegar perhaps slips out the iron, and they rot, and many times it arises this way so there is no need for cleaning and I have seen this.
From the immobilization made by force throughout the entire limb, I have found from experimentation that it is beneficial, as the forces cut equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut evenly with all fingers; but that the thread is well tightened around the leather;
and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not tie him but just bind the thread around the rod only, and then release it in all ways as much as you can.
Then place it between your hands straight away, and restore the strength of your arms or from under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any straining.
Then place your hand on the rod and blow or kiss upon it, and drag in upward until the head of the rod is aligned. Then cleanse it well from any impurities that have accumulated therein, then tie the joint with a double thread, then bind below to above.
Then cleanse it well from any impurities that have accumulated therein, then tie the joint with a double thread, then bind below to above. and fasten it with two loops through the second ligature to the pocket and its indicator, and cover between the two threads, then gently raise the head from compression and guide the rod back. then let some blood drain slowly and slowly, for it is a minor hemorrhage. And apply powder on and above the powder, a poultice made by gluing a spoonful of egg yolk cooked in hot rose water, boiled with good rosemary oil, and let it remain until the following day, curing further until healed.
The use of strengthening methods for this medication is as follows:
Both shoulders should be kept strong and sharp, and the arms equally well-developed.
The mistake in medication is when blood flows out during the incision;
Therefore, you should extend it to your thumb, so that his eye creates an abscess;
And do this evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your thumb, then use tweezamoins the tool, and afterwards the poultice;
And if they persist for three days, and that which is under the sinew becomes swollen, let it be left until the inflammation of the abscess has subsided, and lightly scrape.
And if you touch it as I instructed, but be cautious of the sinew area, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Therefore heal sudden wounds of powdery substances as we have instructed to treat with powders, and if you apply too much force when opening the skin, and it goes beyond that, it will not cause harm.
Heal accordingly, as we have said, until it is sound.
Regarding urine retention
The retention of urine is due to the compression of stones, or frozen blood, or arrows, or nettles, or similar things as we have said in that section.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that there is retention due to a stone in the urethra or bladder neck, it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees. And they are placed with their heads on the back, and the patient extends his belly from above the lower back, and he is held upright as much as possible. And then you constrict the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine is discharged.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with an instrument called "catheter", which is of this form:
And they are of finely spun silver, light as a bird's feathers; and the needle is one and a half palm in length, and it is fine at its tip.
And the method for urine issues is that you take a double thread and attach to it some wool or cotton at the tip, then insert this into the syringe with both threads.
and cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and almond meal, and have the patient sit on a stool, and apply oil soaked in olive oil and water to their bladder and penis.
Then gently insert the catheter into the penis, up to the base of the penis, then wrap the penis above towards the scrotum.
Then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it reaching the empty sac, but this is not done in this order because the direction in which it flows is twisted.
Then extend the thread through all the hairs little by little, and urine follows the thread, then pull it out again, and let the urine flow.
And begin with the catheter as long as the bladaturd is emptied, and relieve the patient's discomfort.
When scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction is present therein, and you see to distill waters and medicines, make use of the entire instrument called "clyster," which is thus formed:
It is closed, and if at any orifice: On one hand, and on the other, as you see;
And the roots from which the medicinal paste is such that it well fills the member without addition, and if one can draw out the moisture, and do so as needed.
And when you see to apply your medicines in the bladder, place the scorching stick where there is moisture, and draw out what can be drawn.
If you draw out the moisture with the burning stick, and then strongly reshape it as possible. If there is entry of moisture there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle cleansing for which we cleanse the bladder:
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher.
and from under the neck where the ligaments tear;
then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture inside that you wish to use for an enema on the bladder, then tie it between the two nipples with a strong double thread, and heat the moisture over fire.
then insert the head into the enema, and press your hand against the bladaderly moisture as soon as it reaches the bladder.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly through. Then blow a strong thread through these perforations, then form the circle as you would with a peg and hole, and fill inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and bind it in the instrument.
And do so as you did with the bladder, pressing until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Of the stone
We have already described in this section methods of stone removal and extracting arrows collectively with remedies;
And I have explained the difference between stones inward of rain and all other signs, and where stone you must work by cutting. And in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will tell it openly and briefly.
I say that stones lodged within the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign that water springs from the bladard like to a watery subtlety.
And he has bare skin, and grieves the patient greatly with his rod, and strikes him many times, then immobilizes. and it is part of these blows that shakes the foundation;
and it is lightly healing for children up to four years old, but very severe in the elderly, and moderate for those who are between youth and old age.
and it is a lighter treatment for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to expel all feces from within the intestines. For sometimes it may obstruct the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and stand them up, bending backwards so that the stone descends to the front of the bladwock, without any sign of blood coming out from the back.
Then make them sit between your hands spread apart, with their hands behind their thighs, so that the bladder slopes downwards.
Then grasp and touch within;
If you feel the stone in the space, quickly cut near the stone.
And if it does not pass with the probe at all, grease your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child or an adult. and place it at its base, then press on the stone, and when you feel it in your finger, amputate near the bladder neck.
then press with your finger, and remove the residual part where you see cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladres with his hand, and command him to extend upwards with his right hand the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the loins at the part where you make the cut.
Then apply the splinting bandage so this is its shape: And make it between those who are between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but to the left of the navel.
And it should be straight above the stone, and your hands should touch either its top or base, and extend the rope as wide as needed if broad, and dense within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
In case you press the hand that is either on top or at the base, so it moves without effort.
And know if there are any pieces of stone or edges and borders: If they are stuck in trying to remove them;
And if there is any part that resembles a slit, round, and whose removal is easy.
When you encounter joints with edges and margins, make the incision larger.
And if it does not yield, then you must use forceps similar to a file on the head, to extract the stone so that it doesn't escape. or you insert an instrument with a subtle hooked end underneath;
and if you cannot achieve it this way, slightly widen the opening, and if the stone is thickened, then extract with vinegar.
and if there are multiple stones, first extract the largest from the bladder neck, then remove it with your fingers, and afterwards crush it, and do the same for any smaller ones that remain.
And if it is very large, one must soften it, causing a larger wound. For two things occur in patients: When he dies or the urine flows again through the part where the flesh cannot join.
Nonetheless, strive to drain with a syringe or debridement using pincers until you have treated it in pieces.
And once you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandages, and place moistened cloths soaked in oil and wine, or oil and pink and cold water to cool the hot sore. Then wrap the patient's neck with bandages without untying them until the next day.
When you reset it, raise the area well with oil and water, then treat with the ointment diafiniticum and basilicon until healed.
And if the sore is present in the wound and tissue deterioration occurs, with blood clotting in the bladder causing it to be unable to pass urine as seen by a lack of stream. Therefore bend your elbow into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, then blisters and pus will form.
Then lift the wound from water and filth and wind, and treat it in all ways you know of until it is healed.
And it is necessary that for all wounds you treat, bind him with two leg wraps and apply the ointments on site.
And if the stone is small and it comes from the penis and protrudes out, and he cannot urinate. If you treat as I say hereafter, do the procedure many times, ensuring to unwind the scrotum with this treatment. I have also experienced this thus.
Take an iron bar in the following shape and make it at three sharp points like stakes:
Then take a thread around the shaft below the head so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
Then insert the probe gently into the shaft until it reaches the head. And turn the probe towards your hand in the head slowly and slowly, as you can pierce through to the other side of the stone.
The urine will come out soon, then press your hand on what remains lodged in the head within the shaft. If it is broken quickly and comes out with the urine, and the patient is relieved.
And if you cannot do it for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the head and another above, then break the shaft at the place between the two threads, extract it forcefully, loosen the ligatures, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound. And treat until it becomes healthy again.
From the stones of women (referring to uterine stones or fibroids)
Occasionally a stone may be found in women, and if it occurs once, then the treatment is serious, and there are three things to avoid.
One is that perhaps the woman might be a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a wise woman who knows how to undress in front of strangers, especially if she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a knowledgeable woman in this art of hands;
and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's body is more embedded than in men, so it requires deeper cutting, and there is much fear involved. And if necessary, one must find a very knowledgeable midwife, and carefully seek her out, and if you do not find such, then no matter how chaste she may be, she must have subtle skills;
And this presents a skilled hand in women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and he commands that she performs what you command regarding the stone examination. And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin.
And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin. Then it is necessary to apply a bandage or foundation and seek the stone.
And if it bleeds, then bind it below the bandage and instruct that they apply a new bandage or hold it with their left hand over the swollen vein, wanting to press it.
If it bleeds, then they should move it gradually from the entrance of the vein to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
then push against the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle part where it is protruding, and feel for the stone in that area. and do not move his finger over or under the stone, and be sure to grasp at the first small part.
and do not move his finger over or under the stone, and be sure to grasp at the first small part. Then insert the staff into the waist; if you feel the stone within, believe in the wound so that the stone may be removed forcefully, and know that there are many ways to deal with stones.
This is known: small and large and sharp and smooth, elongated and round, and that have veins.
If you examine similar cases to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not yield, then apply a poultice of white lead powder, and hold it there until the stone is expelled.
Then return to your work, until the stone is loose, and have the remedies I told you about for stone extraction at home to help you in your work.
And if the stone does not yield, and it is from an artery that has burst, then apply powder on the site and wrap tightly with bandages and ties, and do not repeat this method again, and let the stone pass without traction unless by chance the patient faints. Then treat the wound.
And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb restored, return to your work until the bone is strong.
Next, pus is nothing but a gathering of moisture or scabs, which are under the skin near the joints, contained in the blister.
and is called "scab," and it is never properly within the skin of the blister, if one thinks it is something else. and this is the leather-like tissue between the scabs that we have mentioned;
And this does not happen often. And the formation of this pus is due to weakness in the joints, and it spreads that material.
And at no time if it comes from striking upon the joints, and this moisture is of many kinds: or its color wanes to jaundice, or it lacks redness, or turns black, or becomes watery white, and this occurs more frequently.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is or becomes white as we have mentioned, then the abscesses reopen, they do not remain long like an egg's shape, and do not pierce the joints because there is moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own tissue, then the abscesses reopen with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg.
And if there is moisture between the skin of the elbows and the shiny saddle bone, it feels quite well.
Therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, if it spreads over all the surrounding area, that is why there are marks beforehand. According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to what is within.
And when we cauterize with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be healthy according to their ability and fullness of body.
Then you heat on his back, upon something slightly raised, and place a lot of linens under him.
Then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit to your right, and extend the rod towards one of the two ribs below the elbow joint.
Then take the spatula and cut the skin of the elbangs along their length up to the wrist, and make your incision straight while turning the skin towards the shiny saddle bone, and peel it delicately as far as possible.
Then pierce the sack full of water through its wide opening, and extract all the water, and then apply linen bandages, and elevate the sack.
and do not touch the edge of the wound, but only the sack itself; cut very finely along its edges, such that if you do not cut it neatly and cleanly, the water will return.
and if the egg springs forth from your work, then reset the limb in its place when you have completed the task with the sack.
Then sew together the two edges of the wound securely, then treat it as you would other injuries until it is healed.
And if you find the egg to be spoiled by another disease, it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are swollen, fearing bleeding.
Then cut away any excess sinew, remove the bone splinter, and treat it as we have said.
And if an artery is split into two parts together, ensure that they are two branches. Cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then stop the bleeding, and place a cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound.
Cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then stop the bleeding, and place a cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound. And apply another cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it, place cloths over the two joints, then cover with doubled sheets, and bind everything as described by this method.
Then take two more sheets and place them with shredded cloth as shown here, sewn together at the waistband, and one sheet should be pulled up to the back from the foundation, while the other is placed on the part near the wrist.
And the other two heads above the shoulders, and it is fully secured within the loop of the shirt.
And this method of cautery is akin to iron bandaging in size and type, with the use of a delicate knife-like cauterizer, covering the leather straps, ensuring they are sufficiently heated as we have described, so that the white sap which contains water is revealed.
If you take the cautery in this manner and pierce that sap with thorns, and scrape off using this hot delicate cauterizer.
And scrape it in all ways you can, until everything is scraped off;
and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
And you must believe this work to be more healing; and with caution avoiding blood loss, and ensuring the actions of cutting are done correctly.
and if anything opposes you, or an abscess appears or blood loss occurs or something else happens, then treat what is against you according to what has been previously mentioned.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this treatment due to its severity, then prepare a perforation as I have instructed you, ensuring that you are well-assured by the meanings we have mentioned that rehydration is appropriate, so make the patient sit on an elevated seat. then puncture the abscess at the part above all of the swelling, and insert the perforation through the full length of the muscle.
And let the canals be wide enough so that all water flows strongly.
Then place cotton at the wound, and bind it, allowing for the remaining water to drain out, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the gauze bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's opening, then it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument used for draining fluids as previously described.
And widen the wound and ensure that water returns, being reassembled after six months or more; when it is restored as before, then the patient will recover their strength over time.
Remember that in this branch's treatment there are various causes for fear among patients, which is why I believe it is best to leave it alone.
And I will tell you about the work and appearance of an abscess.
I say that many abscesses come in various parts of the body, especially in the joints. and this happens quite often.
It means that it is due to an excess of sourness and chills, which spreads to the joints or by impact.
and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body part. and it does not cause pain, but is a severe abscess.
and sometimes it is frightening and sharp pains, with an unusual color, never coming from our arteries or vein inflammation.
When it is due to us (the patient), it is known by the heat of the abscess when you press with your thumbs. And it does not matter if you touch it.
The one who is affected by vein inflammation can be recognized by its propensity to swelling with the touch of bones, and it may well form a lump on this appearance or others. and is that you cut the outer skin, then elevate it upward, and treat with white saffron paste, and remove all of the sinew from around the bone.
If the bone is already settled with these aforementioned methods, then it should be treated and skinned accordingly.
And if there is inflammation in the bone or within the joints, it should be done that you release all of them completely and roundly skin them.
And if the birth of a stone is there, you must completely cover it and extract the calculus as we have said.
And when your works are finished, dress the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other salves until it is well again.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a blister, with the softening of the joints, and the patient moves quickly when it goes.
And the treatment for this disease is as dreadful as before, and still we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory for joints under their knees, encompassing all the vessels that are near the thigh with a bandage, and lengthen them straight.
then cut along the sharp spatulum at the place where vessels are visible, and then scrape from each side, as we have described in the extraction of arteries that are in the temple.
Then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein appeared, then securely fasten to the other end. Then cover with a dressing straight away, according to the size of the body, and treat the corrupted sores.
Then heal the wound as with other bandages, ensuring that no ties are too tight to allow movement of either side.
Because nothing bad comes from it, and if the veins come out everywhere, then one must loosen all ties. If the bone loses its movement due to the tying of the strings and cannot be helped.
The remedies for this injury are through the incision that occurs or suppuration, or extension under the belly in the arm area, causing the intestines to protrude into one of the sides.
This treatment involves either of two approaches, due to stretching or extension of it, they come from various reasons:
either from impact, jumping, shouting, lifting heavy loads, and similar causes;
And the signs when it's from stretching of the sacroiliac joint appear gradually and persistently over long periods, and do not come suddenly; And boils are equal up to the chin because the sacroiliac joint presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of division due to a boil, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse appearances appear from near the skin and it's for the exit of the intestines and the body affected by the boil.
At no time do they tie the intestines with cords, and are kept thus; it causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron that cause fear, one must take care to remove them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to cleanse their intestines by hand in the wound if they can insert it; Then either soak his neck between your hands and lift the thighs;
Then they extend the head above, and cut all the skin of the elongated veins. Then insert into the ribs of the waist hooked ones according to what you need to open the wound, and they are such that I can be pulled out.
Then scrape off the sore that is from under the skin of the veins, as long as the white sore is completely uncovered on all sides.
Then insert your finger into what is behind the vein, between the white sore which is from under the skin of the thigh, and between the second sore, and remove that which is behind the thigh, and between the second sore.
And then move the head of the veins with your right hand and extend the white sore up to your left hand, and lift the thigh towards all the sores towards the waist. And command the minister to extend the mouth upwards, and cut out what is behind the joint.
And if there are any intestines twisted or fistulas covered with white scars, and if you find anything such, cut it from the abdomen outwards.
Then take a needle or one with thick thread made of several strands, and tie it in the back part where the fistula is, which is after the skin of the calf muscles. After the waist, then cut the veins that appear with threads, as long as there are four strands. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape and secure the fistula, which we have said is after the skin of the calf muscles, with a strong ligature made of two parts. Then encircle the heads of the children and divide them into two parts so that no creatures that nurse them can enter inside, unless an abscess occurs. And place the suture according to the first suture length of two fingers, and after these two sutures leave a swelling that is below from the edge of the joint's corner one thumb size. And afterwards according to the roundness that the egg carries;
Then cut into the part that is below the joint's skin, until it reaches the cartilage and bone, as we have said before.
Then prepare soft linen with oil, and apply to wounds, and establish the suture that we have mentioned. And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to concern for blood flow disruption. This often happens, leaving the bandage on until it dries out by itself.
And if there is a delay in healing, apply warm water and place as we have instructed, until it dries out.
Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
Of a groin hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is made like fish bones that are joined with glue, in such a way that you bind the vessels, gently tearing above lightly below.
Then wrap it around me, and treat the abscess of what is working there until the vessels dry out.
And you will heal as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Never does a fracture occur without it being mentioned as we have said, and exposing the eyes.
And none of the intestines as clots are shed, and if they do, it is little, and heals all hours.
And also if it lingers too long in this area, the wound or abscess grows until the intestines are shed.
And this happens by the extension of the abscess that is in the area, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and enlarges the eyes and exposes.
And the treatment is thus with fire, as we have previously stated;
Never is it treated by iron in this manner: And he who suffers should lie on his back between the hands, then remove the swollen bone fragment with a width according to the amount of three fingers.
And then extract the sinew that is below the skin which it follows, and then take hold of the head and place it back onto its apparent socket in the sinew.
and press at the front of the belly, then cut two holes visible in the sinew near the head of the shaft, and cut both.
then extract the head of the shaft, and do not cut the sinew or stretch the ulna or any other thing, as I have instructed you in the treatment of bowel injuries. then treat with wound care.
then treat with wound care. And when you treat the wounds, if they become infected and heal the injury, until it is healthy again.
The face is swollen, with no appearance in the wound, and the fire cautery moves easily at this spot, bringing more healing.
For softening of the hardened skin around the joints
Many times the skin of the joints is softened in some individuals because the cartilage within them becomes softened, and it appears milky.
And it is necessary when one wishes to treat it, that they lay the patient on their back and cover with a cloth moistened over the natural skin.
Then bring together the two edges into a stitch, and if you see excess on the moistened skin, first do so with three stitches or four firmly.
Then cover between the stitches, and cleanse as with other wounds, until it is dry, and let the thread come loose.
By burning method
Know that contaminations are removed in our law, and because I prefer not to discuss it, I will not mention it in this book.
and they are necessary for two ways:
the first is that the masters will answer when asked about their practice, and in their practice.
And the other one, because we often need the castration of certain animals to assist us, as with goats and sheep and deer and other beasts.
I say that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
In that which we perform by attraction, we seat the beast in warm water until its scrotum is softened and tender. then grab with your hand, until they are repositioned and you no longer feel them.
Of the cutting treatment: It is necessary to hold the best one and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the bandage, and wrap around each foot after you have properly scraped them.
and leave no sign of a dead sore and the subtle sore that is under the veins.
and this method of cutting treatment is more effective than the one done by drawing, because in the pulling technique nothing may remain with the joints, causing the best to crave dislocation.
then treat the wound until it heals.
Hermaphrodites are individuals who possess both male and female reproductive organs or traits. This condition can be referred to as true hermaphroditism when an individual has ovarian and testicular tissues, which may be separate or combined in a gonad known as an ovotestis. False hermaphroditism occurs when there is the presence of only one type of reproductive organ along with secondary characteristics of the other sex.
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among men: The one is such that between the two testes they look as if naturally of a woman's shape, and it may have hair, or occasionally urinates from there.
And the other method is for women, with swelling as much like a rod and two knots.
And the treatment of man and woman is such that you bandage all swollen joints, and treat them as other wounds.
In the second way, for men whose urine flows without control from their scrotum, there is no remedy.
Gangrene is a swollen joint on the natural part, too ugly to look at; And some women experience this as greatly as with a hand, and it is their affliction.
It is necessary that you gently bind the swelling of your hand or ankle with bandages, and lightly wrap them.
and do not tie too tightly, lest blood circulation be impeded, then the healing process of another remedy until it is healthy again.
and to another herb that is found by the mouth of mares's tail, and milfoil, and sometimes it grows tall, and it appears similar to knotgrass; thus the ancients called it "kowe disease". If it is necessary to address this issue as we have explained through practice, and treat until it is healed.
Erratic if a woman's nature is not discerned, or her pores are small. And it is caused by birth or accidentally due to illness coming upon them.
And it is caused by birth or accidentally due to illness coming upon them. Or it occurs from being struck, or by a subtle snakebite or spider bite, and is caused abruptly in the joints, or on the limbs, or above, or where it may be.
And it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly the ability to have children.
And one can recognize this if by observation of the bale.
If the swelling is presenting itself in early stages, whether it's on both sides or one side.
If it is from a subtle snakebite, and he becomes pale at two months, then act quickly, and do so thus:
Place your fingers together, and the woman be on her back with legs spread apart.
Then extend both elbows fully until he turns red from the snakebite and overcomes it through sweat.
Then take wool, and meal in oil, and apply it to the place, and let the woman massage each day so that it may not heal.
And if the soreness is hard and spiky, it must be cut with a surgical instrument resembling a leaf of myrtle.
If there are punctures from nails, suspend them on the string and cover.
and have antiseptic remedies such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, in abundance of eggs.
then apply a wide bandage so that the wound cannot heal.
and thus it shall be prolonged, and dress the wound with a tent of dry flax.
then administer other treatments until it is healed.
When a boil comes to pass on the arm, it must be covered as follows, unless there are incurable abscesses. Because of an increasing abscess on the arm, do not attempt to treat with fire.
Emotions often involve feelings of discomfort or distress related to situations affecting one's internal state and external conditions; in the case of hemorrhoids, it concerns painful swelling around the anus due to vein inflammation. Effusions are veins that overflow without usual habituation, and when effusions are old they become tumorous.
And we have observed similarities to those mentioned before, and signs, and I will now say which ones receive treatment.
I say that morbus and hardening when fully in the arm, they do not appear to touch, except by curing with iron.
Those who are at the beginning of the arm, which can be felt, these can be treated.
Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the bone with tongs, and wrap it at its roots, then apply powders of restraining medicines such as those made from hawthorn berries and dragon's blood resin and incense.
Then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
And if bleeding persists, make her sit in a concoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranate trees and hawthorn berries and elderberries along with similar things, then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and onion juice, and place an embalming cloth over her back.
And if it becomes inflamed, that is good. If not, apply heated cups to the back and avoid touching the nipples.
Then take linen, and the hair in juice of plantain or elderberry with wine vinegar, and apply to the area.
And when the abscess is healed, treat the area with ointment until it becomes healthy again;
and those called "albatyr" are red and resemble raw meat in appearance, if it needs to be covered as I have written earlier; And then treat them until they become healthy again.
Many types of abscesses come in the groin area, such as chancre and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, itching diseases, fistulas, hemorrhoids, burning abscesses, and various other maladies that I have mentioned in the section.
Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that appears on the arm, which is not just any kind of pus-filled sores.
If you wish to know the work of iron, look and see if the abscess is warm and in its beginning stages when it appears, and with heat and fever, and if it turns red as you can observe. Then do not rush to cut, but wait until the pain is eased.
And then make the patient sit on a chair, and have them bend or lie with two small pillows under them, and support their back and bring together the parts of the leg that are away from each other.
And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligament.
Then turn the ball into his right ribcage and adjust the instrument used to work inside the mouth of the femur, which is then formed.
And it is necessary that when you see this situation, use the instrument by inserting a rod to determine how deep the fracture is, so that what enters from the instrument does not go further than it should and does not harm the patient. And if the fractures are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the fracture with cloths so that the fragments do not harm.
And it is necessary to place the cone from the instrument above and cleanse the instrument.
And when the abscesses are open, and they can be touched with bare hands, it is necessary to cover the head with cloths.
And when the bowels are empty, one must put in the wound soaked bandages with rose oil or dried greenish oil.
And place the bandage firmly over the wound near the head of the bone, and wrap it down towards the bone and around the forearm with clean, damp cloths if they are badly cooked.
Then treat after two days of ointment application when it heals, until it is healthy again.
And never lift the bone or wound with a water and honey enema, then again with water or roots of lily and aristolochia cooked long. Then return to applying ointment.
And if the wound is healed on the skull, it is necessary to avoid using iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
Of childbirth First, it is necessary to know the natural childbirth posture, and the signs if you see the woman hastening the time of labor, and desires scent.
Then you must quickly move to deliver the child. Thus say that such children are following a natural pattern, and the firstborn is alongside its head, and the next in line with it.
and when you see these signs, then gently press their belly, so that the child will be born soon.
because when it begins to emerge from its head, then the next one is with it, and the child's skull is cleansed by good hygiene.
and this one that comes in a different way does not come naturally.
For it comes no time upon its feet, and the body or head, and hands come upon its belly or buttocks, and are turned by chance on its neck, and other unnatural shapes.
It is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these matters, and to avoid error and deception; I will show you all the ways one should assist them.
If a child naturally emerges from the head and the woman is in great labor, and the vitality of the child is weak, then one should have it sit on a seat or be held by women.
and warm his natural substance with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, then the bailiff should place between his fingers a small cataplasm in this form. and split the second phalanx, and wrap it with bandage until the swelling that has come up subsides.
and massage the woman's belly until the child is born, and if it does not descend, one must perform an enema on the woman using a mixture of fenugreek seed oil.
Then cause him to press and sneeze due to condition, holding his mouth and nose for an hour. Now strain the child's urine.
And if the veins appear swoln, it is necessary that you gently compress them a little and a little. and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her legs upwards. then stand the seat on the ground, and wet the woman so she does not move uprightly.
and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, cover the hands with a cloth placed here beforehand, and extract the child, then gently compress it evenly.
From around the child's feet When the child comes to its feet, you must push them upwards; And then turn it little by little until it is evenly aligned.
Then grasp the pieces and extend them a bit at a time.
If it does not reach as far as desired, then instruct to press, and make it cough up discharge if needed. If it is still stuck, may God will it so.
And if it does not extend as we have said, if the turn is little and little, until it reaches its natural shape. they can t. Slavage;
And if it does not come out as we have described, then take musk oil of high quality, and linseed oil, and melted resin, and grind everything into a fine powder. Then apply the mixture to the inside of the woman's womb and let it remain there until reaching up to her ribcage.
And when it has turned into a paste below, then take the tincture of myrrh and apply it there, leaving it for an hour. Then make it sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and hold its mouth and nose, and press the belly lightly, as the child has just been born now.
From under the child's knees. When the child comes in this form, then let the midwife apply her hands gently and sparingly. then lay it on its side with its head downwards, and hang its feet upward, and let it lie beside the bed; then bend its hands gently and slightly, and then press the hands above the belly, and remove the pillows from beneath until it is turned upside down. and if the child does not cry, take its feet and move it properly, then raise the belly upwards, and place your hands on them. And you gently move the child a little at a time; And instruct the mother to breastfeed as long as the child suckles.
From the time of the child's birth, keep a hand on it as if widening its grasp It is necessary to engineer returning the hand: If it cannot be returned, then lift the woman and go away;
If she cannot walk, make her lie down on the bed with her legs bent.
Then treat the swelling as I have described;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair and then study how to return the hand. And you move the child according to natural posture, and make her sneeze, commanding that she breastfeeds as long as the child suckles strongly.
From the dislocation of the child's head from its neck, with hands spread wide, and his face turned towards his mother's back. It is necessary for the barber to wash his hand, then turn it slightly and slightly, and rub lightly.
And when it is balanced, if you place the sticky musk and oil as we have said, then command that it moves slightly and slightly.
And once you have done this, if you place the patient on a seat, then command them to move. and let the patient sneeze. In this same manner, every other time resetting
In this same manner, every other time resetting When it comes to this in such a manner with the second treatment, cover the nail of your thumb until the moisture is dried.
and if it is hanging on its face and neck, cover the mouth, do not hold back, let the child move.
Then insert the child back inside as needed, properly positioned, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
from the release of splints. Know that many times germs appear, and never four or eight at once. And this is not a strange thing, and rarely happens. Two are strange things, and do not live, if ever named.
Two are strange things, and do not live, if ever named. I know that they multiply, and are dispersed by the scorpion who rides them, which is connected to bile.
And never do they emerge naturally like a stream underneath, as we have said.
And if they emerge suddenly, as we have described, and it is the subtle bile, and quickly and lightly does what it does. And make it as he properly moves for health. among several children
At no time are they formed in the maris I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, nor more up to XV, and they all take shape like a child by the measurement with the glorious needle, and it is fitting that the barber understands this, as sometimes similar things happen. And do according to what is appropriate.
that dont the same leue doit li its time sofaire remedy; and his skillet or craft, he not can is a word, si come the after they are craft est et artiste with your art done
When you treat a woman with either a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and there is no expulsion, and you are compelled to perform surgery by hand. And if it is necessary for you to determine whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no injury or fears death.
If it is necessary to lie supine on her back, with her head tilted forward, and legs raised.
And the minister must remove the thorn from two parts, or if it is attached to the bed, so that it may be treated by childbirth.
Then rub the mouth of the maris root with oil soaked in almond meal and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and muscadine.
Then gently place the maris root into it, and encourage them to eat what is necessary for this purpose, being careful if the child is prematurely born so that they descend upon their head.
If the oncines are placed in their ears or neck or mouth or behind the palate or under the beard or near the jaw or beside the ribs, and if the descent is above the feet, then they stick out or twist and ache in the middle of the sides.
And it is necessary to tie the sling with his right hand, and place the pillow between his left thumbs, and he should gently push with his whole light hand, and insert the sling into any of those places we have mentioned, until it fills.
Then insert against the other sling, or wherever you have need to extract it, so that the extractions are equal.
And then extend equally by moving from one side to the other in order for them to come out, and let the slings be separated so they can hold their shape as described.
And if it remains a part of them, and he grabs any of his thumbs with oil, then put the rest in that part, and pull on the other part.
If there are none remaining, place this incision or higher up, and do so until it slips out freely.
And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back due to gripping, it is necessary that you wrap above the shoulder strap until it slips off completely. Then the bandage on the joint of the foot or calf and so you must do the same with the other hand and both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it gets stuck during delivery, or has a swolamoist head, you must insert the pointed instrument between your two fingers, and push the forehead and extract the water. Now you take it to the instrument called "almizate," from which shape is formed with the strum or paste that follows this.
And in the same manner, make such for the child naturally of great character.
and then treat the bones with pincers, and if the head is thrown out and held by forceps, split them until the moisture that has come forth is cleared.
and if it cannot be removed, chop as you can move with your knife.
and if swollen in the belly or under the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce until the moisture flows.
Oudiez andre t (don; they same-Miel: Caufft the fact; endre.this c[at; If you not s. The oughts.
And if swoln in the belly or udder, it is necessary that you extract with a drainage bag wrapped around the hand. And make them vomit or urinate, as long as the moisture inside is correct.
And if other members are aching and the head is prolonged, then support their hand firmly at the base of the skull, and treat it up to the mouth of the foramen. Then apply ice or poultices, and continue treatment.
And if the skull foramen is closed due to a hot abscess, do not agitate it further, but instead administer moist and fatty substances. and apply emplastrums, cut into fresh, softening, and moistening solutions.
And if the child is on its back, put it upright, and treat as we have described for a living child.
And if one cannot hold it together, then let them cut it into sections, leaving nothing of the secondary parts.
And when you have done this, treat as we said for abscesses that appear on the bone;
and if there is bleeding from inflammation, it should be treated with an appropriate restraint, and other remedies applied.
And I saw a woman with the child in her womb dead, then buried one, and resurrected the other. After long time an abscess came in his mouth, swelled so much that it burst, and began causing great pain.
the scaron; he lis, etc. If they gue tret; teli lesse t (c: icheys Droit line.
I place on strong attraction, and from it comes an bone, and after some days another. I am greatly troubled, for there is no bone in his belly.
I thought that they were bones from a deceased child.
I will show you the wound, and when treating bone fractures, aim to improve as much as possible. and let it heal for a long time this way, so that slightly begins to return to the original place.
and I remember this chapter is for when your master encounters an unusual thing that he should know how to handle it with care.
After this comes the method of compression, to which one applies the books;
And at two turning points are the heads of the two ligaments. Nevertheless, the horns should be more delicate for restriction, and made of ivory or boxwood;
And let the mouth of the rod be one hand's width wide, and the edge of the trees half a hand, and long one palm and a half; And amid the two ligaments there should be two adjustments of this same rod, which are firm in both, half a palm long or slightly more;
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the malleus to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, is made of ivory or boxwood rod, according to the resemblance of pincers; And it is two shoulders dislocations, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide.
And when you see the mallet opening up entirely with the instrument, make the woman sit on a chair with her feet and legs outstretched, then place both dislocations together in the joint, holding the head of the instrument between her thighs. Then work your hand with the instrument as you have done with the pincers evenly, according to the quantity that opens the mouth of the joint until the bailiff performs what they want.
This instrument is all overhead, and there are multiple similar ones. And when the bailiff has equipped them, then the work becomes much faster, and higher in price for their quantity.
If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared it, for its necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to hold her alaunates back, and then make her sneeze with certain conditions, and restrain her hands at the mouth and nose. And if she leaps because of this, it is well.
If not, take a pot, and make an opening or lid, and put in herbs that could open the mouth of the mare (referring to childbirth), such as chamomile, rue, anise, calament, saxifrage, and centaury. All these herbs, or any of them, should be boiled in water over the fire.
Then put a gauze or lid on top of the pot, and hold it against the mouth of the mare (referring to childnertaking), until the vapors come into the mare.
Then you make them sneeze, as we have said. If one strains the second rib jointly.
And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, command the nurse to moisten his left hand with oil of sweet almonds or with high-quality musk, then apply it there, and if necessary, do a second treatment. And when you find it, gently pull and stretch it gradually so that the bone does not break during extraction.
But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, then rubbed. And it will come and relax.
And if the mouth of the bone is too long, as we have said the treatment is to induce sneezing and fumigation with herbs.
If it is not of all this which we have said, ensure you do not mistake with regard to treatment.
However, it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the hernia, to tie it to the thigh of the woman, then to clysterize with medicated ointment using four-part medicine. if you manage to reduce and reset it, it will come back strong.
but always, when it recurs, should it bring a foul smell to the stomach and head, and weaken the patient. If necessary then, fumigations with frankincense for this:
None of the old have tested fumigation using parsley and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman to retain the flowering and secondary hairs is as follows:
And it seems like an inflammation, placing the head subtly in its natural state, with wide eyes near fire;
And so there are fumigations over the embers, and for lichen until it is consumed, then start again with another.
Children are born who do not have the solid foundation perceived; instead, they possess subtle veins. Therefore it is necessary for the physician to pierce those subtle veins at their right place, and not with a large needle, and be careful that they do not touch.
Then apply the cloth in wine and oil, then perform the salve treatment until it is healed.
If you suspect that it pops out again, then place or tie a bandage of cloth around it, and let it remain for several days until the child wishes to move in bed.
And never does this vein puncture occur from a wound or abscess. If it is necessary to perform that vein puncture: If you treat them thus, as we have said of the bandage wrap.
Hemorrhoids that arise from the base are inflamed, and those growing near the base deteriorate within two parts, whether in one or several hemorrhoids.
And when such inflammation is old, work on it, and if moisture causes white or subtle pus, then these hemorrhoids are never cured.
And they are known by what comes out or emission and flatulence when the patient expels, and sometimes with an odor.
And if there are hemorrhoids near the bladder, and up to half of the penis. And they reach up to the hip joint, and down to the outer part of the knee.
Thus one finds a persistent fistula at the base (foundation), but not leaking. And you should insert your index finger or base (foundation), and insert a slender needle of silk or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, you should insert a slender tent (probe), or horse hair, as long as you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no pus discharge or foulness or stench, as we have said. say that it does not perforate (perforate). If you quickly cut there.
eisnt ce quater les que sont s;
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the veins come near to that place. If there is no curvature and the pain persists within it, then he must remain bound, and neither medicine nor frequent ointments help.
And for these persistent fistulas there is no effective cure except through hard work, and the futile efforts of foolish men who intervene.
In that which is not persistent and is not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron as I have tried, and it is where the sick man lies between your hands on his back.
and you lift his legs up to his hips and incline his hips towards his belly. Then apply a tent of pitch or wax if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent lies.
If the patient feels numb at the base, it is necessary to apply a tent with your index finger if you sense that the tent has penetrated.
and if you feel exposed or any lice or worm between your finger, then know it is present. but do not attempt if it cannot be healed.
It happens in all cases that one can well heal some, but this occurs rarely.
and there is aid in what you do, which is to apply the subtle fire of cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned. And it boils all hot within the abscess, until it reaches near the base. and do this two or three times, until you know that these forked stones have settled, which appear like the quill of a bird.
and then treat the lined tent with butter until those stones have moved outwardly, then apply a salve that joins and solidifies them.
If it is thus healed, that's well.
If this is not possible otherwise.
If it attempts to pass through, and does not penetrate quite to the root which is at its foundation, and between your two fingers and tent an envelope of thick pitch or silk, and you see the abscess on whoever applies the envelope with heat. If you begin to close the abscess and push it back before tenting, and then apply cautery afterward until it reaches the top of the tent. And the tent will be released, and healed.
Then correct those deformed characters that resemble a bird's feather, and none shall remain.
And if the wound does not heal quickly, cut between you and the work, either fire-cauterized or medicated with a salve.
For fire cautery brings together two things: That is to say, the drying of these dislocated characters, and the binding of blood and removal of moisture.
Then treat the tent-like hernias either by burning or cutting them up, as long as the wound continues to flow pus, and insert a plug in the opening.
Then treat the wound with sudden boils by burning it down, and they become dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes to the very bottom of the foundation, and is distant from the body, you may strike either the knee or ankle joints with it.
If you feel the hernia and there is cloth or fat or charred tissue within it, or if it's ready to be pierced, then rely only on faith and hope through one of these three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or cut to the bone, or if possible, remove hernias and treat them as previously instructed.
and do not go too deep, for you must not cut the structure that holds the base, as expulsions may come by their own will. Then treat as we have said;
Then treat as we have said; In case it is uncovered or you remove the covering and cleanse after being close to the foundation, using a probe or another instrument sharpened. Then repair that damaged tissue which is in the wound, as you know how; Then examine to restore the wound and keep the fistula at the part further down from the foundation;
Then examine to restore the wound and keep the fistula at the part further down from the foundation; If it were an easier thing for the patient.
And no times are fistulas according to this manner; And when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is or close to the foundation of the skin above, then take a pierced probe according to this form; And insert a twisted thread into two, and sew the tent with all the threads until it reaches the top.
If it is pricked at the edge of the socket within, then extract that thread from the pierced one and insert your finger or socket.
and straighten the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, holding them in place, and leave it for one or two days.
and support it securely until the threads bind to each other, and heal completely.
then treat the wound until it is united and healed.
If the abscess does not burst, try to drain it in every way you can, unless it is too deep. For it is not necessary to make a large incision if possible, but then the healing begins as we have said, until it is sound.
The shape of the needle-like spatula used to make a fistula is very sharp and pointed, one side being blunt. and on the other side not, because it does not cut as it should be cut when you see this way:
In some cases, there are two ways: In some cases, they are ingrained in the foundation, like resin grains, and there may be small or large ones, and from which blood comes forth again, and there may be one or several, rendering the foundation weak and the top of the foundation.
but those that are worn have little moisture, and from which a bit of yellow water or blood comes forth, and they have the color of the body.
and the treatment for those that are ingrained in the foundation is to instruct the patient to urinate frequently until the foundation weakens and cracks appear. if you act hastily, or use pincers holding it by its nail, then cut out to its roots.
If they cannot hold them with their hooks due to moisture, then take them by thread or cotton, or from a strip of camlet. And extract it with both hands, then bind it, and cover it with hot powders that are in place of cautery. Or you may cauterize as it is said or according to the fire cautery instructions, and heal other ailments until they are healthy again.
And if the foundation cannot exit, then administer a pungent and bitter enema to wash out what is at or near the base, so that it may exit openly. When they reach the patient, and if there are strong threads near the foundation, then it is a light cure.
When they reach the patient, and if there are strong threads near the foundation, then it is a light cure. And it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pliers, and clip off the dead parts, then treat the wound as we have said, until they are healed, and so that they fear iron incisions. If it is necessary to repair a tear according to this manner:
If it is necessary to repair a tear according to this manner: Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread through from above, pierce the needle's other end, turn both ends of the doubled thread away from the needle, making them evenly thick.
And straighten the thread neatly, then knot it, remove the needle, do so with all others, and leave a bit of excess for stopping the flow of blood.
Then place a foundation cloth soaked with rose oil or wax on the base, and apply it to the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then let it remain until they fall off, and when they are shed, treat with ointment or other remedies, until they heal properly.
Also the seat of fibrous tissue or foundation Often it happens sharply within the intestines, and by natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help. If it is necessary to reset the tip of a stylus or nail and its surface above, do not allow it to become wet. Then treat until it heals properly as needed.
And if it cannot be made whole again, resume the removal more strongly than before until it is fully healed and scraped clean. Then treat until it is healed thoroughly.
By a sudden blow A mouse is a small creature appearing on the body, moving much.
and it never brings coldness to the joints, feeling similar to death from fear, affecting all over the body, especially in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is to take a feather from a goose pen or a strong vulture wing and place it on the shaking, until the purple circle completely envelops the trembling. then turn your hand around the feather until you cover all the shaking, moving it freely, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
And if you see it, make a splint from either wax or iron as shown here, and be subtle below and transparent above. do not feel, to hold with both hands, and press together.
And if you see it, then cauterize the trembling, as it is in front or by fire cautery method.
Never is one made a silver or lead clister, or of melted brass or pewter.
And never are such small and large suppositories made, according to the one for whom they are prepared. Thus in the care of children who are weak and painful, they are small [suppositories].
Thus in the care of children who are weak and painful, they are small [suppositories]. The form of enema small or large is as follows: the belly being tied in this manner.
and there is a distension or the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced inside;
and to one side it has a hole, and on the other it does.
and the belly or his arm has medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around small holes, and between each hole there should be space, then put in these holes a strong thread of twisted linen, X times on both sides, and gather the belly as if it were a goat. When the medication is inserted, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema.
and here is the shape of the circle:
And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and apply the substance of the enema with oil or goat's butter or similar substance, then administer it gently. then the minister inserts it with both hands together until full, then withdraws the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to the bedside, allowing the medication to exit as much as possible. and if he sleeps through the entire night, it provides greater relief.
And if you administer an enema in the case of intestinal issues, and the patient's health improves, as long as it remains so.
And if the hemorrhoids are at their foundation or abscessed, make the enema as subtle as for a child.
And this is the form of a subtle suppository through which the body is restrained.
We have said in that section on wound care;
Or we shall speak of hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the locations or the ways in which they are made, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made include the thrust of a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or of a lance, club, arrow, or similar items.
Or those that are made depending on the wounds of the body, as a gash upon the neck, or head, or thighs, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, because memory will come to mind in its chapter.
When a simple wound occurs or the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's from a stone fall or similar things, and the skin is always torn and the wound is large, so you suspect hot abscess. If a coldness quickly appears on the head if there is little blood from the wound, and it is opposite to the affected part.
And remove the patient's excess fluids with wine and large meats.
And if it does not cool down, reduce his meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat fatty foods.
And apply soothing herbs to the wound if abscess occurs there, use a soft-cotton oil or astringent wine.
If there is no abscess present, place it on the fresh wound where all its blood remains, and it has not moved from air or powder, which I will say something more about shortly.
If the wound has moved due to motion, apply some ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar to it, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, join them with sutures as I will describe for abdominal wounds in stitching.
If the wound exposes bone, and persists, clings only slightly with flesh, you must cover it. Then treat the wound with medicine and restore its firmness by applying tanned leather, instructing the patient to eat hearty meats as you have tested wheat and cooked barley, likewise fish and similar things.
And if you find or feel softening of the flesh, not reaching to the bone, cover it completely with fat and then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without bark, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, you may tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread. And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, there is a light treatment: And you should apply this powder which sticks as the arrow moves it.
The manner of using the powder is as follows: Take incense one part; Blood of a dragon, two parts; Wax alive three parts, and the powder delicately sprinkled, apply to the wound, and gently bind it, until it dries well and rejoins all its blood.
And then securely bandage it, allowing for some loosening unless it swells; Because the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And this should not be done by fire alone unless you have the incense or blood of a dragon; but that the art must heal the wound.
And if the wound has moved or shifted in its place, particularly during sleep, do not reapply this powder.
But apply some digested ointments or ground barley flour made of water and honey, until it heals. Then use other remedies until it is fully healed.
And if there is a small bone fracture with the wound, extract it using fine tweezers;
and I will tell you about this regarding head fractures afterwards.
From a wound of the neck
If the wound comes from the neck and is simple, without a difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery are severed in the neck.
If it's the veins, there is no other option but to let them clot, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the veins and causes them to recede. and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the nature of the veins is cold, and their continuation lies with the brain, which are the highest members.
but use the medicine applied with warm water softened by salt, and mixed with rose oil, and boil it in water softened similarly, and other remed cupping according to this manner, and moist salves.
And if the wound is large, then stitch it and bind with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
If wounds are deep and swollen with pus, puncture or drain below them.
If the arrow is embedded and blood flows inwardly, open it, extract it, and if necessary, cauterize.
If the spine of the throat is embedded or the kidney, and urination is obstructed, causing tissue to protrude, if possible cut near the base of the throat, but do not touch the throat itself, replace it according to its natural shape. And then bind securely, leave untouched for some time, and treat with washed ointments until it heals.
If the wound is pressing on bone, you must address it. And if there are bone fragments, pull out all you can, and those that you cannot retrieve, leave them so the wound may heal over, and then cleanse and align the edges.
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have instructed. If there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have described in its chapter.
If it's a puncture from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if there are signs of venom which may afflict the patient: Recognize then that the wound is fatal:
And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder at once, nor use it to stop bleeding from within, as this could harm the patient: But apply an attracting balm, and bind it for two days.
And if you do not have a balm, place woolen cotton in the old wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep with the injury exposed for three days or more. If this does not cause muscle spasm or severe body shaking; And when you see the bone properly aligned, know that the wound is healed. Treat with tent and other remedies until it is healthy again;
And if it cannot heal or function properly, then understand that there is an abscess.
If the treatment is as described. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, whether it's on top or bottom, treat as described for such injuries. If it is large, with stitches;
If it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and there are broken pieces, then you must address the wound and pull out any splinters if needed. And if they are not embedded, let the wound heal naturally, and lighten the extractions;
And for other wounds on other limbs, apply our judgement as we have said.
And rupture of the abdomen
The protrusions of the abdomen are large and medium and small;
From a large wound, never does it occur that the intestines or their nerves are affected, resulting in contamination from outside;
And the stitching is easier to manage, and never is the small wound worse than the large one because it allows for more frequent handling of the intestines when not reset piece by piece;
Because the intestines swell so soon when they feel cold, thus become more painful, and therefore move the wound inward, since it is necessary to reset the intestines to their place among the others.
And know that there are four ways of treating abdominal issues.
The two common sutures occur in the stomach's incision, and the sutures for other body wounds and two other specific types are common to other injuries.
Also, they are more suitable with the stomach's sutures, and I will describe each one and declare them.
I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes, this is by one of the four ways mentioned. Or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swoln by cold.
And when it is cooled, warm it in a certain manner: Dabble an apron or cloth in hot water only, and boil it with salt and pepper, and heat the intestines until inflammation is gone.
And never do this that constricts blood flow, and ensure it is loosened to deflate.
And when you see inflammation subsiding, moisten the intestines with water or wine, but cook them sparingly as their passage is facilitated by little food.
If it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used to treat bunions.
And the first remedy is to move it that no one should cut without great necessity or need.
And this is for splitting:
If a split occurs in the arch and does not heal properly, then apply this method: When the wound is large and the intestines protrude, if you can reset it to its natural place in its proper location, because movement aids healing.
When the wound is wide and located below the belly, it is appropriate to place the patient on their back with legs raised higher than their head. And if it is located below the belly but above the legs, raise the head and groin higher than the lower parts. If the wound in the abdominal area is on one side, balance them so that the affected part is higher than the other.
Thus, one must treat as I have instructed on large wounds and small ones.
For small wounds do this as you have learned, then take the pus in your hand and place it between your fingers to mix thoroughly, and bring together the edges.
And this is the common way for sutures, and you should take a needle or several according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave space at the top edge of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread. And pierce the two sides with the two sides of sinew, which is underne.the skin close to the deep layer until you have separated that part, and bring together the top edges of both sinews as one.
Then strain a double thread around the arrowhead on both sides, then immediately reassemble the two heads of the wound, and leave some space, and insert another arrow.
Then tie the thread again as you did with the first arrow, and continue doing so according to how many more arrows are needed until all wounds are secured.
and let the arrows be medium-sized, between fine and large, because fine arrows can securely hold together, and overly large ones may not enter properly. therefore it is necessary that they are medium-sized.
and do not place the arrows too far from the wound or the skin, so they can properly secure and function at the site of stitching.
Then wrap the head of the arrows so they do not bend and cause pain to the patient while sleeping, and place pads or cloths on the arrowheads for movement, allowing them to remain until the wound is healed.
And this manner of suturing arrows is more convenient in small wounds, for there may be a single arrow or two used.
The second method of suturing is common and involves joining the two heads of the bone with one arrowhead at a time, using an iron wire.
And once you have pierced all four heads together, reset the arrow at the part where you began, similar to how one fastens cloths.
And place space between each stitch, the size of a small finger.
These stitches close the wound, and I sewed a wound that a man had on his belly, which was troubled by a knife, and the wound was wider than one palm wide, and it involved intestines more than two palms wide, and the wound was in the abdomen.
I brought back the intestines as it had been XXIV hours since, and healed the wound until day fifteen, and treated him, and he was well again.
And the physician judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
and did not treat him with ointment because I was in the place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine. and applied clean cloth over it twice a day, and washed the wound with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you two proper ways of dressing:
Take the needle and thread up to that part inside.
When it has pierced the core straight on, then insert the needle head or thread through where you have passed the needle, and make another cut inside to that far-off part.
And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier does with furs, and leave once the skin from one side, and then return to the other, until the dressing is completely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galien properly calls it, is as any join together naturally, and apply one head of the skin to the other head, in such a manner:
Insert a needle or pin near the next vein, and make an incision at that location only, leaving the two heads of the suture. Then turn the needle, and pierce it through to that depth with both ends of the suture.
Then pierce each one through to that depth with two other veins near it.
And this is the proper manner of suturing, and the most common method.
Galen said this word, but no one can attest to it, that you must sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each.
And one needle should be inserted from one side and the other from the opposite, as those who sew belts.
And say that when the rupture is within the belly, then the suture is more difficult than with other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
and it is such that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, as also the arrow has moved it, reset the intestines and the spleen.
then apply powdered antidote with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any salve that is available, until the wound heals. and cleanse the thread, secure the knot, and the needle. Then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healthy again.
And if you have no medicine, apply it directly, as soon as it begins to swell slightly, using wool or old cloth and move it twice a day until it is healthy again.
For in most cases you do not need any other medicines for simple wounds;
and if you suspect that the wound is infecting the main limbs, it is necessary to grind linen with heated oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints and under the elbps.
and if it causes pain or swelling in large amounts, and often occurs, then apply black wine enemas, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines.
And it penetrates within, instructing that when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are in distress due to the size of the veins and their presence throughout the entire body, as well as the subtlety of all the organs and the proximity of its connection with the nerves.
And if the spleen protrudes from the wound, reset it as before like the intestines while fresh.
and if it is old and has become black or blue, you must remove the dead tissue where bleeding vessels may arise.
then cut out what is between the ligaments and place two fingers hanging from below the wound edge to facilitate arrow extraction, and the wound bowing.
From the treatment of the eyelid
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases because I have seen a man wounded by a lances' belly.
And it was the wound on the right side of the abdomen, and became infected and turned into a fistula, and from which there were excretions and flatulence.
I provided treatment according to what seemed best, and did not stop probing until it was healed, resulting in suppuration of the pus.
And when I saw that it had stopped seeping, I doubted whether the patient did not have a problem in his stomach; and there was no illness present, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
and several experienced physicians stated that when there is a small wound within the intestines, it must be tied in a certain way: take fine thread and gather the edges of the wound, then when it opens up like a mouth, place it between the two lips and stretch its mouth out.
And then wrap the head, and hold it so that it cannot dislocate again, then apply another force afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed. and cover the wound.
If the head enters the intestines and causes no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestines with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a manner:
Take the head of this intestinal thread that is mostly cleaned and then tie it with a fine flax thread twisted, sew the intestine with the needle, and stitch up the wound.
And this method of suturing is only effective if done in accordance with trust and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, only subtlety required.
Regarding a fistula, or wherever it may be Every wound or abscess, when it becomes ulcerated, is universally called "fistula", especially when it grows and becomes bowed back.
And a fistula is the result of improper tissue hardening and bruising, where there is no pain felt, and it appears as swollen as the feather of a bird.
and at times clear like glass, and other times thickened; At no time too much, and at other times enough;
And I have spoken in the section on wounds, that any untreated wound is not closed, for it is through only one of the nine causes. It means, by the smallness of blood or body parts; Or due to its evil nature; Or because there is internal hardness and above the lips, where no blood should flow. Or because there is too much flesh; Or the wound heals poorly, and the material is of bad quality; Or the medicine used for treatment is not good. Or because it is a form of plague infection. Or due to the property of the area being slow at digestion and health restoration, fleeing by nature. When there are veins or bones.
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and treatments with herbs in the section.
Now it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula made by handiwork.
Seams that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; Because there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, nerves, or the liver, intestines, bladder, some ribs, the spinal column of the back, or any joint in hands or feet. and if there is one that comes to the principal part of the limb and others.
And all such fistulas are difficult to heal, with only hard work and ignorance being involved.
And if there is any fistula that does not reach to the place I have said, and you trust in its healing, and observe it becoming known, then take a tent of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight, use it.
And if the fistula is twisted, search for a delicate tent of linen, because the linens bend easily around the twisting.
And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, clysterize it through one of the openings, because moisture quickly moves from one opening to another, and cleanses it.
Then choose it carefully with your strength so that you know if there are bones or nerves present and they are inflamed at the front, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand and where it is located.
And when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the cases I have told you, then follow the procedure as I have instructed, and remove the other part and the corrupted bones within;
and then treat it until it is cleaned, and if the fistula is well placed in the right location, if you should cut into it fully as you can see, then afterward apply bandages soaked in medicinal water, and let them reach up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then apply compresses with medicinal salve, until it is healed;
If it cannot be reduced by this method, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, treat with a poultice.
If neither veins nor principal limbs are afflicted as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, reign it until the entire corruption of bone is healed, then treat with various remedies until it is clean.
If it remains unclean, reopen as before, be sure not to go past the extent of:
And open and scrape until you reach the bottom, then remove all corruption, and return it to its place.
And if he is thus whole, that is well. If not, know that the putrefaction is too advanced, you cannot go near it; if there is no other remedy than the poultice of nature.
and if there is a small piece of corrupted bone that you can extract with tongs, use the appropriate instrument for this, and if there are many bones, extract all of them without leaving any.
and if the moisture causes difficulty, with no mistake or fear, cover it, dry it, and remove the bones.
And if you cannot remove them at once, apply something to the wound that prevents putrefaction, and let it be in place until the flesh grows around the bones, and then they will more easily extract the bones.
If it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, return so much that the darkening has become all bone, then restore the wound.
If there is significant portion of it rotten, and it reaches near to molten bone; if the matter must be scraped away and covered up to the rotting, then heal it until it is sealed.
And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in the man's leg; take it as an example and guidance for your work.
He was a young boy of under thirty years, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body until materials reached the leg, and it developed into a large abscess, and there was no reason to open.
But the surgeons, due to their folly, worked so much on the abscess that it burst, and consumed a great deal of materials, becoming an ulcer, and brought about many discharges causing wetness throughout the body.
and many surgeons attempted to heal it for two years, without any skilled hand in the art of surgery, until I was called upon, and saw the leg and the remedies used on him, and what flowed through discharges into his body. and it became red on the youth's body, with a citrine hue.
I built a tent on one of these points, and then searched all the points, finding that each comes in opposition from all parts of the leg.
So I proceeded, and examined one of the discharges until I discovered a part of the bone, which found it corroded and pierced, with infection reaching up to the inner bone.
I knew those that appeared from the rotten bone, and thought there was no other decay except for what I removed.
And began to heal the wound with strong medicines over long periods, but could not close it up.
Then I resumed my efforts and found the bone as before, discovered continuous decay in the bone, treated it again, removed more of it, and struggled to close up the wound. But I could not completely remove even an inch of bone, and it betrayed me entirely in its depths, so I then reattempted with medicines. And it became safe and closed quickly, and I did not resume the treatment except due to the frailty of the patient who could not endure more, and out of fear for his impending death that I had for him. For often the evacuation of blood was bloody, but he recovered completely, and in place of the bone there arose a hard cartilage, which was well-shaped and had no harm or drawback at all, neither on arrival nor departure.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must thus be treated as follows: Take hold of the ligament, and stretch to the top of the broken bone shaft, and command that it be extended upwards. And place another thicker ligament than the first, and tie it to the skin above the bone, then extend the shaft. As you pull the damaged cartilage away from below, expose the cartilage at the level where you aim to heal, so that it does not move with the tissue.
And place a needle or a small tablet below the bone to help move the damaged cartilage.
And you must treat until as much as can be seen and felt is healed, continuing treatment further if needed.
If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a joint or part, then expose the entire fracture.
Then place a heating pad on it and then move it from one part of the corruption to another, and let the stronger side be longer than the other end of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in a joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and move the bone or its contents to another part.
If the corruption continues through two joints, there is no other remedy but double cutting.
If the corruption is at a finger or toe joint, it may be quite severe, but you must inquire about that corruption and how it opens. And clean it in all ways you can, but let neither vein nor nerve oppose you.
And choose the incisions and sutures for healing these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, as well as their thickness and fineness, their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore one must equip each type of procedure with its instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument of which you need, according to your knowledge of this art, and its guidance on the ways of diseases. If you consider the instrument you need, choose it according to what is fitting for it.
The head may dislocate or due to internal causes, or external factors.
And when you have administered the medicine for combating corrosion through medicinal treatment, and it proves ineffective, then cover that limb up to its original place where the corrosion occurs. So the patient may escape either by death or a worse fate due to the failure of the limb.
And the signs are that the limb becomes black and appears as though it were scorched by fire. Afterwards, from this darkness follows the limb's corroding in one member to another throughout the body.
If you quickly dress the wound, and if it is from a sting of venomous creatures such as scorpions, snakes, etc., and if the corrosion reaches the head of the elbow, then wrap it and do not give any space for it to reach up to the hand.
And if it reaches up to the hand, then wrap the joint as well so that the corrosion does not reach the arm.
And if it reaches the arm, then bind above the knee;
And if it passes below the knee, that's fatal, and no remedies can be effective other than in accordance with the extent of its power.
Do this as such whenever the corrosion appears or erupts: If it occurs at the first joint, then proceed to the following joint.
And if it comes near or on the arm, reset the entire arm. If it occurs in the leg, then set at the knee joint.
And if it comes over the groin, there is no other remedy but to behead the patient.
And so with the bandage or silk member is such that you bind it above and below, extending some menstrual cloths one side of the ties downward, and others on the opposite side upward, and unravel the cloth which is between the two ties by a width of one span.
Then the bandage or silk and place on each side a strip of linen, ensuring that the fabric does not touch the healthy flesh, lest it cause further injury and abscesses to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while working, promptly causticate the wound or apply some binding powders.
Then return to your treatment as long as it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it becomes healthy again.
And I will tell you what happened at a certain place in times past:
It happened one night that it seemed like the glow of fire, and this corrosion began first in his right foot, so much so that it affected the entire foot.
And when the man saw the corrosangly, he immediately covered the foot with a cloak and healed it.
And after long time, the corrosion of his hand returned, and it came to me, and I applied counteractive measures following bodily purification, but could not stop the corrosions.
And I wish to bind his hand, and do not want to, hoping to redirect the matter. and also doubted that if I were to cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the body was weak.
and he became disheartened, returned home, bandaged up his hand, and recovered.
and I have not told you this for any other reason than that which is done in similar cases when needed.
At no time does an abscess form on the nut of the penis, and it remains for so long that it causes a large swelling. and then they rise and break through, causing a protrusion of the nut, and the testicles remain downward, as with small animals. And the skin above is as fine and delicate as cut silks, not reaching to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "healed" and are not called "abscesses.
However, if it is so swollen that it reaches to the bone and splits open, it is called an "abscess.
And if the skin is so raw that you must remove all of it, especially when it is as subtle as silk threads. and not because of its decay.
And if you suspect that the skin is hardening, and the decay is not at its core, and the skin is dry like leather, then treat with an enema in this way:
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bow that is there has a foul-smelling odor; then you should apply an Egyptian medicinal enema prepared in this way: Take ease, and oil, and litargoine, in equal amounts, and put to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red, becoming as thick as honey.
and then take according to your need, preparing it in water and honey, and applying the cleanser to the breasts, tightening the nipples. and leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it by squeezing.
Do this number of times until the breasts are reshaped, and they are purged of impurities.
Et never is it irrigated with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you must take ashes from the wood of vine, pour water over them, then boil it, and for irrigation, until you know that the body is well cleansed.
And if the patient cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicines or ashes of water can be used, then irrigate with a mixture of water and honey to which a small amount of litharge has been added. Or you shall irrigate with honey and mead watered wine in which the honey has properties to cleanse and purify, and the wine will make healthy.
And when you have done this, and are certain that the body is well cleansed, then irrigate with what brings cheer to it, taking aloes vera purgative, and prepare it with rose oil and wine.
When you administer an enema with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned the properties and treatment of ointments.
And if the pertussis of the chest is small, and that which fills the enema cannot enter, slightly widen it with a rod, and place a tent of Egyptian or Basilisk oil so that it may be widened.
And if the wound is too wide, let the skin and leave it so thin that the enema may enter, and if the pertussis drip of fluid is above, then cover or place lower than where it is.
If you cannot pull the skin back as you see fit, arrange it so that the bow is directed to the lowest point where it is, for when the bow is taut, there will be no room for flesh and if you cannot pull the skin back as you see fit, set up in this manner: that the bow slants slightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bow.
that the bow slants slightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bow. and take consolidating medicines to place on the wound, and spread a cloth of flax over the entire wound. then cover the torn skin at the edge of the wound as wide as possible, and apply ointment on another cloth according to the size of the tear, and place it over the wound to alleviate the tension, and do not remove the large cloth for several days.
And the one on top of the breastbone often wishes to remove or extract an arrowhead and discern what flows from it, whether it is poisonous or a small amount, or sufficient, or digested, or undigested.
And take heed if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and how much the medicine has spread throughout the body, thus you recognize that the breastbone area will soon be affected too, and approach treatment accordingly.
And then dress the wound in the morning or on the second day, and when you cleanse the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
And if subtle corns come after long periods of time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
For there are people who experience delayed healing in their wounds due to consuming meat, and those who do the opposite;
And if bowel indigestion causes swelling of the chest after many days, know that the breasts do not become hard.
And if the breasts become hard and swollen, apply poultices of warm dry medicines in substance and dry in virtue, as with an ointment that ends diaphoresis, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and this is the final medicine.
Take an ointment that ends diaphoresis, and make it with rose oil, and add equal amounts of old wine in substance;
Then mix and apply.
And the same is more effective when cooked and swoln, if ointments that end diaphoresis are not present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, crush them, and powder with honey over a fire.
And then in glue the bandage, and extend it over the breast, and never apply any ointment or balm, and roots of holy plants, which are similar to ground pepper and flour. and with simple remedies or compounds: and grind them into powder, and mix it with the honey as mentioned, and apply.
and if the wound is extensive, and not healed by this treatment, then understand that infection has set in deeply, causing pressure on the bone or hard members, or ligaments. if it's a fistula wound healing as we have said before.
A panaritium is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the thumb or toe, or sometimes appears in other fingers.
When it is neglected and not cared for, if an abscess comes, it will burn, boil, and flow with pus until the root of the nail is reached, and by chance may consume it entirely.
And comes to the decay reaching the bone, causing a stench and pain, with shoulders wide apart, and discoloration is evident.
When you treat it as we have explained in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, then you must cut out all the excess tissue associated with the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound. Cauterization provides great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
And if the nail is consumed by worms and begins to point, and decay occurs, then you should cut off the root of the nail where the worm burrows, pour it upwards, and gently but thoroughly scrape away the substance, then apply medicines with burning and corrosive properties on the remaining area; Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
And if there is decay in the bone, when cured and treated with force, because as long as the bone decays it is, it cannot heal.
and if you see the joint decaying, treat with force as previously mentioned, then treat until it is healed.
and if it is painful and swollen, and causing great pain, first you must anesthetize it.
then cut the thick nail with a transverse incision below it, but be careful that the cutting does not reach the quick which is under the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it occurs, put something on it to soothe.
The dislocation that is found in the hands of some men by chance is all flesh, and sometimes there are bones present, and at times none; these do not originate from the root of the joint where they are formed.
Those who are born with any deformity of the foreskin do not move, and those born at the junction of the foreskin may occasionally move.
The size of one who is plump should be lightened in this manner: Trim it at the root with a wide pair of scissors.
Those born in the junction's root are greatly difficult to cure: If you do it with care:
For the one that originates from behind or beside the nearest bone, it is necessary to first cut around the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate sawing motion, and then heal it until it is sound again.
Dislocations arise from a joint being out of its place, occurring either by birth, or by incision wounds, or scorching with fire, or similar causes.
If it is necessary that you cut the swelling, so that it may heal according to its natural shapes: Then place between two tents or linen cloths wetted with oil of roses, so that they do not stick: Or you put between two pieces of fine gauze, until the lump is healed, as it should be.
If sensation comes to any of its fingers with the palm, then bandage accordingly as it should be.
These are large wounds covered with excessive melancholic fluid, which come upon various body parts.
And they more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than elsewhere.
Therefore, you must provide them relief from pus at any time, and then clean the bladder ache with camphor.
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: the first is to wrap it and bleed black blood. The other method is to lift the vein, and tear it completely.
Healing follows this manner: The first step is to bathe the leg in hot water until it becomes thoroughly softened, then hold the limb by the thigh up to the area below the hip and towards the outer part of the knee.
Then make an incision in the area selected, either one, two, or three times wide. Next, extract and remove the black blood with your hand from one end to the other until the healing power of the sickly body is no longer able to bear it.
And then bind it up, instructing that they be nourished with meat-based black dye;
And begin the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are filled, causing discomfort to the patient.
The movements of his limb are according to this manner: Raise the patient's leg, if it has many hairs, then give him a bath, and rub his leg with hot water until it turns red, causing the veins to swell.
And if you do not have bathwater, heat it by fire and then apply the cloth to the veins long at the leg's top near the knee or below the ankle.
Then wrap it with cloth and scrape the veins from each side until they feel as if you can sense them.
And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or through leather appears like a whitish cord.
Then pull the thread out slowly as it passes through the skin, and then secure it to a light hook, then tie in another place on either side of the thighs.
Then scrape the skin on either side of the vein until it appears, then lift up to the root as you have done, and tie it off with another ligature as before.
Then make a second tie or more if needed, then lift it up and secure to the hips, then pull tight until reaching the next tie.
Then extract from knot to knot, ensuring all force is removed, then cut it off.
If you are unable to pull it and lift it up, then insert a strong, thick needle through the entire thread, piercing and pulling out both ends. Insert from under the skin, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes loose. And ensure that it does not scar over, for if it scars over, it cannot be pulled or lifted out, and this causes harm to the patient.
And when you have fully extracted it, then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site. And treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and tangled together and not straight as we have said, then it should be cut lengthwise but do not cover it. And the treatment as we have previously mentioned.
The form of iron used to make the cautery is curved, and does not cut, but holds the vein.
and it has a large curve because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein lies within legs, in hot areas where no grass or trees grow, and on land without moisture.
and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in legs, which occurs from swelling coming from under the skin, as it comes within the body with worms and veins, nestled between skin and flesh.
When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it causes great swelling in the leg, then the lice change, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like a plant root.
When the shoulder is opened, it must be wrapped around with a piece of linen from one to two and a half cubits up to three cubits, leaving the wool on the leg, and every time there is no defect, wrap around with the linen, and the thread.
And if it is too long, then cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder around, but do not cover it completely at its root until it is entirely removed. Because if you cut it, then pus enters the joint and brings about abscesses or rot there, causing a serious illness.
For this reason, it must be treated gradually until completely healed, leaving no remnants or debris behind.
And this vein should never be treated with hands for too long or abruptly. Once a man came to me whose vein was X palms in length. When it is cut, I amble the pus out and pierce it all the way through so that everything comes out.
And let it be emptied of any matter inside, and remedy at the site with mordant herbs for a certain period each day, then treat as one would an abscess.
And never wash the wound with hands or any other objects, especially when it is open at the joint of the arm, and there is much drainage, which causes swelling.
Treat it as we have previously mentioned.
Between skin and flesh where new vessels arise This illness is known in our land as "the ox disease" because it frequently occurs in the veins and is caused by a small worm that lives between skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body rising and falling, causing significant discomfort from limb to limebefore it damages the skin or wherever it goes.
And it is caused by putrefaction of various bodily fluids, such as worms and snails and ascarids in the belly.
And there is doubt about its severity, because when it spreads through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance entering, it destrobes the eye. And this happens many times.
When you see it being bled and milked, it cannot be stopped when it spreads:
So it is necessary that you tie the head above and below a strong joint tightly, then cut around it with a knife, and if the vein appears fully in the bile, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it stops bleeding.
The greatest harm it causes is that blood vessels may rupture, as we have said.
And if you see it approaching or close to the blood vessels, hold firmly onto its eyebrows, then clip and bind them.
It is necessary for the patient to use bodily purification with solutions of medical substances against harmful humors and meat that has spoiled.
From the pain which arises from swelling caused by wind. This disease is called "wakir" in our land, and it brings pain to certain limbs, then moves from one member to another.
And I tell you as such. I was called to a sick woman, and discovered her with swollen arms, and saw a small inflammation in the arm veins.
And immediately afterward, the vein rises just like a worm in the shoulder, swifter than any other thing, as if silver when cut from one place to another.
And the pain departs from that spot, and shifts to the shoulder, and then shortly afterward runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me how it returned within the body, as I have seen it.
by: Nevertheless, I wanted to maintain that the pain moved from one place to another, but I had not seen it in the woman as such.
and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, her veins exposed, and hence appeared to have constant flatulence.
And those who are dislocated due to this reason do not appear immediately as those with dry bodies and veins; and whose wounds have been healed.
And when you see treating this illness, and the patient feels that pain as we have said, then press above and below swiftly, and hold it until the swelling subsides to its place. and cauterize at the site.
and if it is not visible to your eyes, then the treatment of those who swell up like foul pills, and sycamore seeds, and other similar things.
the pain: oughts (a, then heal sofes d, and if they ct; t;
The variety of their cases is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and smooth; And of those with two angles, and of those with tongues, and of those where it has protrusions.
and that which exits through any limb in either manner: or as principal members exiting (e.g., brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidnecks, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs). When it exits through any of these members, then the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter appear: if one must consider extracting this arrowhead because death approaches in various ways. and when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then treat it as such, and heal the wound.
When the arrowhead enters and pierces the bone, causing a sagging jaw above the brain, it results in blindness, pain, straining, reddening of eyes, inflammation and red tongue, mental disturbance with speech mixing, and bilious vomiting. And sometimes there is loss of strength in the nose or ears. And occasionally it affects speech and voice. There is a discharge from the wound that appears like white hair, and oozes as red as fresh blood.
If these signs are evident, then proceed with the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not embedded.
The signs when the arrowhead penetrates or enters are as if it is near the left breast and feels like it has been driven into something hard, not hollow. And sometimes the patient moves as well as hairs, with black blood in their veins, and they come coldness and cold sweat, and syncope. Then there is doubt that death will follow.
the durt; and there (as aul se ues benc!
And if the arrow falls into the lower covering, it is near the small ribs; and causes severe pain and sorrowful groaning. and they move all of the limb at the shoulder joints.
And if the arrow enters into the belly, perhaps from a wound not affecting any of the indigestible meat.
And if the arrow enters into the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrowhead.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, causing it to leak and frequent urination, the patient feels strong pain. Know that the wound is fatal.
The other parts - as made by the collarbone, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, forearm and legs, and similar limbs - are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man whose arrow came out or close to the base of the neck root: I tried it, and on the other side broke through the fat of the ear, and was sound without any harm.
And broke through one of the arrows that fell in the fat of the ear behind the paper, and the arrow was reinserted, unable to reach more than just the tip towards its base, and the arrowhead was large like a Turkish bow, easily without ears.
The joint remained sound, and no harm befell it.
And broke through an arrow in the throat to a Christian, and the arrowhead was Arabian with ears.
I approached the Barbarians, and subtly as I tried to break through, the Christian remained unharmed.
And treated an arrow wound at the belly, thinking it was fatal.
and then after passing thirty days, his condition did not change. I cut around the arrow, skillfully maneuvered it, and successfully treated the wound without any complications.
And if you encounter a person with an arrow in their back where the wound is freshly made;
and if it remains inside them, without affecting their natural disposition or causing harm in any of their natural functions.
And you see another man where an arrow has struck his face and the wound is made fresh; and it remained there causing them great pain.
and many other similar cases.
And injure an arrow at one of the king's men, which was lodged in his groin and slightly leaned to the right side. and the arrow was fully protruding.
I went called for treatment after it had been there for three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
He holds all with subtle enticement, and she does not perceive it. And he felt no pressure or pain from his right ear.
I thought it was due to the arrowhead's point. I placed upon him a poultice soothing and digestive, because his eyes were not inflamed; and it appeared that the wound from the arrowhead remained.
and it appeared that the wound from the arrowhead remained. I applied the poultice for two days, and reopened the main wound, so that the patient suffered long times until he felt the arrow within his brain.
and he told me this. I applied medicinal acidic remedies to the wound for three days until it healed, and tried them, feeling the arrowhead head detach from its place.
Then instruct with the opening of the wound by that medical application, until the head of the arrow appears clearly.
And through it penetrated deeply within four months, and then I tried to push the wound as if using pincers, on one side and the other, but could not.
Then I ceased to subtly and ingeniously devise methods of extracting it, until I was able to grasp it in one day with well-made pincers, as the form will be presented at the end of this chapter, trying and keeping the wound open.
And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I kept it open, and the wound was then stitched up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I have told you the nature of extracting some arrows, so that you apply your care to what I do not mention here, for the book cannot possibly cover everything.
But the wise masters compare few great things, and focus on what is currently happening and failing, working with nine works, nine instruments, at dealing with extraordinary occurrences in this art.
I say that arrows are embedded in the members only where they have been driven by two methods: or through the skin or elsewhere, or from another direction.
and that which pierces because of where it enters is an arrow penetrating into living tissue, and never does so at any other time.
And if it does not heal now, let it rest until the cartilage is fully regrown, and rejoined.
And also if it has been embedded in the bone, and cannot be removed, let it remain for some days, moving slightly each day.
And then when it heals, and if it does not heal, carefully perforate throughout with a very fine needle, until the tissues are fully expanded, and then treat.
And if an arrowhead is replaced in the body and cannot be seen, then cover it completely with dressing. And if you feel it, then use any suitable instrument.
And if you cannot for the widening of the wound or the deepening of the arrowhead and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then bleed until the wound is large.
And remove the arrowhead if you can, and if it has ears that attach to where it's stuck in two parts you can see, break or bend these ears of the arrowhead as much as possible.
And skillfully, do not break the arrowhead, rather pull it out more firmly.
: And if blood deterioration occurs in opposition, apply as we have said for treatment within this chapter;
and be cautious with the incision of nerves and veins, apply method as you know how to extract the arrowhead without danger, whether soon or late, firmly or gently.
and place the patient as they were when the arrowhead fell upon them, for it is the greatest aid that can be provided to them, and if you cannot do so directly, then follow what their signs indicate.
The arrowhead that comes from another direction, or through any parts of them, or if the skin is visibly swollen in the area:
Therefore cut down there, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then extract it. If swelling is now present.
And if it is held in the bone, twist your round hand as much as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull through.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for a while longer, and then resume the extraction as long as it can be taken out.
and if there is an arrowhead present, strike at all of it;
and if the arrowhead breaks off, and you see that it needs to be administered with a tool, then place the tip of the arrow into the instrument's handle.
and strike it again, so if you use an instrument with a pointed end to facilitate the extraction of the arrowhead.
If the arrowhead is embedded, it's necessary to cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can see it; then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrow breaks or lodges in the belly or bladder or ribs, and is close to coming out, then you can cut it open, but do so.
And guard against cutting the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary. And perform the healing until it is sound again.
The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is the shape:
And there are many methods: large, small openings, and tiny, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
The form of the pointed hair is also like the feathers of a bird, to thrust at the tip of the arrowhead, as here is its shape:
There are veins from which one can draw blood, thirty-one in total, sixteen to be precise: II arteries behind the ears, called "Herbich": and two arteries that are visible in two temple regions: and two veins within the joints of both elbebows, called "suctions": and the vein that is above the forehead: And the veins that are at the neck near the nose; And the two bands which are around his neck. and the two veins that lie on the lips above the mouth, and these are called "augae rigae. and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins of which five are commonly found in each arm:
one is the cephalic (headward), and it's on the left side of the arm, called "the vein of the head". and the middle one is called "fast," and it's composed of the cephalic and basilic (bodyward), called by them "the vein of the body". and the basilic is on the right side of the arm, called by them "the vein of the abdomen," it's near the elbow, and that one which is clearly seen over the forearm.
And the surgeon is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg where there are three veins: The first one is above the back of the left thigh bone, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right leg. And the vein called "nesce," that is in the ankle on the other side.
And in the other leg, there are three veins above those.
The pains of the veins that are behind the ears cause ancient cholera and migraines;
And you elevate the quality of the saigner, as I have told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area or veins with a rough cloth; Then squeeze the patient's neck with a pinch so that the two veins appear behind the ears, approximately two thumbs width down from the crown. Take them in your hands and where you feel hair above your fingers, give it a tug.
Then take the lancet, and push it up to the bone beneath the vein, then lift your hand all along the vein toward the body, cleanse the skin and vein well two thumbs wide across, and let out blood until you see it.
Then strain and hold firmly, until it is realigned.
And I have already mentioned the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The cleansing of the two arteries that are in both temples is to be done quickly, gently, and with familiarity, and to avoid causing tears.
And the quality of the washing should be as I say: and it is that the patient must keep their neck stretched until both veins are clearly visible. and feel for the pulse on either side of your thumb, then press down firmly.
then lift your finger above the vein on top of your index finger, and place the lancet below it, then raise the vein upwards again, and collect the blood, just as you did with the other two veins, and allow the blood to flow according to your need.
Then dislocate the patient's arm, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place it on a cotton. And then bandage firmly, and leave it until it is cleaned.
And we have spoken about their healing and extraction, which begins this book.
The cleansing of the forehead vein is just as valuable as the treatment for headaches and ancient skin diseases, and migraines, and redness.
And its quality lies in that the patient stretches his neck by twisting until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "spatula," which looks like this:
And place the tip on the vein, and gently press with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see. Then instruct the patient to open the neck, and tie the vein so that it is clean and not bled once with a wide swab.
Anyhow, you should not make the gauze too wet or dry. and placed acrosswise, because the bone is near, and sometimes it breaks the gauze when it is delicate.
The dressing for the two veins that are in two wounds is to aid with the eyes and gums, and at the beard, and ear lobes, and throat in oil, and skin diseases.
and the quality of their dressing is that the patient must twist its neck as far as possible, just as before.
then change the dressing crosswise, and let it be a little long and wide gauze piece, because there is no lice. And if the limb is subtle, perhaps it breaks;
Then apply correct bandaging, as much as needed, and then bind with a cloth, and secure well.
The pain from the eyes is like ague, and dropsy, and face diseases such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of the pain is such that the patient grips their neck, then strains his eyes to the left hand and takes a long subtle limb, and sticks it halfway into the space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well, and now the blood will start to flow.
And do not go too far with it, make a proper incision according to your need, then leave it for one night, as it is often quickly restored.
The sinew of the II muscles assists in extending the spine, and at the onset of paralysis, as well as in many diseases, pox, corrosion, shingles, and psoriasis.
and the quality of the sinew is such that it causes the patient to stretch out their neck from one side or the other, as we have said.
and be the master stands above the patient's head, and the patient cuts a vein on either side, then lets it bleed for some time, or as much as is needed.
Then perform a similar procedure on the other vein, then dissolve the ligaments, and gently strain the vessels so that the patient does not suffer. And leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
of spleen fever The health of veins in the lips above helps with boils inside the mouth, and decay of gums, cracks in the lips, and bleeding and swelling.
And the quality of the healing depends on making the patient sit in front of you, and gripping their neck as I have instructed. Then turn the lip, and observe the veins, one to the right of the lip and the other to the left, recognizing them by their darkness and the small black vessels surrounding them.
So do both, and if you do not recognize them, or if you are in doubt, then cut the larger one from each side, and likewise with all the veins above and below, as they are of a similar manner.
of spleen fever under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue is helped after the head's wound healing, and it's related to throat stretching, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
And its quality of healing is such that the patient's veins are squeezed between your hands under the sunlight, and they lift the tongue, and look below on each side for a black vein.
Thus heal both of them, but not too much at once, because the arteries are underneath.
The veins of the arm that we commonly treat for wounds have their healing methods as follows:
or by grabbing the entire arm firmly wide, or using an olive-sized and subtle instrument like sharpened scissors, which is called "Aneasil". And they are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins. The shape of this flail mistle is much renowned, and wide as you see.
And it is necessary to open clear veins filled with visible blood that contain much blood and turbidity; and it is the form of an olive-shaped bubble:
Et c'est plus subtilement pointu, et pour soulager les veines subtiles, où le sang est subtilement citrin.
The vein of the base (of an abscess), which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are from below the throat, and neck, and ribs, and belly;
And it is appropriate for the cautery to drain well, and that it should be washed from the artery beneath. And if it is cut (ruptured) an artery, and bleeding occurs, then it should be staunched as I have said; And it must not be grasped by its hair, but trimmed as with scissors.
And if the vein does not open clearly, one should extract it and replace it with another. or you wish to stop its flow, or find it within his arm near the vein: it opens clearly; and clip the hair as with scissors, as we have said.
And if you see the location of the vein, then remove his arm as such that you feel for the hair until you know their roots. then sign the place to replace, and then hold the arm, and clip the vein with scissors-like hair: and be careful not to injure the artery when you see the place swelling, for it is an artery. Ensure it stands as previously instructed.
And if you see a protrusion upward as the urine of an infant, with red and fine skin, know that it is from an artery. Haste there, and extend your finger over the area, then remove your finger multiple times as often happens; If it is on his arm, leave it thus, and do not move the patient.
And be in fear, and do not move him until he is stable.
And if the skin is not tender, and it bleeds, and you have no medicine available, then tie off the artery if it has opened, for the head of it retracts. And bandage the skin.
And take a slice of fresh fishbone, and grind it, then take one half and place it until the next day.
if the dislocation is not severe, that's fine; but if it is, then treat as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
and the dislocations are not suitable for various conditions due to the small location of the wound, and the condition of the patient's arm joint.
The heat of the vein helps by treating blood on top and underneath the skin, because it is composed of the basilica (a bone in the skull) and the cephalic artery, as we have said.
and the saigneror must wash off because of the nerve undernehren is at risk. If it's too much blood, he may strike the nerve, causing swelling and severe pain, and perhaps cannot be cured.
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, one must cleanse the instrument with oil. Then you may pry apart the nerve at your strength.
If there is a vein between the two nerves and it feels long.
The sanitation of the skull if needed helps, drawing blood from the head, and soothing the eyes;
And it is proper to sanitize in the olive oil or myrtle oil region, for this is the safest of all cleansings, as there are no nerves nor vessels beneath. Nonetheless, one must choose the lightest option, and do not perform anything during the first time, then start again. And occasionally it swells in certain men, for what must be done at the first time, but does not harm them.
The quality of the wound is as you think.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health cannot be established without preserving well-being and avoiding future illnesses.
and so health should be achieved through one of the three ways which are known as: that is to say, head, gut, and limb. and healing should begin with prayer in spring and after eating in autumn and winter when signs of fullness appear.
and one must heal the first day or week after two hours or three days.
Healing for diseases does not have a fixed time but when needed can be done in days or nights at all hours and times.
And it does not require bandaging for children up to 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus beyond the seventh month. And should not be suckled the elderly who are over sixty years old.
And if one wishes to bandage in any manner, it is necessary to cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema, if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not pull excessive fluids from the vital organs.
Do not bandage those who are too full of meats, or intoxicated, in any way.
And one must bandage after experiencing colic pain, vomiting, abdominal discharge, frequent urination in women or travelers, being awake and joining with others, and any other weakening factors, whether from an injury to the body or something else.
Then carefully balance the humors if they are large, with meats, drinks, and medicines, if you have permission.
Then give the patient a bath if nothing prevents it to subtly cleanse their blood and purify the veins near the affected area, as we have said.
And advise them to abstain from work, pain, lust, and similar activities;
Be steadfast and diligent, ensure the healer's hands are raised higher than that of the patient being treated, then rub the arm twice or thrice, then carefully extract the ligament, for if it is too tight or loose, one cannot properly address the issue.
Then rub the leg until the veins swell and become noticeable to touch;
Then grease the shoulder blade with a little bit of old oil; then place your left hand above that vein slightly below the bone where you wish to move it so that the vein does not burst upon striking.
For there are veins that flow like cords in the shoulder, and some are so full of swelling that when placed over the blade, it pulls back from the blade, cannot open the vein, and thus they become such. And if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so one must be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein works on the first attempt, this is good. If not, start again slightly below where it was reset, unless the limb is swoln.
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient fears it, leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. perhaps an abscess will come;
nor give him a bath, then resume cleansing if he wishes to.
and if the boils are small, or he secretes blood subtly and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, probe that vein thoroughly.
and manipulate the wound slightly so that the limb becomes swollen. because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the joint swollen, do not begin to dissect again, and apply a little oil of roses, for it eases the body's pain and softens the tissue in this place with the oil.
And thus treat each vein you select with rose oil to stop the blood flow and seal it off.
Do likewise make tranching and binding when applied to the joint. If it is too large, carefully sever and separate it.
And if large abscesses occur frequently, especially when the vein opening is small and you act hastily, apply a damp sponge in water with some heat to it on the joint, and bind for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue of the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or greenish hue, then there is no harm. And if you see anything of aloe or myrrh dissolved in a mixture with mint, it is a sign, ointment, or similar substance.
And often there occurs an abscess and appearance at the sanctity of the bladder:
So place your hand upon it, and if you find a soft lump under pressure with your hand, that is a bad sign. Then avoid putting anything upon it as we have mentioned, for there may be no artery in the cord.
But make a dry plaster to harden the lump, then apply another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
When blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red. And if you see large veins, allow them to be drained until they are thinned. If it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are flat and bald, and require blood extraction, to create a wider wound with broad edges.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and maintain them with little and often, shaping by cutting across, not by pulling.
This manner of maintenance prevents blood stasis and nerve compression, and is better to be done longitudinally rather than broadly.
And for those whose body requires maintenance, give them mashed apples in pear juice. If it is scalded, rinse with blood three or four times; and if it has a cold complexion, provide for the patient bread soaked in syrup sweetened with honey, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, with an agreeable scent.
If it occurs at the temple, after the issue of a great amount of blood, then one should inhale a mixture of charcoal and odorous syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to drain his arms, and use leeches at other times as needed, when they are greatly swollen by moisture, let him bleed a little bit and a little bit continuously depending on the quantity of his vitality.
t c; they have sfite and:
And if one wishes to treat another part, it must be treated on the second or third day.
Because there is much blood within the body that has been scalded, causing fever to arise; If it requires expressing a large quantity of it and dilating the pores until they are full with sweat. Then you must address all the conditions of sweat and touch your hand to its hair when it dries, ensuring that death does not come at the time of sweating, as this often happens when the caretakers are neglectful.
And it is not necessary when you see dislocating the arm, and blood issuing a second time, and the wound is closed, so press firmly above. If it [the head of the shoulder] has gone out, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
but leave it to heal a second time; or you do not touch the dry sore, until the blood which has clotted in the vein flows again, and place slightly moistened dressing on it, and press lightly.
If the vein is swollen, let it remain unbound until the abscess is soothed.
And if a second bleeding of blood is necessary, let it be bled in the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein under the arm is bled where the head of the vein lies because it is composed in that manner.
And the manner of healing is that the patient dips their hand in warm water until the dressing becomes red.
then bind it moderately so that the veins appear well, and now heal across rather than wide or long.
And let the pores be wide, and be very close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot escape from them, place the hand in hot water, and allow blood to flow into the water until there is enough.
And if it is like this, do not push the hand back into hot water again, because in winter it goes further than in summer.
And the vein of this hand is more saved from all other wounds, as there are no clots or nerves in it.
The vein of the thumb on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
Strain the hand, and place it in hot water until the veins are filled with blood. If the limb is twisted, and if you cut along its entire length, then do not injure anything.
And do not cut too deeply, for the nerves lie close together and intertwined; then return the hand to warm water if it is frozen in the wound and cannot be removed.
And when you have addressed the bleeding as much as necessary, apply oil and wax to the vein and quickly join them together, doing this with each thread.
The remedy for the illness in the left hand is as follows, do exactly as I have told you with the right hand.
The physician of the knee is effective for all diseases under the body such as joint pains, retention of urine, diseases of the kidneys, and old ailments of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its healing is that the patient must put their foot in warm water and rub it until it softens, and lay over the bone joint. and the swelling is at the ankle, and from the foot go out many veins.
Then cut the bandage or make it wider around the ankle as needed.
And if you cut above the foot, guard the nerves that lie close by and make the incision as when skinning.
And let there be a slight indentation.
And if the sinew cannot exit, reset the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
If the physician fails at first, repeat again after some time, as the joint is stiffened.
Do not doubt of a nerve, as we have said, and thus make an incision on the other limb equally.
The head of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle near strong, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to blood heat.
And the quality of his injury is such that the patient lies in a bath and extends above the ankle four fingers by twisting, otherwise he does not open the vein.
and if it opens, then cleanse the wound in all ways that you can, and across. and let them move as you scrape, for the joint is loose, and it is much more protruded than normal.
and let them move as you scrape, for the joint is loose, and it is much more protruded than normal. And if you cannot reduce it, then tie any part that has opened or is split in two at the back and chest, and towards the small joints, and take care of the nerves.
And do as much to correct the blood that you see, then untie the ligament, and place cotton under it, and secure. It is now healed.
Vents are made of horns, or animal hairs, or glass.
And the evacuation is done according to two methods: either by hitting and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this evacuation that is done without a hit also follows two methods: either by very hot heat, or without heat.
And evacuation done with a hit and blood extraction is performed in 14 parts of the body, some are entirely at the head. The other one is within the neck; and others are in two sides of the neck. and the pincers from below the chin; and the pincers at both shoulders; and the pincers on the elbows; and the pincers within both arms; and the pincers in both legs. and the pincers on both ankles;
and the bleeding does not involve any blood vessels, but rather small veins scattered in the flesh, so it is not painful to anyone, as with draining of veins. and it must not be inflamed or scorched with any fire or heat, in no illness that arises from congestion, until all the body has been emptied.
And if it is necessary for illnesses or customs, we must examine each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between every hour.
For there are those who, when they need to be examined, feel heavy pressure.
and for those who experience congestion and redness on their face, in their head, and at the neck, along with darkening of the eyes.
and those who experience blood spots in their mouth, swollen tongue, and bleeding. and there are those who think, see through blood-filled and painful eyes and deathly things.
And when we observe these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order to bleed after 3 and a half hours past noon.
The medicine for the ears is helpful in easing the head's distress... it comes to the eyes, and one should not do this until all bodily fluids have been evacuated.
This ventilation is at the site of the head's cavity, and it should only be used by those with a cold complexion or who have weaknesses, as it causes them great harm.
And therefore one should not use it without the guidance of a physician, nor by those with cold head diseases.
the unt les deux they are;
Ventilation through the neck is at the site of the cavities in the head and abdomen, and thus it causes stretching of the bowels, cutting into the channel of the phlegm, and other issues, and distension.
It should not be done too forcefully, for if it holds too tightly, it can cause injury to the liver or heart and soul.
The ventriculation of II ribs by the collarbone causes pain in the head, otalmia and migraine, strangling, pain at the roots of the teeth, and is located near the sanctuary of the basilica.
And it is proper to command the surgeon that he express his hand in putting it on, not cutting the artery and avoiding any bleeding out of blood.
The ventriculation below the chin causes mouth disease, gum decay, and various diseases found in the mouth. It is located near the sanctuary of the two lips.
Incisions in the shoulders indicate diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
The ventriculation of the elbows causes as much pain as from the three veins of the arm since it draws blood from these large veins.
And instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for the flesh is tender and contains veins and arteries.
The catheter placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and conditions below, and it should be large in diameter and made of wool, requiring proper pulling. and sometimes, if she were too thin, she would break. and this causes large wounds.
Legs' catheters drain well, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective against old pains of the kidneys, joints, and bladder, and promote healing.
They are placed above the knees and ankles, and in all cases, they relieve the body after prolonged use, and bring about swelling in various conditions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you place it first empty, and do so quickly, and put it on hastily, and move equally, and continue doing so until you see it reddened and swoln, and with a dusky blood color.
Then remove, and reset the cups, and observe the condition of the body parts, for there are some with scars, and clear pores. If it is necessary to pierce once only, then make wide and somewhat deep incisions. and gently draw blood.
And if the vein is large, it should be punctured twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very dense, it should be punctured a third time:
And when we wish to draw blood little by little, it is just once with a lancet. And if we wish to obtain much blood, we repeat the process often.
And if the vein is narrow, use forceful pressure and ensure it ends such that the core is pierced quickly, and for those with thick and hard skin, as well as swollen parts, you should apply hot oil poultices to soften. if it is so in that case, use purple oil or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
and if it is inflamed, use chervil oil or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar ones.
And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
If the one to whom you provide a tender and broad bandage does not need oil, then it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or blackthorn berry water, or gourd water, or porcelain stone water, or any similar liquid.
And those with excessive moisture should rise easily, using myrtle water or sumac and other similar substances.
Those who have large excesses rise from old wine or water of aloe, or a concoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
and they must not exercise breathing into the bladder before or during a bath, but after the bath one to two hours later.
and they must not sleep after the ventosation, and it is necessary that they take a bath when needed for ventosation and when they have been vented.
And those who are sick with colic must warm themselves up if they feel too cold and inflamed; If it is necessary to grasp cold things such as ripe pomegranates and endive and lettuce easily, and similar things. And mince pieces of meat, and broth from a cauldron, and moist meats.
And mince pieces of meat, and broth from a cauldron, and moist meats. And those with a cold constitution should grasp syrup of honey, and moderately aged wine that is neither old nor new, along with small morsels, minced pieces, and small birds and pigeons.
and on the day he resumes his activities, he should drink more than eat;
it is appropriate to give certain individuals some triacle or musk before dislocation, or afterward, to strengthen the main limbs. and let them be sweetened without adding anything, but only for those who are hot, they should drink it plainly.
The suction cups that are placed without causing pain are those applied over the liver, and joints such as gouty toes, podagra, and over the abdomen, buttocks, legs, and armpits, because these body parts do not tolerate being pierced anywhere, and it is only done in order to draw blood from a limb back into another part, just as we do on the nipples when they are inflamed;
to remove the thickening present in the limb, just as we apply suction cups over the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the limb.
and alleviate pain when there is edema or stone, if you remove it by its attracting nature perhaps the edema, or restore the stone to its original position.
And thus it is done when placed upon the liver and kidneys with retained windwaters, and these bladders are prepared empty to draw out as much fluid. And never are they arranged with fire, nor filled with cold water like maladies causing excessive sweating; thus the bladder is filled with hot water boiled or water that has had certain medicinal herbs steeped in it.
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And it should have two pieces of leather each half a palm wide at the base, and with holes around its circumference like for threading a needle, and be made from deer skin on the front so that it does not slip when placed upon the limb.
And it has among its tools a rod of crossbar made of brass or iron to put on a poultice, and they are large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who take them.
Because children's cupping therapy is different from that for adults, and it varies between thinness and heaviness.
And should this cupping be applied to the limb thus:
Take the poultice of wax or salve and place it amidst the cupping within the rod that lies across the cupping area, so that the heat does not burn the patient at the bottom of the cupping.
And then place it upon the limb, and you should do so at the percussion points we have mentioned before, such that when desired, steam will rise, and one may remove the cupping.
And apply a splint as before; begin again often if necessary.
In the blister that is made for pneumonia treatment immediately, without an erect penis or scrotum, and it's only dressed when full of fluid, and placed over the limb fully.
and this is its shape:
Blisters are not dressed unless in limbs where you cannot place blisters due to smallness, such as lips and gums, for example. and on naked areas of the body like ears or nose, and others similarly shaped.
and the quality of their use is that when you find blisters filled with soft clear liquid not causing trouble, take them.
And they place her on an elevated bed with a gentle pillow, until she is accustomed to it, and has no discomfort in the belly. Then you shall wash with vinegar and a compress, then rub the limb until it is reddened, and apply bandages.
And when they are filled and swollen, if it is possible to place a compress there, then apply one, as this works very well afterwards.
If not, raise the limb easily, and then pour vinegar on it abundantly, and then press out.
And if the wound still hurts after dressing the body with bandages, then apply a linen cloth soaked in cold water, and leave it on until the swelling subsides.
If there are multiple abscesses, apply crushed vitriol or gallnuts, and similar substances, until they have dried up.
Or place on the half-moon section of scraped veils, and let them dry until they harden in that area, thus sealing it now.
And if further action is needed, then take additional materials.
And if the materials do not adhere, rub the blood-soaked area with fresh blood or insert a needle until the abscess opens, and then apply them, allowing them to dry as soon as they feel the blood.
And when you see that they bleed, sprinkle some ground alum or crushed wool, or ash, and it will harden now.
the d. These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and involve the repair and replenishment of breaks and moisture loss.
Know well, dear student, that the madman seeks wisdom from this treatise, which he has never seen in any ancient book nor read.
And for this reason, such knowledge is strange to our land, for I have never found a good one (book).
and I know nothing of it from the knowledge in ancient books, which I have studied so much that I am familiar with its teachings, through experiments, and by habit over my lifetime.
And I have described in this treatise what is contained within it, and abbreviated at the end, clearly showing the forms of the distortions that are treated, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
Therefore, we must say that the preface of this book contains the essence of its words and chapters where the wise apply their understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
When any breakage or dislocation or torsions or strains occur in any part, it is necessary to support the patient on both sides with a splint, if nothing entirely supports them, as would befit their age, whether children, adolescents, or elders. If the tension is not too great or too cold;
And avoid very cold things such as cold baths, and meats of birds or rabbits, do not drink wine nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill up excessively with foods that cause the veins to be filled with blood until there is no doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading matter in the limb;
If the patient returns to his first state of health, which he previously experienced.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy nourishment, or viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and beef, lamb, pork, veal, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For certain heavy nourishment represents moisture and more rapid healing of the fracture.
And know that broken and old bones cannot be well repaired or joined according to their nature for the support of limbs, nor those also who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
but pay no heed to joining the large tendons which are stiff and join the limb together, until it is strengthened as it was before. and do not finish all his work, and for this reason he should nourish himself with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures occur in various ways.
When the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that resemble an arc and others by sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that resemble an arc and others by sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture along a small crack.
And in every way have his appetite, and his own proper tools for restoration, according to what memory comes to him.
And it is known as a broken bone because the limb is twisted and quite open on one side, and lies close to the press of the hand.
And when there is no twist or touch on it, and the patient does not feel much pain, unless there is a fracture.
But it can well have a twist, a split, or a small fracture. If it is not necessary to move your hand at all, but apply the following remedies immediately and then gently strain now subtly.
And know that the fracture hanging down, and are two parts disjoined, now they must be made equal lest it become an abscess.
And if the abscess arises therein, let him not delay any day until the abscess is soothed.
Then make them equal to what you can easily and healthily move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than in those where there are fragments.
Then restrain as appropriate thereafter.
And if the bone is in pieces and it extends on two parts, whether it's arms or legs, or to your hand if it's small members, or two tendons, or one tendon and your hand.
And place the member according to its natural form, so that if the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset them by any means to their original positions as they can be moved, and ensure through your crafting no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best possible forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems not rightly done:
If the reduction is done well, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who induce abscesses hot and constriction in the limb have seen us many times.
And when the limb is at its limit, so gently restrain the patient that they do not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning or in any other way. and ensure well that the limb is secured so that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not at its limit and one must place it in such a way that it feels no pain.
and ensure well that the limb is secured so that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not at its limit and one must place it in such a way that it feels no pain. and you must ensure that it is positioned correctly, so that twisting does not occur when restored.
And the condition of the broken limb is as follows, just as I have told you.
; that he est la:  (e patience de se mar :
For there are small members such as bones and tendons: If it is necessary to wrap with thin and delicate linen cloths; And those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
If it is necessary to wrap with a wide and strong ligature, because the wide ligatures encircle the entire large limb equally on all sides so that there are no irregularities.
Then it is tied with light padding for three or four turns depending on the limb, and the hand is slightly tightened along the entire ligature, then moved to above the fracture and loosened there, so that the breakage moves slightly away.
And soften the ties a little at a time, until you grasp a significant portion of the joint's natural state, then take up another tie, and return it correctly to its original position.
Then go back to the part without the breakage, and strain it moderately, neither too much nor too little, as we have said in the first instruction above.
Then place between the stitches linen or cloth so that they are all evenly matched, then secure everything above the binding, and then put in well-made stays underneath, unless there is an abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or an abscess, put on something soothing for the abscess heat, and that removes the inflammamo.
Then strain the affected bones and have them bound with a wide leather strap or wood for splints, as shown in this diagram.
But it is necessary that the affected bone placed on the break should be slightly larger and wider than the others.
and so also long as needed for small or large limbs; then strained on the bones in the same manner as the first splint above the fracture, and tied with a thread if necessary. more tightly it is, the less so;
and it should be moderate in thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of fine flax.
because if the thread is thick as I have seen with works of folks who make their linen cord reels coiled up, it's a great mistake, for the splint cannot be evenly distributed if it is too fine, and it must not have less than two inches space between each bone.
And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the pins after being tightened to healthy places, then place cotton or linen rags on them so they do not slip out.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment as follows:
And know that it is not necessary to extract all shattered bones on the first day. When the limb is large, it does not require immediate dressing but rather after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the risk of infection.
And then follow the manner of ancient embalmings to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And take some flour that is held against the mill walls, and mix it with abundance of egg, and apply this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, for it is a common way to restore fractures in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of embalming that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take bile, aloes, onion, aspetide and frankincense, and myrrh, one spoonful each. Mirrorwort and aloes, five spoonfuls each. Alecites, nine spoonfuls; And make powder, and mix with honey and egg white; If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster because it has good composition and quickly mends broken bones, benefiting many individuals.
Another kind of plaster that works for twisted injuries: Take myrrh and violet leaves, one spoonful each. Mirrorwort and alechites, nine spoonfuls each. Acacia, six spoonfuls; On Wednesday of the Fast of St. Martin, boil Armenian spices with wine or plentiful water and conserve it.
Another method to reset dislocated joints and bones from their place, which alleviates the pain that occurs, and it is used for breaking the bone and fractures. Take new linens, soak them in ease and cooked oil, and place it upon the wound.
These bandages do not restore, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly alleviating the pain.
Another method to reset broken bones that restore their integrity: Take dried leaves of the fig tree and earthly parrot's leaves, grind them together, and use as a splint.
Another way to bandage is for the healing of broken bones and remaining abscesses. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, and barley meal, one part from each;
And you mix it, and with wine, and if the limb is swollen, then with vinegar mixed with wet coriander water or plain water, and apply it in use.
Another way of plastering more effectively than the first, when an abscess is ready to heal on its own in member restoration. Take roots of valerian, and flaxseed, balm, honey locust, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts. And you grind them, and cook with salt water or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its resting state.
Ypocras states in his book that nothing else should be applied to the broken limb for healing other than a mixture made of wax and oil, and it should not be too hard or too soft within two layers.
And Galen seems to suggest that dry and slightly warm substances should be applied to the broken limb for healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another method of balm that is suitable for injury and pain: Take the shavings and feathers of cocks or bird's quills, valerian root, and equal amounts of each; grind them up, and make an ointment from it and apply it thereon.
And then slightly move it again, and be careful if the patient feels no pain or has not moved the bone back to its place. If you do not manage to relocate by hand. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, a sense of rest, or swelling occurs, hurry and relocate, and remove the splint now.
and take light bandage, and use a damp sponge, and soak in water, and lift the place up until itching stops and pain is eased. then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and wrap it up with a bandage until you are sure of heat from abscess.
And place it on the inflammation of the limb, and if there is bone pain, then resume gentle movement, and a little mustard plaster, and do not stretch it as tightly as before. Resume subtle movements until they are suitable.
And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and ligation, then begin again as before.
And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not reset it except after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days. and never leave it for 20 days, as we see that until the fracture heals, approach the joint above.
then reset it more than first time, and let the wound swell with flesh, as I have said before.
and if you see that it dries more than necessary, know that there will be no healing. Rose from warm water every time you dislocate it, and do so daily, letting it rest a while.
So in this treatment also sever the nerves of the limb and quickly remove what are done by the ignorant physician who return the limb wrongly.
It is bad and such treatments are fearsome, and I see nothing else but the lazy ones and those who work directly.
There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes differ;
for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bones all shatter down to the fascia which is below the bone, as if struck with an axe or club; And because of this, this manner of fracture is called "hachure".
Or the sword breaks the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute";
And there are wounds from these two types of large or small fractures.
And if it is impacted, cracked, or from striking against stone, falling on stones, or similar occurrences.
And if there is an open fracture reaching the skin just below or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that heals in the bone as subtle as mouse hairs, and it is a small crack, and therefore this fracture is called "capillary";
And if the wound is made by being pierced with an arrow, or falling, or similar thing, and causes displacement of the bone piece upwards, and it fills in as smoothly as blacksmiths when they pour into molds. If between the stones within.
And this happens more often to those with bones that are mostly moist, as in children's cases;
and occurs in all these ways of fractures where small pieces become dislodged like marbles; And I will speak about it on site.
All know the methods of fractures through pulling apart, and examination with tests, and by the corrupt bone that lies beneath.
The appearance of hair is known when the bone is discovered, and if it is rubbed hard underneath, an open black break occurs.
In the treatment of a break, beware in case of an accident with the patient; and if you see any malicious accidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding outwards and reddening, and other similar conditions, do not heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unstable injury with hope for healing, begin the treatment.
And when the inflammation comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day you should remove the bone that you can reach.
And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bn before the seventh day so that the tissue around the bone becomes corrupted, and they come to the accidents we have mentioned.
And if the bone fracture reaches near the cloth covering the brain, then it is necessary that you split the affected part thusly;
and that you grasp the injured head with care, exposing all sides of the bone as much as possible, and gently uncover the wound area more delicately than you can, and if blood flow occurs during exposure, or pus appears, assist it with what is appropriate, and ensure that you fill the cavity with soaked linen in oil-soaked rose petals; And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and ensure that blood flow resumes. Then begin working within the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of treatment:
The first method involves cutting a narrow slit in front, and that is the shape:
And then make another larger incision than the first.
And the second method involves having various cuts of different widths, some narrow and others wide, with points, made of specially crafted iron:
and working lightly so as not to fracture the skull.
And if the bone is thick and hard, it is necessary to pierce around it so that you make cuts with scrapers, not too deep into the skull or beyond the other test (presumably 'test' refers to a piece of equipment), which should have a margin or circle at the tip, so as not to go past the bone.
And you must have several tools if anyone comes in the place of the spine's bone, so that you have tongs for all examinations.
and this is the form of three ways to use tongs:
The quality for examining within the broken bone is to place one pair of tongs on the bone and rotate with both hands until you know that the bone is fractured.
then move the tongs to another place shortly after, and thus do it throughout, then use the scalpel to create space in the bone where it is broken, making the cut more delicately than possible, gently, as we have said, until you feel the bone with your hand or any of the instruments that you have like pincers.
And ensure you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
And when you have pierced the bone and exposed it, and it is necessary to cut out the protrusion that has been left by the bone from any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be finer and more delicate than the other chisel.
And if there are no small bones or scales left, gently rub with any of the tools mentioned earlier. Then treat the wound as we have previously described.
And another method of treatment is that which Galen describes, and it is more effective. and the remedy must be strong, as he said. It is necessary first that you open part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and when you have discovered that part, place atop its head a lens-shaped incision tool so that it takes this form:
And do not cut too deep, for it is an inflamed area on both sides, so that the one cutting towards the bone.
Then gently strike with a small mallet above it, so that you lightly chip the bone all around, and take care not to hit the surrounding tissue.
If it is exposed to the bone, gently chip away at the bone carefully, because doing so without harm and with caution is of concern.
If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate all the way through to the skin, and the bone is cut mostly above it, leaving small pieces, then you must treat the inflammation, and have various subtle rasps from which you should extract scales in each place as deemed most appropriate according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If there are many coarse rasps followed by more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
In each of these hair treatments and subtle fractures, it is necessary to align according to its direction.
And this is something not properly restored by those who have studied in this art.
And if the wound is severe, it's necessary to take a linen bandage according to the quantity of the wound, and soak in oil roseate (reddish oil), and place it on the w지디. Then take another cloth folded in two or three layers, and soak it with wine and oil mixed together, and place it over the first layer. And do this more gently than you can manage, so as not to burden the patient excessively, then administer it above the other layer without tightening too much until it only covers the wound.
And leave it like this for one day or two, until the abscess is calmed down, then remove it and apply medicines as herbs of lilyroot, flour of cumin, powdered incense, aristolochia, among other things.
And make a paste from these things and apply to the wound, then administer healing medicines without burning.
Ensure the wound is clean and clear, do not leave any ointment or allow a boil to form, for when a boil forms on the cloth of the brain, it festers and pains the patient greatly.
Because if you place something sharp on the skin, do not press down upon it. Therefore, be cautious because if anything unfortunate occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if darkness does not come as a result of the medicine placed upon it, then you must mix one part honey and three parts rose oil in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area. Then proceed with various treatments as needed until healed.
Know that at no time are the two parts of the knee broken or separated, for they consist of only two bones.
And those that are dislocated are cartilaginous, and do not break or snap, but rather hinge or twist, and then heal.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must splint your index finger or little toe with bandages on both sides, and align the fracture within your index finger and ankle inwardly until they regain their natural shape. And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
If the fracture is in the part above the nose and it cannot be brought to its place, you should adjust it equal with a bit of a rod.
And if it is a fracture of both parts, do as described above, and hurry to restore its position the first day if possible.
If not, after the seventh or latest day, when the swelling has calmed down, then bind to the top of the injured toe with linden cloth bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
When you bind another on the other side, if there is a fracture there. And be that they are swollen to such an extent that they fill up the nostrils with snot.
And a healer said that you must anoint the tendons with butter, and change it each day. It seems to me not well enough, but it should be made into a mixture of egg whites and flour, and mill powder. Then let the swelling stay as long as the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
And never put goose nose droppings in place of the swelling, and if to it a sheaf of hay is placed around, and keeps the fracture, and blows on the patient's face. Or do whatever you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then place a compress or cotton cloth in rose oil, or with a little bit of diachronic (ointment).
And if abscesses do not arise, then apply plaster promptly, of wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg whites, then place it on light cotton wool, but do not tie the nostr grooves.
If the break of the nose is small and it is broken into tiny pieces, extract as with suitable tools, then cut the fissure, and treat various difficult wounds and burns, and poultices and ointments appropriate for this.
If there is no internal injury to the nose, treat with bandages and apply linen soaked in broth until healed.
When the jawbone is fractured but there is no open wound and the break is not too severe, as if it has been broken with a stick, you can see it lightly.
It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth. and if the breakage is on the left jawbone, insert your index finger of the right hand, gently push inward, then adjust with the other hand accordingly and ensure it's level.
And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, it is necessary to arrange for an expansion by two parts so that they are equal.
If there are movements of the teeth or bruxism, then they should be strained with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and apply cerate on the fractured jawbone, and place it under a double cloth. And place the great splint well made under it, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the jawbone, securely fastening it in all movements that may occur, instructing the patient to rest, and suggesting they consume light meats.
And if you see that the face changes, reset it every day, then restore what is changing back to its original state. and place plaster over it, with finely ground powder or meal of chickpeas after removing the cerate.
And place a light linen on the dislocation, and if the dislocated bone touches, do not change the patient's position until it is properly aligned. Often healed within three weeks.
And when an abscess comes, arrange it as we have said many times before.
And if there is a break and wound together, ensure no piece of bone remains exposed. If delicate in the vicinity where the swelling has settled near.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fat according to necessity.
their;
The shaft breaks many times at the shoulder, with breakage occurring in three different ways:
When it is broken and displaced into two parts, and there are fragments, making it easier to repair.
Or when the break also includes an open wound.
And the procedures are as follows when the break with an open wound occurs: you must have two assistants, one of whom bandages the shoulder with the broken shaft. and the other should extend their arm towards the affected area.
Then position the break evenly against your own shoulders so that it is as necessary, ensuring there are no visible misalignments or discomforts.
And if you require further extension, place a round rod made of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, with its thickness according to necessity. Et ils sont étendus et livrés à leur force, et retenez-les dans votre main, de sorte que vous les positionniez correctement, comme cela se doit.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back due to it coming from the front, it is necessary for the patient to lie over their sling, and place under the shoulder .i. arm splint with a middle hole, and push in the ministers' hands downward until the shoulder bone is elevated.
And then bring the break close to your hands, and if you see fragments, it is necessary that you split above.
and grip the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any protrusion, provide support with one of your cutting instruments. but use this instrument to hold them apart to protect against infection.
and make it resemble a spoon, not too deep, and as wide as needed according to the size of the bone and the strength of your hand.
and it should have two ends, as you see, one end wide, the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
And when you are sure of an abscess being hot, if the wound is large, or if you doubt a hot abscess, then cover the wound with linen and cloths, according to its quantity.
And if an abscess comes about, apply oil-soaked cloths, lint, and wine, and place it on top.
The tension of a bone, when it is without wounds and not swollen, place plaster powder from the mill and whey butter on it, and put light bandages over that, and if necessary, use a splint underneath. Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, then put two layers of linens over the bandages, and the plaster. Then take a delicate rod three palms in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, ensuring the head of the bandage hangs down. And place the stake over the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and below the healthy seat, and below the unhealthy seat. And reset the joints of each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the break again, and it is clearly not moving above the broken bone, reward them every day, and once the bindings are loosened, they heal.
And make the sick person lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the seat while they sleep to elevate the shoulder. If you alleviate the fracture by adjusting the shoulder position or tying the arm to the neck, and no accidental dislocation occurs again until XX days. (XX here is a placeholder for an unspecified number of days)
Then begin the poultice again if it is needed, apply pressure and leave as such until restored.
And it is restored in at most 28 days, and sooner for some people.
Regarding a broken shoulder
Occasionally the shoulder breaks or moves out of place without a fracture, and it cannot be moved except by touch.
if the apparatus according to the pattern of the break, and resetting in accordance with its natural shape, in all ways that you can.
then place on the location powder finely ground with plenty of eggs, and light gauze, and over it put a double layer. then place a wide and fine bandage, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if the edges of the bandage are beyond any part of the shoulder, use a linen gauze to secure it evenly.
And then it is tightly bound with a large bandage firmly, so that the joint does not move from its place, and monitor the ligament each day.
And every time it becomes less painful, re-bind it firmly, and place the joint even if it is displaced from its place, and lay the patient on their side.
and the shoulder has been restored in 20 days or 25.
And when these numbers are completed, re-dislocate it gently and be sure, for it is not the bone that moves lightly.
And if a piece of bone is felt before and not near the skin, probe further, and expose the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed boil.
In the breaking of the thighbone
The flesh is never broken in a thousand ways, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks on the other side.
And when it is fractured within a thousand pieces, if it falls from height, the patient feels great pain, numbness, and tingling, and at times blood is vomited, revealing exposed joints in the broken bones, and they are very ill.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and places I cushions between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and aligns the ribs with both hands for II finger widths, subtly adjusting to all manners possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then place above the dislocated bones and stopgaps on the subtle salt stone or other light material, wrap it in a cloth, and keep it stationary so that it does not move. And turn the ligament back into place, strain it gently, and release each hour as needed, and if it becomes relaxed, then continue to strain.
And if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain or pustule, do so promptly, and remove any splints, and attend to those who have come seeking treatments.
Then reset the splint, and strain it until it is secure.
The breaking of ribs
Surges that the fracture of ribs only occurs in large ones behind the back and within, and they do not bend easily because they are slick. and feel it well at the inquiry with both hands.
And healing involves setting the fracture correctly as needed. Then apply a cast, and use a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of ribs is inwardly inclined, the patient feels very great pain and pressure, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the skin. and is filled with pus, and constantly vomits large amounts of blood, and it is severe illness, and the ancients put much effort into treatment.
And if those who say it should be administerired meats that inflate the belly to push the fracture upwards.
We do not attempt this if there are no pus-filled abscesses present, unless they have already come about. And if it is present, proceed with the procedure.
And some say that you place cups on the body to draw out fluid, and it is reasonable. However, there is doubt whether the bleeding will not draw out excess at its place due to weakness in position.
;  the em (chief by:
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the bone protruding into the skin, and doubt arises for them, so it is necessary to cut at its place of broken ribs, and one must use an instrument to protect oneself from the wound.
And then one must cut the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplasters until healed.
And if boils arise from this condition, place a cloth soaked in oily rose oil on it and apply to the area.
And care while the limb that must be incised is supported on its side until it becomes stable.
And also in the spine of the back.
And when this occurs with anyone, and you need to know if they will be healed or not, take care that if you see their hands become softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when pricked with a pin, they do not feel it.
Say that they have signs of impending death in various conditions; if when restrained and not moved they feel well, then know the bone's connection is intact, and the patient will be healed with proper care.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you need to know if it is stable or not, take care if the joints are softened, and if there are accidents present in both hands, and windwaters and involuntary stools occur on the back.
And when it is stabilized on its belly, if there is involuntary defecation. And when they are settled on their backs and they want to roll over, they cannot. Say that it is fatal: If he does not work at his own care.
And if this injury does not occur, then it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is that you apply soothing oil of rose or oil of sweet almonds until it is eased.
Then place on one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind with a bandage, and command the patient to rest. And do not sleep over the part that is in pain until it is healed.
And if any bones are dislocated, one must cover them with a cloth; And remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat with an ointment-soaking poultice until healed.
And if the skull is fractured, known as "chiés de la kowe," place your poultice from your left hand and hold it level with your right hand at arm's length, then apply an embalming sponge and staff on top if needed.
Then stretch it, and if there is displaced bone, do so carefully, then set the bone, and treat the wound until healed.
For the fracture of the hipbone
Sometimes the hipbone is fractured, and if so, it has a slight shortening at the top. And they make a long cut, and descend to the breastbone, and come to pain at the location, and swelling, and break as if broken.
And its healing is such that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the fracture. and assess which bone is broken and its shape.
and if the fracture is solely in the skull, make it equal to that fracture until it assumes a natural form.
And if the fracture is long or it inclines towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that breakage is aligned properly. And when you have made it equal, place a staff underneath, then put a pillar of wood or iron, and stabilize the fracture so that it does not move.
and raise from below the ribs until they are levelled. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy ribcage or backside.
When an abscess appears, do not touch it until it is soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned. Then return to restoration, and strain as necessary unless there has been any injury.
Of a shoulder joint fracture
Dislocations are those that occur between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, they must be restored according to one of two ways:
One is to take a piece of iron wire long enough in this manner:
And make two loops with it, and bend them upwards, then secure the patient on the support.
Then cast the broken arm on the rod so that it reaches the support, and in the middle, make an arch with another rod, then bend it over something heavy or extend the aid towards you.
Then you must set the fracture as if together with its counterpart, until the break is restored as it should be.
And the other method is that one suspends the patient over his hatter, then ties his hands to his neck, and commands two ministers so that one dyes what is above the break in his hands, and the other dyes below with wool all around it, and stretches each part.
And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then strain at the breakage below and above the breakage, and extend each of the limbs to its place.
And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade, it should be bridged by placing one end under the collarbone and the other towards the armpit from the break.
And similarly if the fracture is towards the armpit, you should place the splint gently without much effort, until the break is level with its location and above the collarbone.
Then set the fracture as it should be, and splint it, if necessary abscesses do not occur.
And if abscesses do occur, do not splint it until seven days have passed, and apply linen soaked in oil of roses for relief, until the abscesses are calmed.
Then you hold it in place, and the method of holding is such that you place the splint over the break, then join the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the back or over the chest.
And apply the dressing, and hold it against the shoulder, and along the arm, so that the arm stays straight unless something prevents it or if a bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use splints and place one wider and stronger than the others over the fracture, with an interval of space between each splint, so that each splint should be large enough to extend beyond the break by three finger-widths from either side;
Then strain over the fragments as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more forcefully and less while aligning.
And if you see the position of the fragments and alignment, as we have said, during the hour when you restore the broken member, and you doubt the wound is hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then check each day for three days that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, or new sores cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If correctly executed as we have said.
And if none of these incidents occur, do not discharge the bandage for more than three days or so, and let the patient lie on their back with hands on their abdomen.
And place a bandage made of clean linen evenly on the shoulder, and observe each hour or part of the night, to ensure that the broken limb does not move or the ligaments become softened.
If necessary by the power of medicine, and give him meat that we have previously prescribed, in such a way that the meat is as subtle first. And when he begins to recover, it becomes larger (or substantial).
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be restored in forty days altogether. Then you must dislocate and administer baths and ointment remedies to set it right again.
And if the stricture is ugly and twisted, it remains to dislocate for days or months.
Of a fractured arm
The arm consists of two bones called "phalanges," one small and the other that forms the palm.
And the other is large, and it is he who is outside, toward his small finger.
Perhaps break only the large bone solely, or the small one; and sometimes both together.
When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easy, and their healing;
And when the large ones are broken, then there is bad healing, and more complicated than if they were both broken together.
If it's only small fevers that have been broken, then a little rest is needed and one should be even-keeled.
And if it's the large bone, then it must be removed with greater force;
And stretch it over the bone, and lengthen the pocket of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and cross them with him immediately, and hold the bone in front of him higher, that the patient may suffer no pain.
Then extend the minister's arm towards the area below its hand or at the elbow, with one assistant on one side and another above.
Then place the mirror evenly, according to its better form.
And if in the break to pieces, place each in its place, and if any are dislocated that they grip their root, and you cannot restore them to their place, then make a cut above and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And if there is an injury to the bone, I have discussed this individually with the physician. then take the treatment.
And if in the beginning there are pus-filled blisters, make a poultice of a cloth soaked with a mixture of rose oil and white wax beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft. and apply the poultice gently until the pus-filled blisters are soothed.
And then remove the poultice and apply a plaster of powdered lime with abundant egg whites. When applying bandages, make them thicker and slightly wider than the others to stay on the fractured area more securely.
And you must understand there are six degrees or different arrangements of arms. So it is broken in one bone, or two.
And it is held more at the break than elsewhere, and every day less in alignment, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the dressings be soft and moist over the break, not hard or rough.
And let the dressings be soft and moist over the break, not hard or rough. And let the bandage used to hold it in place be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And repair the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon the limb, you must bathe the member in warm water until the itch is soothed.
And let the limb rest without any tightness.
And then resume the strapping, and if the ligament is softened and the bone displaced, and similar things occur, so shall it be done.
If care must be taken as the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it slightly and let some days pass until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then dislocate up until day XX.
And between these times, then tie his hands to his neck, and let them be evenly matched, and guard against movement and displacement, and he sleeps on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or fifty, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the composition and temperament of the humors.
Of a fracture of the hand
It happens that in the palm of the hand and in the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather a bending occurs many times.
And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, it requires that the patient sit with their arms crossed evenly before them.
Then place his hand above the extended thigh, and lengthen the broken bones with a straightening force, and align them evenly until they are well joined.
And apply the plaster and dressings, if there is an abscess, then he places a splint according to the amount needed. And it is wrapped in a cloth of linen.
And if there is a break near the ribs around the belly of the sole, make a splint with cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken sole. and then the strain of a long cloth is applied, and let it be elevated as high as the palm's sole, and held in place as necessary.
And if the fracture is in the lower part of the limb, it must be placed with a stake underneath and another above on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap it entirely around the wrist, keeping the ligament between the bones taut.
And if there is a break on any of our ankles, if it's the malleoli, place them equally as needed. and strain with the sole, and if you see it then insert a small straight splint to elevate the breakage, and do not move.
If the fracture is of other bones, similarly to those in the index or one of the others, make it even and bind with the healthy bone that follows. Or you tie them all together tightly so they may move little or no movement, or place a splint underneath as needed.
And take care in the restoration and management of pus-filled abscesses, and remove what arises as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often fractured, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward.
And its repair involves tying ligaments above the breakage, as well as other surrounding areas. The patient lies on their back, then each attendant extends their hand equally to all sides.
And when there is a fracture within the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let one ligament go toward the wrist and the other ligament below the fracture.
And also if it's near the knee, then be the ligaments by the knee, and make the extension valgus.
Then place the splint on the bone equal with both hands, so it follows its natural shape, and then apply the cast, and the bandage, if no swelling occurs.
And if there is hot swelling, let it be soothed first then return to your work and care. The ligation is done in the following manner.
It is necessary that you wrap above the fracture with doubled or triple bandages, and leave extra material, then turn the leg until the ankle reaches near the knee's root, and thread a long string between the thigh and leg, below the knee, let the top part of the cord hang over.
Then turn to the leg and thigh, bandage them, then apply a dressing over any wounds, and place an iron bar on the leg bone.
Then wrap the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to ensure even pressure, then begin binding using three or four turns around the wound. And as you increase above the wound, decrease the tightness.
Then take two more strands of thread that you have tied between the leg and thigh, and bind three dressings on top of them, then return to untie at the head end of the thread as far as reaching the foot.
If it does not move back to its place, leave it like that, then ensure no abscess or swelling occurs again. And if it occurs, when resetting is done, and directed as described, as we have said many times.
And if there are broken bone fragments that catch, the repositioning may be required if possible. and if it cannot be done, then incision of the limb must be made, and ligaments severed. and the treatment is as we have said until it is sound again.
And never should the thigh be broken as such when placed in splints, like in shoulders and arms.
Nevertheless, in this kind of restoration done, it does not harm the patient.
And know that the thigh is restored within a day or so, depending on the variations of constitutions.
Know that in the groove of the neck there is often a slight fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is not so much a crack, but a split or piercing, and leads to any wound, feels of the wound, and this smells quite foul.
And if there is restoration by setting equally what was separated at its joints, so that it can be moved and healed.
Then place the splint, and put a round peg if needed, and restrain it as necessary, then address all other issues we have mentioned regarding fractures, like abscesses that burn and similar matters. Do what is appropriate for each injury so that it heals properly.
On the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one called "tibia" and the other called "femur".
and there are all types of fractures as they occur in the arm, and therefore the treatment is like that for the arm equally, and the procedures are all there. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg from all sides.
And if the small bones are broken, turn it forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly. Yet then turn away from it.
Then prepare for stretching, align properly, and secure the ligaments evenly.
but nonetheless, if it is an unsightly breakage with some fragments present, then the stretching should be minor and lighter. and keep upright according to your virtue (strength).
And when you have completed your work, take the weighted wooden staves that extend along the leg from knee to ankle on both sides.
then wrap them with two strips of cloth above and below, securely tying the middle so that the leg cannot bend to either side, thus it is well.
And no one administers oil to the length of the leg, and it heals as wood, and places the leg in position to prevent movement, and properly treats the break where there is injury.
And each day moves the leg, to check if there are any abscesses or other accidents. If it heals until it is healthy.
On the breakage of bone in the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot it comes to a fracture and the bones are slightly dislocated, with no injury occurring in some other conditions.
And if it occurs as a broken bone in the foot, and you see the bones protruding on top of each other, place such malaise limbs flat on the ground as if they were to walk, then now put your leg under theirs where the bones are elevated, and press until they return to their places.
Then place the poultice and apply pressure thereon, then take a small tablet at II inches from the navel, then strain it back in position immediately, then wrap with bandages around, and other things of which you are in need.
And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones to be equal again, whether fractured or dislocated.
And if any nerves are broken, restore them as we have described for the hand's nerves. then place an iron bar of the same length as the nerve, and make it slightly wider, then take that tablet from under the hip as I mentioned, and strain back immediately.
and if there are two or three, or more broken, place under each a bar according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of flax, and strain the tablet from under the hip. And it is when on top of the shoulder blade lies the belly with a feverish pain, so that one may grasp firmly.
And it is necessary not to forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, which we have mentioned; and treat each injury as it ought to be.
For a fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of womanly nature is broken, and she should sit in a chair expanded, then incline it to the part of her back that hurts, and be held from behind;
then fill the maiden's body with cotton cloth, placing as much as it can hold.
then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, and thus remove the cotton when it comes to the entrance of her body, returning the bone with its natural position.
And when she wishes to urinate, provide her with a sponge, and once she has urinated, reset it, thus doing so for seven days or more. If this is restored, and if you see it, take a sheepskin bladder, tie its neck with thread, and fill the entire bladder with water from the stream. Then blow into the bladder until it is fully inflated. The body will return to restore the fracture;
Then it should be filled with cotton and left that way for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm or woman's limb is broken as we have described in the thigh bone.
And these fractures are not hidden from those who devote themselves to its study and application; listen to my book.
For a fracture indicates various conditions affecting the proper path of restoration: So understand this.
In the phallus, when it is broken, takes on a goose's neck and inserts itself. Then wrap dressings around it, and leave them there for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be healed now so that the signs we have mentioned testify to them.
And if the wound is healed and there are no foreign bodies present, then again begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, unless an abscess develops.
When abscesses occur there, allow the healing until the third day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch or disturb it either on the second or fourth day, for you would bring about a harmful incident.
And if the broken bone is visible at its location, it must be carefully set with slight pressure from your hands in small extensions.
And if the extension does not fit to make both hands equal, then use this instrument made of iron with seven or eight long pieces, and its width is according to the amount of the wound. and so it requires three or four fingers from the barber to grasp, depending on how much is needed for each treatment of fractures.
and it should be slightly long and somewhat thicker, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and have an edge in front, and thickness towards the middle like this:
And it is called "palisandre," so that the arching of the neck must be placed on the visible part of the bone. And you must touch it once so that it returns, and they are equal to each other. And if the fractures are subtle, and the tissues cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must cut off the visible part of the baboon until the tissues have opportunity.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, use a suitable instrument for this, either an incision or a saw, to your ability.
then retrieve what is lodged in the hard bone with sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned to its place, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position.
If you manage to place it back where it belongs, then anoint the wound with vinegar and black sticking tonic properly if so. and do not put any cerate or other substance on the wound that contains oil, lest it causes decay and infection.
then apply bandages as you have restored the bebone, and leave the wound uncovered, covering it entirely with a dressing according to the amount of the wound, ensuring that the injury is not strained with the fracture.
And many times have they done this foolish physician, bringing forth from the patient who is dead or corrupted at some point. And let it be that he makes the fracture more gentle and softer than other breaks.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that some unforeseen event may occur, as we have said, and there is pain at the site, then it does not require setting with splints. but wrap around it, in place of splints, use sturdy cloths and bind them.
And when after one or two days you see infection at the wound, take whatever you have applied and add healing salve to it, as with Tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar ones.
It is necessary to loosen the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
And the limb should be set in such a way that the bow bends gently.
If more than one day passes and it cannot be joined but returns with pain, because there are small pieces of bone in the way, then you must carefully cleanse the wound and remove all those displaced fragments that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes at the site or another form of decay occurs, it must be treated as described in this chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and visible above the limb, as with the hip or shoulder bones, and other similar large body parts, do not treat it, for many times death comes, but let it remain until it heals.
By chance it may heal itself after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound, if you know how.
and if you do not know, leave it be.
We often come to heal the break after bone health, especially when it is near the joint, and there is an unsightly appearance of the limb. and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore be cautious if we are weakened: if you administer medicines like aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with acacia and other similar substances, whether you use any of these individually or all together, mix them with astringent wine or an abundance of honey or oil. And place them on the knives for cutting, and hold firmly without loosening hands.
And place them on the knives for cutting, and hold firmly without loosening hands. Then dislocate it, and do another one, as long as necessary movements occur.
or strain a well-made lump of flesh; because the properties of this flesh are such that it pulls out all inflammations from over the limbs.
and if the movement is already converted into hardness just like a stone, and there is a need to remove it, so remove excess flesh. or reshape by any razor until it is removed, and heal as long as it is cleaned up.
The member that is weak after recovery
When the broken bone is restored, and after follows weak and subtle limbs for many reasons: Because one was made too tightly, and it was not loosened as it should be. Or because there were too many bindings, preventing the member from regaining its normal size. Or due to excessive rubbing. Or by making movements that are too large and not at the right time. Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the treatment should be that you feed the patient well and make the body supple until there is an increase in blood. And provide him with a bath, and give him joy and ease.
Then apply poultices to the limb such that they draw much swelling away from it and often change with water, until the swelling subsides in the limb. And returns to its natural shape.
The twisted member after health is restored When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb is ugly, however, it does not lose its natural function.
if you do not believe the simpletons who say that one must break the limb anew entirely, and many foolish men have done this in our land.
and such actions are condemned, which brings great harm, and sometimes death.
however, if the knots and twists are recent, it is appropriate that they be loosened with warm water, or soft herbs boiled like valerian leaves, roots, and milk thistle, among similar things.
And the poultice softening agent you take as Aquilon properly made, and you collect the mucilage of wormwood, and mix it with fat of geese or oil of sesame, and make a poultice on top.
Or you take soothing fats, and grind them with columbine seed, and certain medicines that alleviate the tightness.
At no time is bone broken by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands. And so provide relief to the movement of each limb at every hour.
And if the tortuousness is old and hardened, just like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then if necessary, use the saw-like instrument gently up to the bone. And apply cuisson and continue with treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint is out of its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When any dislocation occurs, now you must return it without delay.
Because if one is late, the swelling increases, and perhaps when resetting it causes pain at its place.
For this reason, it is not advisable to move it when it has swelled. Many times brings forth pain and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this occurs, make the patient take wine, then leave them alone until the swelling is calmed.
Then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently flex it, and treat each member as care comes to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder joint dislocations up to fractures.
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated inwardly, and there are two ways of dislocation for both sides. or they are a little out of their place, and become slightly softened; or they are dislocated entirely, hanging towards the left, and causing saliva from the mouth that cannot be held, not able to close its mouth, and wrapping around the tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
If it is complete and accomplished, one must promptly reset it without delay.
In such a way that the minister dyes your head with the patient's hand and inserts the mirror slightly into one of its roots at the location of the lower jaw's dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is on both sides. And let the other two hands be far enough to place them evenly.
Then instruct the patient to soften his jawbones and move them from all sides. The mirror is placed to make it level, until it returns to its place.
And if resetting is difficult, especially when both jawbones are together, apply hot water and oil until they can be gently adjusted.
Do not attempt to move it back as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the wound of the patient heals well and becomes softened, then place a cloth soaked in a mixture made of rose oil and wax on it, and lightly bind it with thin threads.
the patient should sleep on his back with his head between two pillows, and not move to either side or make any effort to turn over, but gently eat tender meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws have healed.
and then offer him what he wishes to eat lightly, and not strain to open his mouth while eating or drinking until the jaw is fully healed and healthy.
If the two lower jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not restored to their original positions, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal obstruction, and perhaps they vomit clear fluid.
And when you see this, then you know it is dislocation. and many times the one who suffers from it can die within 9 days.
The strong bone cannot be dislocated from within the ribs and at the end of the shinbone, and it is not dislocated even once by accident, but one feels it keenly.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then you press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return.
then place on the splint and apply the bandage, securing it.
and the one lying towards the edge cannot dislocate; if not, and if it ever does dislocate again, reset it to its place as we have said.
then apply the splint and bandage, secure it, and advise the patient to rest until they are well again.
And thus bring back the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
Sections that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways:
One is because it dislocates from the lower part of the shoulder to above. and the second is at the upper part. And sometimes dislocates to the upper part, but this happens little.
and does not dislocate backward for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inward for the nerves;
and often dislocates upward toward the collarbone, especially in those with little strength, for these it moves very quickly.
to those with enough strength, it goes with ease and reenters easily.
And occasionally some men may experience blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with intense heat, believing it to be dislocated by this.
Thus one must try it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And is known when dislocation occurs toward the collarbone, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their marked diversity; And you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and underneath the socket where the top of the shoulder meets, just as if it were some eggs. And the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor make any movements at all;
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see the socket.
This way of dislocation cannot be corrected if it is new, or when the child becomes ill.
And the method is for the minister to raise the patient's hand upward, then put pebbles underne cuff, and lift the joint with great strength at its place. And the minister takes hold of the hand, extends it upward, then places it below. If done swiftly and skillfully.
And if it does not occur as we have said on the following day, it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water. and treat gently with soothing substances such as an infusion of wormwood, fennel, and honey in water, and be treated.
then rest the patient on their back, and place under the buttocks a strip of linen that is neither too soft nor too hard, then position the ankle bone on top of the strip, and carefully elevate the head of the shoulder, and treat the hand gently.
And other remedies apply to the patient's head so it does not move forward. and if that shoulder returns immediately, then examine whether you reset according to this method:
And ensure that there is a person who is larger than the patient. And stand directly to their side, and lift the shoulder from under the seat of the patient, raising the seat upward so that the patient hangs in the air. And other remedeus guide the patient's hand towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, reinforce with them something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset in another manner:
And it is that you insert a long stick into the ground so that the head is aligned as with an axis, and not too thick nor too narrow. Then it is put under the patient, but with soft cloths above, and the patient lies long on their back.
Then the hand should be extended downwards to the other side gently, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return for all these reasons that we have mentioned, then do this treatment: Take an iron stick of length five and two inches in width, which has the head bent to enter into the elbow from above, as follows:
Then put soft cloths over the back of the patient, so that the elbow does not scratch the patient, then place it under the joint of the affected limb.
Extend the other arm over the length of the back, and place the shoulder over it, then extend the head of the hand, and put the arm under the slot of a stool with wide arms, and let the hands hang downwards on the opposite side. The joint may now remain fixed.
And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put a woolen thread beneath the shoulder, then apply an ointment cloth of powder from grinding, with incense and myrrh oil on all around the shoulder, then quickly strain undernehemenent, and turn the linen over the ointment, wrapping it around its collar, and let the hands hang in this manner.
And it is necessary that he rests a little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal sooner.
and then rest more after 3 or 7 days, and move [it]. and if it is firm and not softened, it will be healed.
And if the dislocation is severe due to the moisture that has occurred or another reason, it must be tended with three small fire cauteries as mentioned in the treatise of fire cautery.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after nine days, and the joint does not stay in place, nor can lift either arm upwards; then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are pinched or stretched or softened. and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that occurs towards the lower part and scapulae, or backward, is caused by impact, extension of the hands, and other measures are taken.
And treat until it is whole again.
And after healing comes weakness in the limb and delays in movement, causing the patient great pain many times until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Know that the shoulder joint has dislocated from its place and returns to points;
And it is dislocated in all parts, mainly at the front and back, and the dislocation cannot be reduced, as one can clearly see and feel it. and dislocates according to each position. And when you join the maligned limb with its proper alignment, if it can be seen clearly. Because the dislocation is raised, and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary for you to reset it as soon as a bone protrudes because if the bone were to emerge, it would be difficult to realign.
and perhaps cannot always be realigned completely, especially when it is at the back; it's worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and perhaps there may be death.
And restoration is when it can be returned to such extent that you spread its hand with your two hands. and its arms are spread wide, and the hands turn as follows throughout it, above and below, positioning the joint with all of its fingers together or at the root of its palm, until they return to their place.
And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back after doubling its hand with its own hand and fixing the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
And if it does not want to go back to its place, give a strong stretching.
and there are two ministers who extend the arm, and they hold it with both hands, so that it does not move during stretching.
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it.
When the muscle attaches to the joint near its hand, if you anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then rejoin the joint properly until it heals.
And when it is in place, if you securely wrap with linen bandages and strain gently, then support the arm at the ache-ridden joint, leave it for several days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in place, you may loosen the ligaments and let them be.
And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, start anew with bandaging and ligaments, leave them for several days until they are firmly in place. Then release it.
And if it feels stiffness after the joint's resetting and moves, then bathe well and rub gently, pressing until relieved. Or place a fat sheep's grease on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then bandage, and let them take their bath. And when they sweat, rub the joint promptly, then reapply the fat, and then take a bath. And do this two or three times until healed.
And if you see swelling, apply warm damp fenugreek paste mixed with butter and bind it.
If it returns to normal condition.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand's joint dislocates easily, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be brought back to its place promptly, at the same time as it is dislocated, so that the joint can swell or an abscess may arise there.
And the adjustments are such that you place your hand over a table, extend your fingers, and align them evenly, so that you put your palm on the joint's surface, and press until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to check if it is properly in place. Then the patient should put their back on their hand over a table during extension and resetting. If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a tabletop and mirror position your hand over that joint appearance.
If it returns now, that is well. If not, and the strain from soothing balms causes an abscess, then let it be as such to begin again.
And if it cannot bear being left off, and you are unable to place it back after any days, the twisted joint will persist.
nor can anything be done for the patient until their hand has become softened and cannot grasp or extract any objects at all. then you know that the nerves are cut or the artery is affected.
if there is no other remedy but to extract through surgery near the wound, and perhaps it brings no further benefit.
And when the hands are placed correctly, place them on the plaque we have mentioned, then grasp it and leave for 5 days, then release and keep like this.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no loosening, then apply warm water to the area, and rub until it becomes smooth.
Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Never are either of the bones of the hand dislocated to any side, neither towards the back of the palm nor its underside.
Then they are to be tied up and the dislocation is put back into place until it stays, then support the head of the shoulder, and bend towards the part where it was dislocated.
And leave it for two days, then on the third day make it equal again.
and from this nourish him as we have said, leave him for a day, then make him move again, and reconnect the nourishment.
and do this often until it is narrow again, just the same, if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, then proceed as you did before, until it becomes healthy.
And do likewise when it is dislocated elsewhere.
Double dislocation of the spine or backbone.
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several occurring, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
And the signs are that the urination gushes out without volition, cannot be held in, and many times some limb is weakened, either both hips or one arm or leg.
And many times the spine dislocates four parts.
The one that moves at the back is called "gilborsis":
This treatment is for when you find "gilborsis" resulting from childhood. If there's no remedy or healing at all.
And the one that comes from falling or blows or similar things, according to old methods of treatment by using many words, it does not have much benefit in all.
But I've abbreviated according to my intention and formed remedies in various ways.
I say that in the "gilborsis" occurring at the front of the thighs, there is no cure or health.
And similarly those that come directly to both sides, and cannot be healed except for the one properly coming onto the back, as I say.
And that the patient be stretched equally across his face in one place, and have support from below him, so he does not fall.
Then stick a splint to the head in earth firmly, and one at the feet, and tie a bandage around the limbs of the patient, and another on the hips, knees, ankles.
And two ministers know the bindings, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the two splints.
And they should be securely closed, as we have said about the splint, and the healer place his palms firmly on the spine, until it recovers.
If it does not return with this treatment, take a stick three arms long, and chevron from the front, position the patient on their side, then place the head of the stick under the forehead, and then set the middle of the stick against the spine. And place the ends of their feet under the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see that twists toward the elbow, apply pressure with your hand. And take two sticks of great length to the head of the patient's arm and toward the other two fingers, placing between each stick an ample space in width.
And have on each stick one knot where it bends correctly, and the sticks should be firmly in place so that they do not move.
And among these burners should there be one burning piece returning to where the ribbons return, and have in it two smaller pieces of the width of a palm, for turning the wheel.
And then attach the ribbons that are among the cables to the wheel's axis and the other ribbons to the pieces on the opposite wheel, with each servant turning their respective wheels throughout the entire length of the ribbon, and the master ensures the spine is aligned as we have said.
And when it is aligned, place on an embalming desiccant with plenty of ointment, then the plugs, and then the splint from a tablet three fingers wide to properly fix the fracture site and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with ribbons as we have said, and apply subtle nourishment to the patient until they are well.
And if any issue arises at the end of health recovery, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the spoon that we have mentioned here before. And never administer a piece of metal or iron, and when the appearance appears in the lower part of the back, believe that it is dislocation. And it is the bone that opens up, so there should be no assumption about it: Perhaps death could come as a result.
I say that the hip and shoulder joints only come from dislocation alone, not like other joints.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: Outward and inward, front and back;
And further inside and out thereof, with it dislocated forward and backward.
And the recognition of its dislocation inwardly is such that when joining the affected limb with the healthy one, it is longer and opens more joints on the diseased side than the healthy, so the afflicted cannot double their knuckles over fire. And it is the sinew which is near an inflamed abscess, because the head of the hip comes close to it.
The sign of it occurring to one is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs in those for whom this occurs anteriorly are that they extend their leg according to completion; However, do not double the knuckles without pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, cannot go forward, retains its urine, swells with anger, and as it goes, passes over the heel.
And the sign of it occurring to one is that they can spread their knee should be loosed from above and weakens, and is the other leg, and are the shoe.
The resetting of this type of dislocation is such that you must first assess if the dislocation occurred recently, and it remains according to its nature, without any remedy. and it should not be assumed unless necessary.
And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh and there are four ways of dislocation, quickly return the joint to its place, extend it outward and inward, and move it to the right and left. perhaps if it returns, no further treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this way, you must summon a strong assistant and firmly support the leg with two hands or with one hand under the knee. And other ministering hands extend over in such a manner that they put their hands below their knees, then grip them with a soft cord around the thigh. and others pinch the head of the ligament.
they extend both upward and downward at once so that the patient is lifted from the ground entirely, and hangs suspended.
This method of extension is common in four similar cases; and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is fine.
If not, then it must be given similar treatment.
When the dislocation is in the jawbone, it is appropriate to support the patient on their uninjured side, then place a cord at the base of the thigh, and extend it from under the arch, towards the foreleg, and upwards towards the neck.
Then call upon other ministers with your arms, and hug the large joint of the ailing thigh, and extend it in the direction needed. If it returns to its place now;
And this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then you must bind both feet of the ailing limb together with a strong but supple bandage over both heels and knees, and let the sick leg be extended two degrees more than the other.
Then hang from the top of a log, with two long arms outstretched on either side of it;
Then command one minister to hug the head of the thigh, and let other ministers hang with the sick person, who firmly grasp the thigh, as the joint returns swiftly now.
When the dislocation is on its way back, place it in front of the patient, as we have said in those with gilbosity, and properly straighten the limb above the leg.
Then put two sticks, one on top of the head and the other under it, then place a stick between the buttocks near the form above the patient. And have him wear wet cloths around, so he does not shake the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the master places it evenly with his hand to reset the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good.
If not, then place on a board and press as we have said for the gilbosity, positioning the patient's bad side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended quickly for the affected leg, and according to what I have said. Then the master places his hand above the patient's pain, then presses with the other hand and extends towards their navel.
If the dislocation is in its place, do not extend or lift the patient upwards, but let it be as if the joint was dislocated backwards, as we have described during lying down on both hips. And let it be propped up so that the limb is extended as we have said before, and one should apply pressure on the joint against the table. And when the patient extends their legs, they will be equal in length. Then support the hips and place the traction, and tie it with a bandage so that the joint does not move. And let it rest for three or four days, then release the traction, and place the traction again underneath.
And if you see that they are equal, strain them as before, and let it rest for three days.
Then release it, and the wound heal completely, until the limb is comforted.
For the dislocation of the knee joint
The joints are dislocated in three ways: That is to say, anteriorly and posteriorly, and behind.
And does not dislocate again immediately.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, extend his leg if he can, and then place your back to his face and put your feet under his.
Then take his knee in your hands, retract it between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the kneecap. And other methods extend his foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it fits lightly into his thigh.
And apply the bandage over it, and raise the leg to the hip, keeping them together firmly for three to four days or five, then release.
And do not allow the patient to move much during healing until the limb is comfortably settled.
And if the limb is not severely damaged, it must be carefully and strongly treated, as we have said in the treatment of the arm, until it becomes healthy.
For ankle dislocation
The ankle is never completely healed or fully dislocated, but both within and outside.
The signs are such that the ankle is everted, and try before reaching the part where it has dislocated.
The reductions should be gentle, and he must be extended slightly by his hands as soon as possible.
And when it is fully dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and grip him with one hand through his leg above the ankle.
Then grasp the foot towards your right hand and then two times with the left, then extend it upward, and gently place the foot back into position.
And do this twice as we have said, pulling and turning the limb.
If it returns, that's good;
If not, resume the work, as it will return;
And if it cannot return thusly, lay the patient on their back on the ground, and firmly insert a staff between their thighs in the earth, and wrap a cloth around them so they do not move.
Then mark the thigh with a minister, and other ministers extend the limb to their hands or chains, so it is tied at the neck of the limb. Then extend each minister equally, and the staff should be firmly between the thighs of the patient to restrain them when extended.
Then set the mirror to properly align the dislocation with your hands, and other remedies apply oil to the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
And when it reaches the point where bones heal, place the poultice and apply plaster above, bind firmly, tie the bandage to the leg, and be careful not to make the lines too tight around the tendons behind the ankle.
Then leave it for two or three days, and loosen the bandages if necessary, reapply them.
Then release at the fourth day or halfway point, and instruct the patient to walk for four days. And if it passes this timeframe, there is no need to be concerned that it may still dislocate.
And if an abscess comes to this place, it is necessary that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
From the dislocation of both shoulders When both shoulders are dislocated, they should be extended with ease, which is a simple thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it must be made to sit on something flat or a table straight, and place your foot under where these joints open, then firmly press with your foot until it returns.
And when it is evened and nothing opens up, place a board with two legs under the foot, then press firmly, and leave it there for three days, then release. And let it rest until it is healed.
Of wounds and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and we want to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
If you are not overly confident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassaderies and merciful but late, then do not be too bold:
And at the beginning of healing abscesses cut hot, and let the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope for health. And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place now so that the abscess heals inwardly.
And when the limb is reset, apply soothing remedies for abscesses and treat the wound as needed with dry ointments.
And if there is dislocation with bone fractures and small nerves disturbed, as for simple illnesses do what we have said.
And beware of falling into despair, as I have said, for it benefits your soul and the health of your armament and body.
