Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science and together with its fulfillment and at its end through its exposition and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this section, which is part of the work on hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and employed everywhere entirely, it has been completely forgotten except for small descriptions found in ancient books where hands have moved them. And thus comes the mistake and arrogance, with minds closed and wisdom forsaken.
Or I believe that to revive it, you should follow the treatise's guidance on exposure and explanation as well as abbreviation. And I shall also use the forms of fire cauldrons and other instruments for surgery, with the assistance of preparation and explanation as necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned. by and ou bonte;sso ça que t1: s.
And so Hippocrates says that one without knowledge is much, but with effort it is little. and especially in the art of surgery.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that those who are not attentive to what has been said before will err and may kill people.
thus I have wanted many times more from those who engage in this knowledge, yet abandon the theory and lack experience.
For I saw a mad barber who cut an abscess of scrofulous swellings or the neck of a woman, and severed the arteries in her neck. for this is why so much blood issued that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another barber who treated a stone in a man's eye, and the stone was large; if he carried away with him a part of the bladder, and he died within three days.
And I had already been called to extract it, and see the position of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one were to cut into it, he would die.
And I saw another barber who took care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the fracture there was an injury;
and the ignorant barber strained the fracture near to the injury with strong ligatures, did not allow any bandage on the wound, and left it like this for termination.
And he commanded that they should not dislocate at all;
and remain so, lest the leg becomes entirely numb and useless, leading to ruin.
I am called upon for treatment, and you hurry to come and reset my dislocated leg; and when it is set right as I hear, it becomes at peace, feeling no pain.
But in any case, the contagion had already taken hold or limb, and could not be healed;
and the contamination did not cease until it spread through the limb completely lost all function.
And behold a different physician who collapsed an abscess that became inflamed due to the illness of its lordship.
the et; (c.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that this art of healing is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in various conditions.
And I will show, at each location of this book where there is fear and danger.
For that's why you must be cautious, so the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons in combat, and approach your illnesses easily yet firmly, and choose the best course so that by God's grace you are healed and praised.
And let not grave diseases bring distressing health;
And use your weapons as you doubt their effectiveness, and have faith in yourself to come from this world of glory.
Galien occasionally gave these warnings: "Do not take in care of diseases badly, that you are not called foolish doctors.
"I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapters are about the fire cautery and cold medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
And about suppurations, and iron cauterizations, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about tailoring and cutting, and of cupping and wounds, and extracting arrowheads, and such matters.
And it is the chapter ordered with the forms of inflammations.
The third chapter concerns resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things;
And it is ordered for the neck up to the head, and forms of inflammation.
Thus we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the nature and harm of each constitution.
I say that the quality of assistance, and harm caused, is the longest word and subtle science with secret solutions.
and on this spoke many wise men, and agreed to this;
and I leave little of their words because I repeat the lengthiness.
I say that cauterization helps all conditions where there is material, for two types of constitutions; That is to say, hot temperament inclined towards matter, and dry temperament inclined towards matter.
In hot and dry temperament together with substances, some consider that fire cautery is greatly helpful. and others said the opposite: that cautery is not effective for diseases arising from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat diseases caused by heat or dryness.
and those who argue the contrary say that fire cautery greatly helps diseases of heat and dryness that affect the bodies of people. When you examine the body of the man and his moisture to its nature by fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it never once through experimentation.
And anyway, only those who have tried it and know the procedure of fire cautery through long experience, as well as the different temperaments of people, their conditions and causes of illnesses, outcomes, and time frame.
We have no fear of other conditions except for cold and damp illnesses. And all healers gathered and agreed on the use of fire cautery.
And know this, my son, that fire cautery is a secret of healing and has greater kindness than burning medicinal caustic.
Ou li desmedical knowledge, then cure the cautery of medicine is fire and les poinz comme maint, soigne est caust estreation de healment at cauter it cile: they are medicines et que ne est. Est oint. And treatment by they s in themes, for paints you dose, as cure it medical treament of fire, the lese medicine, then c.
Hot medications come from one body part to another by joining together, and bring about serious healing diseases in the affected member. and sometimes it kills the patient.
The phosphorus does not do this due to its potency or goodness of its nature unless there is an excess.
And this I found through experimentation and the longevity of my service and study in the art, which is on the truth of things.
and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words because it is not my desire to withhold from you the secret which lies in heat or fire, and the quality of the work as how it overcomes diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates. Or receive them into your thoughts.
And know, son, when to perform cauterizations, they seek advice from learned men.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm occurring can be avoided with the aid of cautery. and particularly when cautery is needed urgently for pains that cannot wait until a more serious harm comes to the limb.
And never think like foolish monks; For the disease treated by fire cautery has no recurrence. and it heals in this manner;
and it heals in this manner; but it is not as they think, for cautery is a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors causing pain, and works to quicken its effectiveness, and due to the virtue of its work and authority.
And things that cause disease can come at any time according to the complexion of the patient and their condition and its power;
And they are combined in him due to the acquisition of meats and other things, unless cautery is administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with cautery for pain, and other things, so that pain does not return. But little of this happens often.
And many people do not understand why fire cautery is considered the last resort in medicine, and that's clear.
But they do not believe that fire cautery is valid after medicine; however, their understanding is false, and it's considered the last resort in medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they prove ineffective, then we apply fire cautery, which does work.
Then it is well understood that cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of some people.
The ancients said that a gold instrument for fire cautery is more effective than iron, and they claimed this due to the quality of gold and the preciousness of its substance.
and they said that the heat of fire canguary does not cause harm, but this is incorrect as I have tested it myself and found in some men.
And gold cauterization is preferred over iron, as they say. However, when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know if it has been heated by the color of the gold, and so soon cools.
and if it is overheated. and they make it in fire. And thus there are enough hindrances.
Now I have ordered this chapter from head to toe, so that the path may be easier to find.
These cauterizations are for moisture and cold in the brain; those which are done due to a disease called "soda," and by many humors descending to the head, ears, causing numerous dreams and pain of teethache and throatache, especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient may be purged by a solvent medicine affecting either part III or IV, depending on what the properties and nature and habits of the sick person can tolerate. And then make sure to raise the head of the sick person.
And then you should have them sit with their crossed legs between your hands, and place their feet on a pillow.
afterwards put the base of your palm over the base of his neck between his two eyes; and when it comes to your two methods, if there is bleeding from the wound then quickly apply the caustic called "olivary," of which this is the form: And he makes it touch at its place with his finger, and do so by drawing and straining your hand little by little while turning. Then gently lift your hand immediately, and adjust the place where you see the small bone. And if you do not see it, continue the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you.
After taking a little bit of wool, and placing moist and soft cotton inside, then puts it at the place, leaving it for three days.
Then put on butter-soaked fine cotton. And leave until the burned area is healed. After, cleanse the wound with an ointment called 'tetrapharmacist', until it is healed.
And the ancients say, when a wound is open longer, it cleanses more. Therefore, to facilitate healing.
And some say that one must thoroughly clean the fire cautery if a part of the bone is burnt, and then repair what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
And others say that the cautery should be applied as much as possible, and pushed in so hard to widen the opening like the pins women use in their hair for the humours to come out.
and one must keep the open wound exposed for a long time. After this, it should be cleaned and bandaged.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good in all cases except for some men where there is fear.
and I think that it would be best to leave them.
For the head becomes weakened by continuous exposure to bodily fluids, as we testify with other limbs.
Similarly, when the head is weak due to its natural state, and the initial sign of a caustic burn seems more healing for me, I undertake this work accordingly with greater benefit.
When pain persists in the entire head and lasts for a long time, the patient must use years and pills called "cachia," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters. And if one performs the caustic treatment that we have previously mentioned, it proves effective. Be mindful if the patient's headache is of strong nature and not too cold. Then you must cauterize from that cautery a little as we have said above. After performing cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and then perform the cautery where it is called "veins". and are the places in which you apply cups. and lift your hand so that it does not come up to the bone. the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of elsewhere.
and it is proper that the cautery of the horns be more delicate than those used to cauterize the middle part of the head, which is the form.
For both fire cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and extends throughout the body until evening, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the classification of diseps, none of it helps. Then you make cauteries according to two methods, namely medicinal quinsy and fire.
The cauterization of quinsy is that you pull out a strip of skin and remove the bark with the two edges, and then create an incision where the pain is most intense so that you can place the strip of skin back under the skin.
and when it has been replaced, if it is tied and held tightly, leave it thus for twelve hours. then you untie and treat the strip of skin, and let the wound heal for two or three days. then place a clean cloth soaked in butter until pus comes out.
After the poultice, leave it until healed.
And if you see, use some of the written or divided treatises on burning medicines that I have composed.
The caulteries of iron are done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery with which there is the shape.
And it is called "closed" because the head has been shaped like a bell or has a small protrusion, and within, there's a slight appearance.
and you place it gently back into its original position, and with your hand turn the fragment slightly, until a quarter of the edge that is curved is smoothed.
and hold your hand so that the artery does not burn within, which is further; let plenty of blood flow.
After placing cotton on the wound, apply it to the area for three days; Then you place soft cotton soaked in fat on it, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And if you decide to perform cauterization for this headache using the cautery called "cutellar" at its tip, and be careful not to burn the artery in such a headache which is not ancient.
Migraine
When treating headaches as we have described in the division of diseases, and it does not work alone, and you see that the previous medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cutellar" until it is white.
and gently press it on the painful area with half a finger's length of thread, and remove your hand once, ensuring you do not puncture the artery nor reach to the bone.
Guard the mandible so it moves when bitten, and ensure the nerves only have regard to movement and do not cause spasms in the patient, and guard against blood flow from the artery when it is severed or cutting into it causes great fear and especially for those who are unaware of it and untrained. Leave your hand along the path;
But I will tell you how to stop blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you there where it takes place in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, cauterize it between the skull as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
And if you see it, apply the fire cautery as described in the extraction of the artery chapter, using the cautery that has two blades. and this type of cauterization is better than that one and more helpful.
From the pain of ears caused by coldness
When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then heat this cauterizer called "points," of which here is the form:
After making an incision all around the ear of the patient, where both sides hold pain, and then move away slightly above the root of the ear once you have secured the opening. and make it 10 points around each ear.
then close the wound until it is neat.
Regarding the torment of the mouth
Pain that must be treated with fire cautery includes only those caused by moisture, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases.
And do not perform a fire cautery on wounds caused by scratches or nerve swelling.
When treating this type of torment caused by the foam of worms and purgatives for the head and gargling, if it does not work, then you must perform three fire cauteries on the patient. One at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third between the two lips.
Place the fire on the healthy part of it and make the first fire at the top of the ear just a bit behind the tip of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a piece. And let the fire remain until half of its color is burned off.
And this is the form of the fire cautery:
And it is a similar method to the knife treatment that we have described before, but it requires that the knife be slightly larger.
after curing them as I have mentioned before, until they are healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four fire cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle, and one where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and then a fire cautery at the mouth of the stomach.
And so treat as we have said before.
From lethargy
This illness requires giving the patient large years and purgative pillows for the brain;
After reaching the top of the patient's head, place an opal on their occiput, which is as described in treatments for plasters.
And this is how it is done with caustic treatment: If the patient does so as I have said.
If they are cured thus, well done; And if not, perform three caustic treatments under the head, descending to the neck, with an interval of one foot between each treatment.
And treat as with others, and if you see it worsening, perform one caustic treatment in the middle. (This is a slightly modified translation based on contextual understanding that seems more coherent) And if surgery is needed, place it on the two horns [of a special instrument], and care for it until it is healed.
and use the cauterization called "olive," as I have previously mentioned.
It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and dirt, as we have previously said;
After shaving the patient's head, then perform cauterization on the scalp and at each horn [of a special instrument], and again three times along the spine of the neck.
and if more is needed, if the body is damp and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back. and leave it until you can see improvement, and remove your hand. After treatment until it is healthy again, and the caustic called "olive" as we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
The epileptic should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain with herbs and other treatments we have described in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, they should have gargling and chewing with medicinal substances to often cleanse the brain with good meats.
After removing the child's head from the cradle, and they make the caustic as we have said before, and on each horn. And if the patient is out of control and suffering, they should have caustics as I mentioned to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine of the lower back and neck, and it should be the olive caustic according to the manner that I have said.
If it is a child patient, they shall receive a subtle cautery as follows:
When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moisture and large phlegm, then one should apply our described fire cauldration on those with paralysis.
And if caused by melancholy are the diminishing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is a weakly moist corpse, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be clarified, as determined by its status in the classification.
After raising the patient's head After making the bandage properly, like a circle, place it under the head.
and have the patient cross their legs, and hold them firmly from all sides;
after applying the ointment, use old sheep butter to move it; and heat the cloth briefly, so that they may pour warmth into themselves if possible. after emptying the circle from within the head, let it cool down.
and do this to each patient once a week with good management until they are healthy.
Or if you see to cauterize it by making various points on the entire caulteries.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly;
and then place on cotton wool in butter and chicken fat.
For the healing of the eyes Firstly, address the issues with the eyes as I have described in the division; then begin by having the patient drink things that purify the mind and guard against all dampness, and make them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After he commands to support his head, and makes fire cautery in the middle of the head, and makes two cauldrons over the forehead near the ears together, or one wherein the dislocation is.
and cuts out all veins and arteries that are from the crown, making the cauldrons long according to the width of the forehead.
and watch for blood flow, and if you see too much blood coming out, then bind with a bandage using all your might.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to bandage it correctly;
and never make a cauldrone or incision over the back near the two bones.
and one sees that it is due to cold, phlegmatic excesses; then you make the fire cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter on the eyes. I perform the cauterization in the head and two cauterizations over the temples and two hemi-cauterizations under the bones. and if more is needed, gently cauterize above the eyebrow with all one small cautery.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if it does not improve, then give to the patient three bowls of cooling drinks. After the king lies down, he makes a fire cautery or oil cauldrone. And make two fires from the fire cautery called "clāvis" on the two sores, slightly below the hairline.
And beware of the artery so you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use the caultery called "olivary" which is this caultery. of which there is the shape.
And if you see, make two fires on the sores just like near where the eyebrows are.
and do not leave the hand except until one-third of the paper is scorched, according to the manner I have described.
by:t; Never does it happen that hairs become gray and prick the eyelids, and there are made fire treatments in two ways: This is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
Or the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in health. After cutting into the skin with an outline that is as smooth as the fleece of a marten, and let it begin at the sign near the hair.
Then he applies softened cotton wool and musk of persea sap to the oil, then uses a fire cautery which has this shape:
After the area under the wound you have marked has been cauterized many times over, ensure that the hair is burned at that spot.
And to observe signs of health in the wound, you should see the paper retracted, and hairs raised at the point of oil.
Then take your hand off, and leave it thus for three days, after which place a woolen cloth in butter until the burn is healed. After applying the ointment until it becomes healthy.
And if hairs and the paper become soft afterwards, then resume the cauterization on that same spot, just as you did initially.
And if the hair is sparse, continue to cauterize until the paper rises back to its natural place and becomes even, without pricking at the root of the hair.
The medical cauterization of fire is such that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a mimosa leaf.
Then take French soap and fine salt, half a dram each, and grind them together well. And do not allow it to cool too much, then sprinkle it over the form you made like the mimosa leaf and place on the parchment. And if the illness is only in one eye initially, work on that first, and treat them both similarly. Then place a piece of cotton cloth between the eyes.
And the patient's head should be upright and their eyes showing on both sides of the medicament, and press gently with your thumb each time the patient feels a tingling from the medicine, as it tingles like fire.
When you have done this for some time, administer the appropriate medication. When the bite marks have passed, raise the affected area and check if it has swollen as though lifted by fire or cut with an incision. And if so, that is well.
But if not, reset the medication on the affected area or if the medication has not worked, until your actions are equal and your eyes are sharp.
Then apply softened cloth soaked in butter until the wound is covered, then treat the area with anointment called 'dyafenis' and another ointment, until it heals.
And if you need to protect your work thoroughly with great care so that none of the medicine gets into the eyes.
And if the swelling becomes soft afterward and the hairs prick at their base, begin again with medication on that area properly, just as you did before. After the treatment until healed;
And it is the form of the bellows with the mist:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this shall you apply your bindings.
and not be returned through the right path for those who practice this art.
In treating a fistula by means of cautery.
When treating a f지stula as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and if your treatment does not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Command the patient to put his head in your hand; and instruct the assistant to place the physician's head between their hands so that it does not move or drop.
after placing soft cotton in an egg-cup or juice of parsley over the wound;
then heat the cautery that is to be used.
and place it close to his head as if like a feather of a dove, with the caustic being attached. (This might be referring to positioning the hot iron near the area for treatment)
If you observe it, ensure it is properly aligned from top to bottom, and if you see it, make sure it is also straight like a tent.
However, this must be moved for your treatment.
After pressing the abscess if it is open, and treating the pus, then drying it out. And if it is closed, work on making an opening, and treat with a poultice.
After applying the hot caustic well, and hold your hand on the caustic to the painful part above the wound, so that your hands do not go mad. And place the caustic in the fat of the wound, and let it rot.
If you approach the beginning of the fire cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, repeat the caustic once more, and otherwise if needed, and leave for three days.
Afterward, place on cotton and grease it with butter, and treat the dried ointment until it is cleaned, and after forty days pass that it has been cleansed, then apply medicinal vinegar until the bone is uncovered. And follow this as what comes in your chapter.
And there is a method of fire cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Begin with an abscess, and lay the clay on it. Afterward, put in the small split which is its form: and make into the quantity of one rubber of clay; and hold your hand or abscess firmly, and do not move the patient at all until the softened clay flows into its place.
And it is proper to put on the oil for the ill person with cotton and egg white or in water;
The place of the wound is at the lower part of the anus, and it heals with a miraculous health.
And if the abscess is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good. If not, if it must administer a drain through the vein, and return the abscess to its proper place in accordance with where it truly belongs.
For bleeding in the lips. Many times there occur bursts on lips called 'hairs', especially in children's lips.
How you treat these bursts as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment does not work, then apply a small incision-like fire caustic according to this method:
And apply mustard plaster to those cracks until they are fully healed.
After treating the chancre, let the leg be washed until it is clean.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the ear, or on the roots of the teeth, after decay and pus formation, it becomes aged and turns into a fistula. And you should treat it as we have described in sections, but it does not improve. Then it is necessary to apply the fire cautery according to the quantity of the furture. After opening or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the iron has cooled off from its surface and bottom.
And do thus once or twice after the healing of what we have said about treatments, until it is well.
And if it is healed in this manner, it is good; And if not, it is necessary to expose the joint and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find described in your chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you heal them with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head in your hands. after cooling the fire cautery so that you will later apply it in such a way as to place a chain on the tooth. (Note: "cainn" is an archaic term for "chain" or "loop," which could also mean a tool used for holding something in place.)
Et place dans le cautère chaud hâtivement, et tende ton bras de manière à ce que le malade ressente la chaleur arrivant à la base du dents.
Après lever votre main et reprendre le cautère selon votre volonté ;
Après remplir la bouche du malade avec de l'eau salée, enduisez-la pendant une heure et demie froides.
And in this manner the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the gums are softened and held still, and the infected moisture dried out.
Of tooth pain
Lorsque la douleur aux dents survient par raideur ou chaleur, et que le traitement médical n'est pas efficace, alors il faut procéder à un cautérisation selon les deux méthodes : Et cautère d’huile et cautère par le feu.
Pour la cautérisation à l'huile : prenez de la graisse de veau, et faites-en un bouchon dans lequel vous pouvez insérer une cuillère de fer ou d'argent ; After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, apply butter-like meal on the sore tooth quickly, and hold it in place until it is cooled.
And often enough until its virtues reach the root of the tooth; if you see butter-like meal on linen and cotton that has been cooled, apply it to the aching tooth and keep it there until heat comes to the closure of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take an iron or copper vessel, and it should be large enough so the heat does not reach to the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, wait for it to cool down afterwards, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled.
Often do this, for the pain will persist on the same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter during the procedure of this cautery and then let it rest.
and thus are the forms of this cautery:
And perform a cautery on the eyelid you wish to, according to what you can afford.
and this is the form of the cataracts:
Of scrofulous tumors When scrofulous growths are due to cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then apply the hot iron cautery as described hereafter, so that it has openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.
And apply the hot cautery to the abscess once or as needed until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, apply cautery accordingly to its size and leave it as such for three days. And put on cotton soaked in butter until the inflammation subsides.
After, treat with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moisture overwhelms the channels of pain in the groin, especially when it comes from cold exposure, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged with soluble medicines.
After applying the fire cautery to the throat's root and ensure that you do not come close to the actual throat, but only slightly touch it with heat.
After that, the other fire cautery is applied to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is called "clavicle", which we have shown previously.
and heals if as we have said before until it is healthy again.
When all diseases of the palm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or thirst, and it is an ancient disease, then they apply two fire cauteries on either wrist. and another fire cautery in the middle of the feet between the two breasts (mammae).
and it is called "clavicle" as per the form described beforehand.
And if you see it, perform fire cautery by touching all the fire cauteries called "points" as shown in the form for ear diseases.
And extend the points up to XXX or around them.
After curing the dislocation as previously described, apply the cautery with three times according to this form.
And because these cauterizations are lighter, as you make them in three places simultaneously.
Of shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first address the dislocation initially. Afterward, apply soothing substances on their back and ribs; after that, remove the core which is within the thickness of your left hand's index finger.
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the caustic which has two iron nails inserted to mold it into shape.
and cauterize the core until it pierces up to the ribs, then apply four caustic treatments together.
and therefore cauterize with the caustic that has three iron nails, so that the shape of cauterization are these four caustics.
and they are like the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the caustic that has three iron nails.
And at no time should it be approached near this one nerve because there are eight incisions;
After applying the fire cautery, let them break with salt. Afterward allow the patient to rest, and do not move their limbs for long periods until they are well supported.
And if it becomes dislocated again, such events are rare; then perform cautery on the thickness above the cauldriform cautery, or many cauterizations in close succession.
Because the joint is repositioned, and there may be bone fractures and the patient feels better.
When in the stomach there are coldness and excessive moisture affecting its temperament, causing numerous types of catarrh to occur, and following usual remedies it brings no benefit; then it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on their back, extending their legs and arms. After this, apply three cauldrons of fire from under the cup to the ass area in the amount of two ounces, at every incision, and then two cauldrons on each side until they form at an angle of three degrees, with space between them so that when they are pulled apart, there is no joining together.
and the cauldrons should be placed as close to each other that they prick both legs on their knee, and the cauldrons should form according to this shape without crowding.
And if you see a large fire cautery within the stomach according to this form;
And those who fear this caustic method should use the tweezers to press and then sign above the stomach exactly where you see inflammation, according to the quantity present. Then cauterize with the entire caustic substance that is called 'points'.
After the treatment of the wound we have obtained before it is healed.
When the liver comes with pain from cold and moisture and bloating, as it is overly removed from its natural state by excesses; and the patient is treated as we have described in sections, but it does not benefit them, so it must be elevated above their heart. and apply three caustic substances according to this method, shape, and quantity above the liver, avoiding the epigastric region where the lower ribs meet.
And between each fire cautery is the swelling of one finger. and let the fire cautery be long in all parts of the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery.
and it should be warmed enough so that two-thirds of its face is warm, and let the patient lie down properly on their feet.
and if he cannot do this, then let him be lying down with his legs extended and his arms lifted.
And if you wish to do so, fire these scalp wounds with cautery, if you are skilled in the art and careful not to burn the entire face as it would dry out all of the body. And it does not extend to a boil, for the core is very subtle there and one must feel carefully to examine.
When you have an abscess in the liver, and observe if it's on the surface of the liver or underneath its membrane. If it is on the surface, then the patient feels pain but not too severe;
And if it's underneath, then they feel unbearable pain.
And when this treatment requires a mirror, the patient should be placed propped up on his bed;
Then you must tie off the leg or where the abscess is, and then heat the caustic which looks like a sponge, as follows: And perform cauterization with a hot iron until the hair is burnt off, and continue to the joint, until all the sores are healed.
Afterward, follow the treatment for pus removal until it is cleaned.
And it does not require any other method of this cauterization than by those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have spread at some point.
Then he can hardly work, but it always seems to me that he should rest.
Of the cauliflower-like swelling
The ancients said that one should perform root cauterization on astragalus herbs in the following manner: Take a root of astragalus that is as long as you can find, dry it and make it just as thick and long as your thumbs. And the muscle in oil, and grasp it with fire, and cauterize with a cautery between the clavicle and neck, and several small caustics slightly descending on the part below the beard.
And other caustics between the fifth rib and the seventh, slightly inclined backward a bit. And one caustic above the thighs, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two more on each side of the ribs behind the previous caustic between the shoulder blades.
And do not grip too tightly with your hand, but rather open widely as in smelling.
And an ancient said that no man uses the fire caustic as one shaves, and warms it and places it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess. And then a great pain occurs, as we have said with abscesses of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies immediately, where a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.
Removing hair from the area with fire cautery can cause burning and discomfort to the patient, but it may also lead to quicker healing if done properly under professional guidance.
When treating the disease known to us as 'mice' and its divisions in wounds, if there is no improvement, then there are three methods of fire cautery that all work well.
There is a method where you make three or four cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the vein, following the liver cautery that we have mentioned before.
and do not hurry with your hand over all the cauteries, and let the patient lie on their back.
And another method of cauterization is to heat the one with two horns, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation.
And lift the edge that is at the vein's location or where the patient'cuesthesis comes from the left side, and make elevations as you lift the edge according to its breadth, following the body's length, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After inserting two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, then use a fire cautery, and so there will be four.
And if you see, causticize with all the cautery at three nerves.
After the cure when it has become swollen for long periods, this means moving as the other previously mentioned treatments.
Caustics are not used in hydrotherapy; that is called "ascluetae" method.
When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is time for you to make four cauterizations around the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back above the spine, and one at the genitals; and place the caustications close to the esophagus near the core.
After leaving the cauterization open for long periods to drain pus, do not abandon treatment of the patient after caustication; And healing would proceed swiftly, and they will be together with two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the fire caustic for the abdomen is as we have previously shown. and that for the back be an olive-shaped piece, just as it has been set here before.
When the feet are swollen in one who is diabetic and full of golden-colored pus, it is necessary that you causticate on the back between the little finger and ring finger. and lift your hand with the caustic moving towards the tailbone.
And do not go too deep in, so it would draw out the yellowish sweat and be done with the caustic tool accordingly: according to this shape.
After, do two caustics on each leg at the ankle joints. and let the caustic be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, on the leg.
And let the cauteries remain open for a long time to heal properly, so that they close completely.
After treating other wounds as we have described.
When a solution of the stomach comes from cold and moistness, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines have been weakened, they cannot be treated by conventional methods. and you see the patient is suffering greatly with strong virtues, then make a large fire cautery on the stamency as described above or an intestinal cautery, where the cautery circulates. and four subtle fires within all the fire of leeches are applied, and two on the groins.
And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, then perform fire cautery on the fingers, and one caustic point on each joint, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large ones, because it is beneficial when there is good assistance for treatment.
of treating swellings
When bunions are at the base of one or more toes and are old and consist of large cold and damp corrupted humors, they should be treated as we have explained in sections; if it does not help, then do cauterizations. On the spine at the back of the neck, which is slightly forward and gradually widening into a triangle, apply cauterization near the base of two toes.
And if you believe the stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and the face swells, then on the face apply a large cauterization to the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and several small cauterizations in other areas; And leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating the limb until it is healthy again.
When you cover the festered part, if it seems to be hairy, and then set the fire directly on that covered area. and let your hand and the caustic burn until blood vessels are born, from which the pus comes out.
do this once or twice, and if there is much festering, causticize each as we have said. after applying beneficial ointments until they are healed.
and if you causticize with a large caustic on the festering area, it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening wounds, we will discuss this in detail; if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
When there is an occurrence of fistula and it becomes old and rotten with corrupted moisture, you should examine thoroughly the entire tent, and know its full extent.
After the caustic that appears hairy is set and inserted into the fistula according to the amount that was previously entered therein, continue with the caustic until the corrupt and rotten body parts are consumed, once, or twice, or thrice, depending on how much is needed.
And watch for burning of nerves which are within, and large veins.
If the fistula reaches into the body of the bladder and intestines, watch for these lumps, do not attempt to cut them out in place without knowing whether they are benign.
After healing the lump as much as it becomes healthy, and if the lumps are swollen, and materials have been long extracted, then know that the lump is entirely healthy.
And if materials have not been extracted, understand that the lump is inflamed, and corrupting the bone at its root. And thus, as one of those which we say in place.
When the pain of cold comes with great swelling and does not desire to have intercourse, then it is necessary for you to make a fire caustic on both sides of his testicles as we previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize it with fire, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
For bladder issues. When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery on the part behind the bladder where the hairs begin at the palm of the hand. There should be one cauterization to the right, one to the left, each as long as our finger.
and you make another fire cautery on the back if necessary. There should be two such cauterizations.
And let the cauterization extend according to the form described beforehand.
When leprosy is cold and wet, not allowing it to be conceived, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late. And when they come, he feels great pain: Then it must be done as we have said with the urinary tract cautery and two cauteries forward on the back:
And let it be the clavicle cautery, as we have mentioned.
When the slimy secretions descend into the hip socket, and for this reason it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together:
And the muscles are found to be detached from their place, it is necessary to perform a cautery like a circle on the hip socket with one cautery in front of the dislocation as it turns so that the socket remains within the circle:
And if such cauldrons are like those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these cauldrons are not present, then make three large olive oil cauldrons and the cauldron should be made just as all colors.
And boil until it is cooked through.
From thigh pain When pain comes to the buttock area, and it is from coldness and dampness, and the patient suffers as we have discussed in the section and treatment does not help, and the disease is old. Then it is necessary to purge the patient of large foul humors with putrid pillules or other good-smelling pillules. After performing the cauldrons;
The manner of this fire cautery is according to two methods: It consists of the following: namely, burning remedies and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is as follows:
You should cauterize the back of the thigh with three triangular cauterizations following this pattern: ensure good depth and size, leaving space equivalent to the width of a thumb between each cautery, and make them olive-shaped.
At no time should you perform cauterization in the middle of the thigh's head because there are four following this pattern:
And if you see, when performing the circular cautery as we have previously mentioned in the thigh'cupping. This step is crucial for reducing blood flow and promoting healing by removing damaged tissue or creating an incision to drain pus from an abscess. The text describes a method of using fire to perform surgical
But do so in a way that the circle contains the entire elbow, and all sides are smoothly rounded.
And that is the way to do in sciatica when the pain holds in the hind leg and does not reach up to the thigh or the shin.
And if it reaches to the thigh and leg, make the cauterizations where the patient indicates the pain holds them, and four on top of the ankle, slightly left.
And let it be a flesh cauterization, and remove the thickness around the joint.
And if the patient feels that pain extends to two or three fingers up from their wrist or near it, cauterize there where they feel the pain at either three points or four at what is called "points". And if necessary, if it does more.
And if it is known that the pain is from below the groin to the thigh, make a flesh or circular caterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations not to harm either the cauterized area or the large arteries when you burn them, and do no greater damage or constriction to the patient.
And I have seen others who made a cautery on the heel of the foot, and they continued until the entire leg was swollen, resulting in the same for the foot, which became pierced and corrupted throughout. After a stomach condition which caused death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and the other as per this manner.
And the sage say in the cautery of the haunch, this is how it is done, make a tool as large as a small boat oar or slightly smaller, and have it with spaces between each like that of a fist's width from one space to another.
And the gaps should be two parts wide and as numerous as fingers, and there should also be a good iron bar for support.
This is its shape:
And it should be heated until red and soot-free, then place it upon the bag of the affected haunch, and rotate over its outer edge.
and causticate once with each tool, leaving three days in between. And then make an emplaster with butter, and leave the wound uncovered for long periods of time. After applying the ointment, allow it to heal until it is sound.
Albuquerque says we rarely use this type of cautery because of its appearance, and few dare to do so.
However, it is one of the good cauldraries that can be suffered, where it may fit.
The medical cauldron that is burning shall be made with an instrument between two edges so that the margin of the door descends, and it should be either iron or brass in length, and at the top have holes spaced as two pins apart; And they are open on both sides and above, and join together according to this form:
After placing the sack on the patient's chest with their back to the side, and then place your hand heavily above the sack. After pouring between the two circles of warm pitch that have been heated over a small flame for one hour, and allowing the patient to feel the heat and dryness on their skin.
Because there is also numbing like from fire;
And when the numbness is gone, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the pitched chest, leaving it like this for three days, and apply butter until what is black from bruising has healed. And he leaves them to rest for three days until they harden;
and this would be the last remedy after the ointment treatment once it is healthy again.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or up to the leg, then you must use an instrument that turns according to what you did on the shoulder equally.
and this is the manner of hot turning, which I have written in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take equal amounts of alkali and quicklime, grind them together, and put in a new pot. or if there's a small hole that needs to be enlarged so that the point of a knife can enter;
or if there's a small hole that needs to be enlarged so that the point of a knife can enter; and put on that pot another well-leaded pot with alkali and salt and gentle heat underneath, until there are one or two layers of powder as you have thoroughly ground in your hand;
And let it remain so until the pus begins to flow and form clots, then take all of that pus, and pour it onto hot charcoal and into alkali as before.
And if there is a lot of pus, it must be treated with medicinal pastes and other members' fire cauterizations.
For it is another work as before, and if with other remedies where one properly cauterizes the knee just as in incision and honey from cashew nuts and charcoal mixed with soap, all these things blended together.
And Galiens relates a treatment in which a lord was healed of ankle pain and sciatica; it had much relief, and said that no other remedy was used, and that he recovered once when this cure was done, after being bathed as it is instructed hereafter.
And he advises in this manner that you take the green and dried leadwort herb, grind it quite finely with a little fat, and apply it to the knee, thigh, and leg where pain resides.
And he leaves it for three hours, depending on the amount by which the patient no longer feels thirsty.
And then let him enter a bath to warm his body somewhat, and make him lie down, and the pain will depart entirely, leaving him healthy.
And know that no one should use fire cautery for such remedies unless after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat intestines, it helps greatly.
and must be done in such a manner. Take the linen and wash it with old oil, and place it in the hollow that is between the thumb and first finger, which are called 'foscile'.
After taking dry goat intestines and grasping them in fire until they are ashes, place it on the wool, and leave it until it is soot-covered.
and do this again, and keep doing so until you think through your sense that it reaches the thighs, and the pain is stopped.
and these methods of cauterization are called 'goat intestine cauterizer.'
It causes great pain in the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion, or from too much blood loss, or from resembling spread cold matter, of none of these matters does cautery hold value, except for those coming from an influx of cold substance.
After the patient has been purged with foul pilules or other similar substances, they should be made to stand on their back where the pain is felt, three lines marked by dots, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
And let the cauterization be done according to the cauterizing method called "points";
and if you see, make III caturers or IIII at the central vertebra in this form:
This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that their necks become tight when they move, and fear. and you find it in the lowest spine and it appears among the others above.
When you see this wound and examine it, then cauterize with a caustic cautery as follows. If the fire cautery marks each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, using a cutting caustic around the spine at points two or three lines apart, and they are close to each other.
After healing the wound until it is clean as we have said, and be careful not to perform caustic treatment in a location full of nerve tissue.
For the pain of joints
When joint pain is from moistures that are spread to every limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the foot, which physicians properly call "gout," and when it is due to cold causes and cannot be cured by medicines, then they are treated with caustics in this manner:
Make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizing be of an olive shape in this manner:
And if there is a need to grasp above the face of the foot, then make caustic treatment everywhere that we call "none". And when the pains reach to bones and other joints, which happens often, then make fire cautery on each big toe with three or four cauterizations from each part, for all olive-shaped caustics.
And if more is needed, then make it more, but do not hold your hand away too far until the color of the skin has scorched.
And if the pains extend to the knee and back, treat with the fire cautery as we have mentioned in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make small indentations around the fingernails.
and if there is no pain in the fingers, make indentations on each joint and along the hair of the hand.
and if pains come near the edges or shoulders, caution each area, and give good care to the patient while administering remedies.
For if you manage it well and purge moisture, he will be made whole with the help of God.
When numbness comes to the fingers and they become limp with new symptoms, it is necessary when you see them healed, that you do not use any remedy on that day. and let him use things that ease his stomach so the puke rises from within.
After he has sat on his back between your hands, command him to wash the area until it is restored, and reset the joints in your arms, and sew up from under the numbness around the bone of the thumb, and do a sign like three-quarters of a circle above the body.
Then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until he is clean and his eyesight is clear. Then reset the bones to their place. and ministers, you shall dress your hand so that they do not return backwards.
and work well on the patient's thighs, and place a cord under him, then a strap over the thighs, and another over his foot where he feels pain in his hands.
then place the cautery on the mark with your entire hand, and keep it straight and as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again until you get to the bone. and be subtle that the flesh does not protrude when you perform the cautery. That you do not burn it; And so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your works are of no value.
And it is necessary that the fire cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and large people also proportionate to their stature.
After three days he will treat the burn with butter until the scald is healed.
After other salves are applied until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well-healed.
And it is necessary that its nourishments be lengthened so that the boils do not break out when he gets up to walk in his room.
And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be adorned with a well-made belt, and wear it for another forty days.
And have good rest, that he works little and guards against excessive drinking of liquids and eating, and shouting too much.
And when teaching this, be completely free from harm.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting within this chapter.
When windings come into other bellies and are known to you that they do not grow anymore, then make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be one third of their size. Afterward, as we have said.
And none of the ancient ones have said that you should apply fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
But first mark the level of the head and draw a line for the width above the stone, and another one below, and place your hand throughout the entire fire scalpel.
However, the first incision is lighter and easier to move.
From old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it should be cauterized with the fire scalpel known as "points", and the incision should be made according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, strength, location of twists, and pain.
If it is free from harm with the first cauterization, it is good.
If such is the case, commence another cauterization upon it, as custom dictates that it should be moved to the limb closest to it, so it requires you to make the cauterizations until the patient is free from harm.
Sometimes they are healed by fire for great help, and particularly the illnesses that come from the decay of moisture and melancholy.
Can you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and neither recedes nor remains, and you suspect that corruption may affect the entire patient, then make V cauteries on the head. I am making V upon the forehead, and one near the end of the eyebrows. and III on the II horns, and I behind the temple area.
and leave the hand to where the cautery reaches almost to the bone, and stay until blisters form so that vapors of large humors can escape.
and cauterize above the eye as it appears before you.
If the messenger is scattered throughout; And if it is clearly visible, then you must perform the cauterization with the cauterizations that we have mentioned previously: on the front of this area, and two near the neck, and six along the spine at the back, and one above the groin and another below, and two under the shoulders; And two along the ribs, and two at the shins of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and toes, and over the palms' hollows.
And beware of the nerves that lie behind the calves, do not cauterize them.
And never perform a cauterization on the bone of the wrist and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver's location.
And know that the more you perform cautery, the greater the aid it provides, and benefits accrue.
And know that the patient feels no pain during cautery as healthy ones do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
And it should be that the cauterization is large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in methods of handling iron.
After curing them with a paste made from flour several times with honey and other remedies until they are healed.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healed, then you perform cautery on the limb according to its size and severity.
and let the cautery be slightly painful at first touch. then treat with ointments until healed.
And at no time is done cautery and to the hand, foot, or back, when it follows the nerve that moves the limb, thus this swelling occurs.
And in any case, no one interferes unless they are familiar with the limbs and the exit of the nerves moving within the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is old, and medical means are ineffective, then you should cauterize with a hot iron somewhat small, according to the quantity of blood seen, until it turns white and changes color.
Then the treatment with fine flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of calf's gallbladcuetts. And mix all together, bind with cloth, and apply heat to the area until it is healthy.
The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
When a sore begins to develop, and you see it as an opportunity for treatment, use the fire cautery in the shape of a circle around the entire sore area.
And yet the wise say to perform cautery just as with a gonorrhea.
And yet it does not seem good to me, for I believe that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted this to happen before.
A more proper course is that it should be cauterized nearby, with the cautery called "circulation," as we have said in many of cauldrations.
When some have an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death or due to the excessiveness of its effects or by the state of the patient when they are very old (that is to say, too weak) and have little blood, or for a while. And you see them hasten to die. Then, accordingly caulk around with many small burns by pricking; After that, leave it as such. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see the entire cautery pierced, heat the cauldron of which there is a hole:
And put your hand in the midst of that illness called 'adubelati' until the cauldron feels its core, and be such cauldrons that the patient senses behind them somewhat so that the course of the pus is directed.
After the treatment until it is completely healed perfectly.
Another way to name the disease is "corrodens," and it's nothing but a mass on the limb, as fire dries out logs in a similar manner.
If you see this illness on site which can suffer fire caulking altogether, then fan the burns widely small and large as appropriate for its location or disease.
After caulking all parts until you have removed all the infection and nothing remains of it, that everything which is corrupted be excised.
And then let it be for three days, and apply poultices with oil until the burns from fire are healed, and all corruption is gone.
After applying the ointment treatment causing warmth.
And if after three days no health returns, this is good;
and if not, then resume caulking on that which remains of the corrupted parts.
And this inflammation is sometimes treated with cold medicines at the site of fire cautery.
However, fire cautery is more helpful; and I have already described the treatment with cold medicines in the section on poultices. Take the quantity you need.
small pearls coming to the fingers Many times it happens that under the feet is a disease we call "close," which is a large swelling affecting the foot.
And the fire treatment for this disease is in two ways. It is to know fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Fire cautery is like heating an iron as with the blunt end of a bowl, and it should be made of good iron to accommodate the nail at all parts, and have subtle edges.
After heating it thoroughly on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it feels hot at the point of the nurture. and leave it as such for three days until it begins to form pus. First make a poultice of mashed herbs with honey, and leave the poultice on throughout the night, and it will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the place of application with soothing ointment until it is healthy again.
And if they are turned towards the rear of the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply a hot water cautery. and occurs in one manner: take a bone of iron or lead, or a spatula blade, and place it on the nail and its root, that is to say for warts: and place the bone so that it surrounds completely, then put some hot water on it, hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the bone reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep down to the root:
The patient endures a bit of the tickling of hot water for an hour. Then leave it so, and it will detach from all its roots.
So do another afterward, until you have examined all those on the body; then treat with ointments that contain warmth.
When anyone suffers from trembling due to coldness or fever of the quartan kind or other, it is necessary that you make four cauldrons on the spine of their back, one between each vertebra. and one near them, and one over the stomach at the olive oil caustic.
If they will continue to tremble, it will preserve their health of the cold disease.
Never appear visible in front of a body bathed or pus-filled lesions, which come from large corrupt materials.
if in the first instance when you appear that you make cauldrons over each head of the pustule: A subtle cautery made of mastic wood, where the tip is grasped by fire or a long-rooted astragalus, or with a lenticular caustic.
And at no time should they be cauterized from the start when noticed, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any lumps in front, but are relieved of excess which comes about, and become healthy.
But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there occur great bleedings from the artery that is severed at the wound that comes to the periphery, or in the incision of an abscess, or with a caustic on a limb, and similar things. And it is a very difficult thing to stop bleeding.
And in any case if this occurs with someone, quickly put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very hard until the bleeding subsides from under your finger, so that no more blood flows out.
then apply small to large olive oil-based fire caustics until they are all reddened.
then take I (an unspecified medical substance), whether large or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and apply the fire caustic to that vein while holding your finger, until the bleeding stops.
And if it jumps when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And continue doing so one after another until the bleeding has stopped.
Ensure you do not injure the nerve nearby, and that no other harm befalls the patient.
And know that if the vein cuts off, it cannot be properly tied again when the vessel is large; unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned. or through cauterization, or by pulling out when it is not treated, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that can stop the bleeding. and thus be tied off and strained accordingly.
Who will administer proper stanching by wrapping tightly with cloths or applying burning substances above, or other similar things; if it does not help much.
And if it happens to anyone and they do not have a scar or medicine present, you should place your index finger over the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is tied off above the wound and above the vein. And it should not move, but the cold sweat must often be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened.
Therefore make incisions forward as needed for cauterization and medicine application.
We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require fire-cauterization or burning medicines, as well as poultices and salves, along with their preparations and forms.
And I have included that chapter on head injuries up to the skull, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method for what is found easier and as you wish.
In starting this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is greater risk and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore more caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess, and wound care, and arrow extraction, and cutting into stones, and similar things. When there is doubt and fear, death comes to some.
And I caution you to not undertake folly. For there are many ways in which people come for treatment. If they come from such who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily due to the severity and extent of their disease. And one must have fear for these.
And there are some who lose their senses, and say: "Wait," they claim, "I am healed; And the disease is treacherous.
You should not easily consent to those who come to you in this manner, but rather put greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but judiciously based on what you are sure of and can have taken and lost.
And use prediction and indication in treating your patients so that health may be restored.
And this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and the memory of God.
Three dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
And I have ordered this treatise by sections as I spoke of the section on cauteries that I instructed from head to toe, so that you may find it more easily what you will need.
I say that this illness often occurs in infants during childbirth, and when the birth is too strenuous for the infant's head.
and it never arises from any known cause.
And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, and all those that I've seen it has quickly brought death. and therefore, it seems to me worthwhile to pay closer attention to this aspect of treatment.
And I have seen a child whose head was swoln with water and the skull grew every day until it could no longer support itself.
And due to so much moisture it caused death, and this moisture is gathered from under the bone above the shoulder blade, between the flesh and the bone.
And when such work is done if the moisture is between the flesh and the bone, and abscesses are small, you make a wide incision into the skull.
And it shall be of the same length as we, until the moisture subsides.
and then you do this for the shape of the paralysis:
If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
And if the moisture is from under the bone, and the signs you see at the corners of the head are exposed on each side, and the sharp pain occurs when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not been restored to its place: If it is necessary, you must make three cuts within the head as follows:
After the incision, remove all pus. After making the incisions of linen and powders, add wine and oil, and leave it so until the fifth day.
Then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be evenly pulled out, and have the patient eat dried meat with a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of incising is to examine whether there are signs of large abscesses or collections of water.
because it should never be present beforehand. and it should never be behind either. nor on the right side. And never to the left.
Therefore cut where there is an abscess open, and fill with water, and heal according to what you are able.
and be careful not to cover the artery. and allow for a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and evacuation of fluids.
When a disease called "catarra" occurs in the eyes or legs and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is the fire cautery where you cut two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see them covered, that the patient turn their head backward. then rub the wound with a rough cloth until you see the vessels, and then remove all bandages from the patient's neck. then look where it bleeds, and the veins on both sides are behind the ears, but few have been put back.
Then sign the edges of the wound with a heated piece of iron, then cover both sides with a thick bandage made from two parts until it reaches near the bone and is wide at the top.
And if you see, insert the strip underneath the artery and cut above it as two parallel lines across.
And when the vein is opened, blood flows continuously upwards from it.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then sign with a hot piece of iron and continue until reaching the bone.
and that amount of blood you must let flow is six ounces, and possibly a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the replenishment of the artery.
then examine the wound: if it remains under the bone with no spinal cord exposed, then apply a dressing where there are none, then bandage and treat with ointment until healed.
Of migraine When migraine comes early with acute catarrh, due to moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old headaches and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical remedies which do not benefit, so we draw out the arteries from the temples and perform cauterization as we have written.
And the method of extracting them is such that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is not easily replaced as with some men who are too cold.
and if it is restored, the patient should stretch their neck with a piece of cloth, then rub the area with an abrasive cloth, and apply warm water until the artery appears clearly. then take the splasmatil from where it is formed: then lightly scar the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the corners, and tie it off with threads from each part.
And if the arrow is fine, pierce to the tip of the hook bone, then bind that part according to the quantity of two joints. If it is not properly set, then he will always have pain throughout all of it.
And treat from six to three inches, just up to three inches.
And if the arrow is large, it must be tied in two loops of strong, twisted silk thread to prevent decay at the wound site and ensure blood flow away from the wound.
Then bind the excess tissue between the two loops at the same time, and then, if you see it necessary, cauterize with a surgical hot iron up to the bone as long as the joints are cut.
This is the completed work; if the patient does not have a fever and is of warm temperament. For the fire cautery serves to finish the pus: Because it is of greater aid in dealing with pus.
Or, for extracting the artery, one should fill its place with old cotton and then put it back well made.
And when you remove them, be sure to treat with dry medicines that produce heat and bandages until it is healthy.
And if there is no blood flow as you do this, quickly cover it with fire cautery, where you fill its place with vitriol and stretch your hand that the wound be cleansed. And if you do not have it in sight, keep your hand on its place until the blood flow freezes, and apply cold water there until it flows again, and wrap as necessary.
And it should be between the two knives with a space in the middle, and then when you have secured both blades, use the hot iron until reaching the bone, and cut the vein into two halves. and they should be separated between the two edges because it is not entirely reliable with this type of fire cautery in every case.
and here are the forms of the fire casters:
And he who performs the extraction of arteries should causticate the vein with this sharp fire cautery in two parts, but the sharpness must be well tempered to preserve the heat longer. For when inflammation is too intense, it retains less heat.
From tears When the tears from the eyes descend into veins near the forehead's strength of flesh, and it does not benefit at all from medical treatment done there, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel their forehead tremble as if in fear. And if they are held oily and damp so that the skin of the paper is chalky, and the papers are swollen, and scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment may be necessary. And they called the old remedy "contusion treatment," and so you make it over to the patient with this condition on their forehead, then create three cuts or evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead.
And they called the old remedy "contusion treatment," and so you make it over to the patient with this condition on their forehead, then create three cuts or evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead. and one of the cuts just like two thumbs together across the forehead down to the bridge of the nose, and the others two fingers above the skin, but beware not to incise the arteries that are at the level of the two fingers.
And align your hand with the extension of the two jawbones, so that each wound has a length equal to three fingers spanning the joints.
And prepare a piece of sponge and several cloths for soaking up the blood, then use the spatula to apply it twice on each part where this shape is found.
From the incision that extends from the temple to the second incision; And scrape off all the core material that is between the two incisions across the entire facia overlying the bone; then make another opening from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this pus-like substance. If you place in the first cut an instrument called "culterellum," which is very sharp on one side and also smooth but not cutting on the other, and this is its form.
And place the splint facing towards the chest near the heart, and the underside of the ribs towards the bone, and support it as much as it reaches to the middle opening.
And cut off all the vessels that arise from the head down to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens into the core; then make another opening in the middle incision up to the other one.
And then remove the blood evenly, and express its location for collecting the blood.
Then place a tent of fine cotton in each cut, and cover with cloths soaked in wine, oil, and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form.
And after three days, let the joint heal, and abundantly apply a water-based poultice, then treat with a balm of basil oil, along with other remedies used to heal wounds, until it is sound.
When anyone suffers from frequent and long-standing gout, and you see the eyes swollen and small, causing weakened vision, and burned corneas. When the hair falls out, causing intense pain at the crown, and the patient sneezes. Then from these occurrences understand that such materials and those cataracts come only from many veins, and the physician treats accordingly if it is so.
And instruct the patient to place his forehead on it, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another with wide notches. And begins with the cut of the left temple to the right temple, up until just before the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves near the temples that move during eating.
and when the bone is exposed, draw all the blood onto an absorbent sponge, then between the two edges of the wound insert a piece of old cotton, attempting to stitch it with thread. then place washed rags soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses;
When it is fractured, you must rub the bone until a callus begins to form, then treat with things that are beneficial for healing, which should be done regularly.
In such a manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophonium, and mix them well. And apply it to these wounds regularly to promote healing.
And for the eaves by applying warmth from an ear and pouring thereof with oil or other liquids into the ear, and the beneficial properties they are found in the distillations; and then let it become so that li quidem.
All that drips from the ears is one of the four things: either grains, or animals, or stone fragments, or similar things made by man. such as seeds that fall from the ground, beans, peas; or things that flow out like water and easily, similar things.
When it is a stone in the ear or other matter not close to the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
If you see a stone, and it drips any small amount of purple oil or sesame oil, then make an incision to extract. And he makes the patient sneeze due to a condition, and blows his nose when sneezing occurs, placing cloth or woolen strips around the ears. And extends the ear upwards.
Often comes as a result of this treatment;
And if it does not come to pass, the refined extraction is performed for which follows the method:;
If it comes out with the fine probes, that's good;
If not, then refined extraction is performed using a small double-ended hook.
And if it still does not come out, then make a grape-sized incision and push the chief of the incision or an opening in the ear with force, and stuff soft wax around the incision so that nothing can enter through the incision. Then treat with a strong fire, as often it comes this way as we have said.
And if it does not come in any particular way, then take pitch to which he applies feathers, and uses an instrument as needed for this purpose, placing some cotton around. Then press the pitch on the stone or whatever it may be, and treat with a strong fire.
And if it does not go out from all the things we have said, then hasten to split the ear as soon as an abscess appears and pus emerges, and spasm occurs.
And the way of the split is that you first comfort the patient in his headache and then drain the blood according to its strength. Then make him sit between your hands, turning the ear upwards, making a small cut at the base or edge of the ear. And it is to be torn as with the crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then push according to your strength, and suck in haste into your mouth.
And perform the healing until it is clean.
And if there are grains inside and they swell, then administer an extraction.
And if it cannot be expelled, then apply a small sucking cups (spatula) subtly according to this form: [Here should be the explanation of the method] and perform an incision at the site of that grain.
But do not attempt it when you think that the grain is softened by earwax moisture until you have tried many times.
Then extract it with subtle forceps and the suction cup, as we have said, so that the extractions may succeed.
Therefore if the grain gets into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to cough up phlegm first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them rest on that same ear where the discharge is. If it falls out by itself, this is good.
If not so, take many small pieces as per the length of your string or ribbon and scald them in fire. And put the patient's small pin or pincers in his ear, and draw out from it on one side with fingers from another piece of string. And continue to do this until all the matter has been extracted piece by piece, and so it will be fully removed.
And if you see this, take a bamboo stick, and insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end in fire until it is properly charred.
Then make others as mentioned before, so that all has been extracted.
During the extraction of an animal, if it is a small creature like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on wound care.
But if it is of large size and can be felt, then make an incision for drainage. And this is the easier thing to remove that may be in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on drainage and dealing with secretions, if the remedy does not help, it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight. If there are no worms, if the fine secretions are drained, and they do not appear, take this paste of which is made.
And it must be narrowed from below and widened above. And insert the finer tip into the ear according to the amount of pain suffered by the patient, then proceed directly to all parts. Do this often as long as they are well rested.
And if they do not comply with exiting, then plug around the wound with cotton as I have instructed in the stone.
and if they do not exit as we have said, then administer infusions that the ancients have tested in arrow wound incision, and you will find them or treat with infusitions.
and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, as shown here: [The following line would typically be accompanied by an illustration in a medical treatise from that time period] And [it is] made of silver or copper without small holes, and above openings for distillation.
And [to] press the essence during distillation with an adequately crafted copper instrument for this purpose, and if you see any residue, wrap it around the tip promptly with clean cloth. Then pour in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicine in the jar, and let it be placed in the ear.
Then put all the residue into the cloth and press with your hand quickly while the oil is still distilling or emerging from the ear. And let the patient smell it deeply, and be so that the distillation is slightly warmed by fire just as it is distilled in the ear. And keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
And for the eaves by applying warmth from an ear and pouring thereof with oil or other liquids into the ear, and the beneficial properties they are found in the distillations; and then let it become so that li quidem.
No child is born without any eyebrows or ears.
and this same thing happens in individuals through a wound or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these blockages often do not extend fully into the ear canal if one cannot see them.
And it never happens that they lose their eyebrows completely, and what they see is fine.
Therefore, if it comes in but cannot be seen, it requires careful treatment and certain preparations, and when visible, one should place the affected ear towards the sun. and examine inside: if you see an obvious obstruction, so that the work involves this spiral structure of which here is the shape:
And it is to pull and incise before and behind completely flat, so that it does not affect the ear.
If the obstruction is of a bone or body part of the ear, use delicate forceps and gently manipulate it until all pieces are removed.
And if there are obstructions in the ear, take a fine and gentle razor and warm it by fire, then place it on the edge of the ear.
If you feel the obstruction and the patient feels great pain in their hearing, pierce it lightly, and ensure that you do not strain the nerves of the ear.
Then place a tent in the ear according to its width on the perforation, and apply honey with Egyptian ointment. Do not do this until the wound is healed, then take a tent and apply honey with rosewater ointment, and powder with crushed cobalt.
If you see an ear flying away, it is necessary to pierce the tent and move another bloody veil with a mold made of rose oil and wax until the swelling subsides. Then treat until it becomes healthy again.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cover with cold water towel, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that are used for treating blood by distillation.
This bladder that arises from the hairs when they are wet and dry requires that you stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off a small piece of their roots. Then pour on white vitriol paste.
And if it does not come off, then cauterize with the fine lens-shaped cautery and afterwards apply heat to the incised area.
and do so many times until nothing remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, their roots are burnt and do not return.
From scurvy Many times come on the skin from the body things that appear gritty in their form and hardness, and so this illness is called "hailstorm," a collection of excessive moisture above and below the skin. The treatments are as follows:
The treatments are as follows: Take care if "hailstorm" changes from one side and the other, for it is an easy thing to know.
Make them then wider apart, then lightly peel each part, and bind with bandages, then wrap.
If you cannot cover it without piercing the skin a bit, nothing is harmed to the patient;
And if the tear is large, assemble it with a stitch, and care until it is healed.
And if it's small, do not apply any pressure, for the ointments will restore it quickly and prevent scarring.
And if the splinter descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and extract it with tweezebrushes, hold and press from both sides.
And if the paper is pushed away by the incision, do not worry about it.
When great frost is removed, wash the wound with salted water and treat the area to heal as quickly as possible until the patient is well again.
of the fat from the eyes Exanthema is a grease that appears on cloths and papers above, occurring mainly in children rather than adults, causing great discomfort to their eyes, leading them to have watery mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
And because of this they lie on their faces downward, sleeping with closed eyes and the dampness from their eyelids causing swelling and giving them an appearance covered by exanthema in the oil. And when you press on the place with your hands and feel the exiting between bones.
The manner of treatment is such that the patient places their head on a pillow.
And then take a linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that each part contains, then place it on top. And press both sides with your hands so that the discharge is gathered within the circle.
Then make a small incision with a sharp knife to release the fluid, and it should not be larger than the wound made on the vein.
And make an opening in front as much as you find discharge. And in various cases, discharge comes from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Remove it altogether with a whole piece of spotted cloth between your thumb and index finger, and turn your hand to the right and left until scattered.
And ensure that you do not insert it into the tear, that you do not widen the entire swath until the end, and do not break it.
And if the sinew does not protrude at the beginning of the tear, then gently push the tear until it appears.
Then extract as we have said, then wet rags and water, and put under the sore, and bind with bandages.
And if it is for men who grind salt and apply it to spoil that moisture which has remained.
Then the treatment should be continued until healed.
And if it comes to a hot abscess at the place, then treat with plasters soothing until healed.
From the hairs of parchment papers When hairs grow in paper other than their nature, and are aged, they harm the eyes, and bring about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and scurf, until it is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
And there are four methods of treatment: or by fire caustic alone, or by medicinal ague as instructed in this chapter on fire cautery, and is done either through incision and suturing or with lancets, as I will describe.
It must be that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
if it is so positioned, this is good; if not, then place a needle all the way through with thread. and if it is near the edge of the paper or hair grows from there, draw the thread through to all sides of the paper and turn it as smoothly.
Then make at the part below the paper, below the hairs nearest to it, covering all around, from the great forehead down to the small.
Then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then gently press down on the paper with a molding form as a reed basket, and it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity you see raised in the paper which is desired for all.
And if there is an area that requires cutting off a large quantity of paper as it has softened;
then make throughout the entire surrounding areas marked by you, and begin from the great forehead down to small. And there is a split near the natural hair growth of a root, then insert the needle into one of its two corners, and scrape it thoroughly.
Then stitch the two lips with a thread made from fine wool using one needle, and let out blood, remove excess threads around both eyelids without any sticky substances, if you do this.
And if not, leave the stitching and threads for three or four days;
Then treat the wound without dry or constricting things, as the paper relieves at the discomfort of the wound and its healing, but stitches are moved (as ancient texts say), and this is a work without fear. And if by another method:
And if by another method: And it is that you shape the paper into a form similar to the willow leaf, as we have described before, at three inches in size according to the following pattern.
Then apply the force.
And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the piece is not uniform, then take a needle with one thread, and wrap it around the form. And add another thread near the large end, and the second thread near the small end, and interweave between them both threads evenly.
Then lift your hand evenly and remove all the skin over which you have shaped, as we have described before, then stitch together the two edges of the wound with a seam, and care for it until it heals.
If an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is turned into:
If it becomes necessary to use what we have said about the incision;
But the stitching on either side is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds follows this method: And that you convert the paper and the fat according to what I have said, then make the stitches with skill, as fine as the width of the skin and the spacing of the suture material. And cover as two edges where you hold the threads;
Then join one and the other delicately above what is beneath the skin of the oil, and pull the two stitches from both parts carefully. And leaves it thus for some days, and the skin that is stretched will die and swell and turn red, as long as it heals by itself.
If there is delay or if the wound has great force, then treat until it becomes healthy again.
and when the wound heals quickly, and the skin is raised, and no longer can grow hairs;
this is the form of two tunnels that you will make according to this shape, and in accordance with this length and width;
the techniques are such that you should select a fine needle, and put through silk thread soft and thin; then join the heads and carefully stitch both together subtly, and make the length of the threads a span long;
Then order a thin thread of other delicate silk briefly, and do not cut through the main fiber.
Then place your hands on the patient's chest near their heart.
And be near the sun so that your work may be declared, as it is a subtle and fine operation, then insert the needle into the entire thread at its root where the hair is attached, and pierce paper hastily while you trace over the natural hair.
Then extract the hair down to the root, and insert that hair back into the thread if there is one or two or three or more.
Then remove your hand while the hair grows through the entire paper with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and hair does not grow with it, you will scrape the wound at its base along the entire thread as ordered, until the hair grows strongly above the opening and can be seen by oil examination.
Then you will scrape the wound and thread, and cleanse it with oil for two or three days until the hair hardens in place and new growth appears on top.
And if the hair is short, accompany it with long natural eyebrows and elevate them alongside those you leave, until they are sufficiently elongated and then shave them off.
from the decay of oil When this illness known as 'aleacrati' or oil deterioration occurs, there are two ways it happens:
One natural, the other unnatural.
And it happens from a sudden wound, cutting, or fire cauterization, and by similar things.
And the manner of treatment for it is that you split the joint capsule, sever its ligaments, and insert linen threads inside, keeping them until they are healed.
and one must only use in its treatment things that dry up and restrict. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before.
but work with things that soften, like fenugreek. and the roots of watercress or nettles and flaxseed are cooked, and unguents with quinine melted in any oil, and you wrap it with a cloth, and treat with this.
And the essence of your care is to ensure that it does not shift from its original shape at all.
And these treatments we have mentioned are solely for addressing this illness, so that it does not return to its original form again.
This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident occurs from a wound and tear and cautery and similar things;
And the procedure of the treatment in it is that you take an awl, where it has a double thread, and the needle through the left eyelet to the right, so that the threads come out from two holes on the chest.
Then extend the chest above all the awls, and the cover has a wide spacer. If the shape of the paper returns as it should, this is good.
If not, take the scissors and place them in the tear, then turn the paper and make more tears or cuts within the paper.
and let the heads of both tears be at the two ends of the incision you made, so that when they are joined together, their shape is like the letter "H".
then remove the suture, according to the amount of edges that protrude or recede from it, which secure the paper, and bring the two torn parts together, holding them with a thread.
then follow the healing methods we have mentioned using softening remedangs and bandages until it is sound.
And if the disease comes from a tear or stitching or cautery, it is proper to make an incision clean through the hairs of the skin, and according to what has been said before. Then insert between the two sides of a tent, as I have previously stated.
Then insert between the two sides of a tent, as I have previously stated. And the operation must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise devices with all possible means so that it may return to its natural form.
And the patient themselves, according to what is necessary for operation and adjustments in various positions.
When this suture occurs in the hands such that the paper above is sealed with oil fat, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it must be pierced at the tip of a razor underneath the skin, and lifted upward.
And you extend the forceps as much as to grasp what is at the subtle spot, neither too hard nor too sharply cutting, so that the patient cannot endure if the spot becomes too hard or dulls the oil.
And make your incision, carefully excising that gathered tissue, so it returns to its natural form.
And cleanse all the gathered tissue, and do not moisten it with dirty water or lift with hot water or charcoal.
Then place a tent of flax between the tissue and oil, and cover the wound generously with soft wool. And after three days wash with soap and other soothing substances until it is clean.
It is said that the gout occurs in two ways: It is said that the gout occurs in two ways: one that resembles nerve and gangrene hard skin, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen moisture blisters. When touched with iron and cooked at the edge of the pincers, it cannot move;
And both types begin near the great forehead and grow slowly until they cover all sight and light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is such that the patient places his head on a support, then operates with the needles. and lift paper to your hand, then twist the gout by small winding, and extend it upwards; Then take a needle and apply hair from a horse, or wolf, or ox, and strong thread. Then slightly sharpen the needle's tip and insert it under the nail, piercing entirely through. Bind the nail with a strong thread, extending above the skin along the edge of the nail that emerges at the root to all the hair, then cut off any remaining part in the area where the spatula is applied gently and with slight force, leaving the natural color or layer intact so that through the incision no tears come as usual.
And do not extend the nail too much beyond the knuckle only to the hair and thread, as we have said. Then peel off all the surrounding skin from which lies its shape.
And ensure that the flesh does not touch or break it and that the puncture is not pierced.
And after making an incision, pour some pearl broth into it and the dressing made of lead, and leave it until the next day. Then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not alive and you cannot insert the needle, and the knuckles do not enter it, this resembling of a nail has often been treated with remedies.
and grow as I have described in the section, and if you see it swell up, treat the patient's affliction with oil, and take a light amount of flesh broth according to this form. And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason is nearing, then distill from your mouth into an oil collier made of litargire and with red wool thread mixed in, and stuff the oil until the following day.
If nothing in the oil is against you as an abscess appears, then apply it, and first treat the hot abscess until it heals, then resume the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Then continue the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh by the elbow hurts in the oil with great harm, then suspend it on a splint and bandage part but not all, to prevent blood from flowing.
Then distill into the red wool thread oil made of litarg지리아.
Some people experience a redness once and cover the swelling and restrain with paper strips and then turn them back on the following day, resembling an almond blossom.
And the operations are such that the patient places his head on a stool, then works with his eyes, and wraps all of it with bandages suitable for this purpose, and holds them firmly.
Then cut the first bandage, and trim it close to the skin with scissors until finished, ensuring not to irritate the wound.
And make the incisions of spermatic veins as we have described in the incision of nails and small bandages from which it is removed, as shown by the form after this treatise.
And once the incisions are completed and all bandages removed, apply oil of seal butter or distill it with red wineskin and similar corrosive medicines, and cover the area with clean cotton soaked in olive oil if a hot abscess is assured.
If it remains in place for a time, and the bile rises again, and you suspect an abscess is hot, leave the wound alone and treat the abscess with soothing measures.
Then return to your work as soon as it is healed, and thus make the wound where the joint was dislocated by this similar condition.
However, you must always align the treatment of each weak part along its natural course; and from an unnatural cause, in surgical work;
and do not proceed with your hand in any of these procedures until you see that the patient has recovered from this specific operation.
Red swellings are covered over on the skin, and they impair its function and weaken the eye daily.
It is necessary, then, when you look at the first joint that is affected, where it is located, is flaccid, and there is no other illness but in the tendon. Then you must fix it thusly:
Command the patient to place his head in your lap, then tie off those veins along their entire length according to your wisdom, and let them be finely cut in a manner as follows:
And there are two screws placed by degrees within one body according to this form:
Then carefully cut the veins gently, and let the blood flow out after each one, until you see that all veins are removed from the area.
And ensure that you do not parch the tips of the spatulums, and perform this procedure in the middle of the day before the sun, being very careful with your work so as to avoid cutting any veins.
And once you have done this, if there is any residue in the neck, pour a mixture of green and red color to dissolve what remains on his throat.
And if you are unable to grasp all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster with soothing substances for eye pain and leave it on until the pain is eased and assured against inflammation, then continue according to this method before they are healed.
And here is the form of remedy:
The mirror known as "arisati" abscesses:
When you treat it with cauterization and by using the hot ague medicine as I have previously described, but if it is not healed, then perform a trick in which you cut into the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that remains until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed, and you see decay and darkness, remove all instruments from the entire tool that bears form.
And it is called "sharp edge," and made of iron at the front corner, and pointed like a file as in the present form.
And place it on the location of the decayed bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand until you know that the decay has been removed.
and do this not once but often, then restore the location of healing remedies.
if the wound is swollen and discharging pus, and the body of the bowel is also swoln, remaining so for forty days, and it does not heal or become an abscess, considering there are no other issues, know that it is healthy;
If not, there is no other remedy but to bring back the abscess to its place on the upper thigh as per this method: And it is that you expose the bone again with iron, and with medicinal agues, and when it has been exposed, take an auger as per this method, and let the shoulder blade be of iron in three angles, and the shaft to be tapered up to where you see here:
Then place it against the bone near the temple, and keep your hand away from the iron plug, then turn the auger completely until it penetrates the bone, ensuring that the patient feels as if they are holding their hand on their neck.
And then restore the original place with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the wound heals and hardens, go to the neck. It is a more pleasant thing for the patient.
If the eyes are opened widely throughout, and there is no disturbance or narrowing in the nose, then you should tie the patient.
Then treat the throat, then apply cupping or using a hat-like object to suck without causing harm, then apply an oil made of acacia and aloe, as well as incense and sarcocolous resin, and strain the oil, and place bandages and linens.
and the manner of using linens is that you should take enough soft linens, doubling each one four times, then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed by the eyes.
Then strain from above a hard bandage, and begin again with leeches to suck without causing pain.
Then remove the leeches and let the limb be strained day and night, if it becomes softer, then extract it much.
Then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the limb returning to normal, that's good.
If not; Resume the enema and dressings and bandage and leeches until it is healthy again.
The rupture of tissue seen When dislocations come in the open wound, and paper is coming out as like sawdust of pitch, and it's hopeful to see.
Then when you see it swollen, the operation is such that you insert a needle to the root of the part from below up to its tip, then insert another needle or if there are two threads in the part above the rim. and pierce it precisely, leaving the first needle according to its position.
then cut the second thread and tie a part of the eyelid around it, and tighten it well, then extract the needle and place a greased cloth in abundance over it.
and leave until the threads come out with the eyelid, then treat the eye comfortably as long as the wound is healed.
and never restrict the wound with any part of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eyes have a large appearance, then pierce at the delicate part that comes from the edge of the eye, and let the moisture run white and draw down the hairs, entering almost immediately.
Then extract until it is clean.
This disease called "alcunatia" is not just an arrow that has been assembled in the eye and appears to be water running down, it is not actually water.
and the manner of its appearance in surgery is that you make the patient sit on a seat prepared and upright, then take their head with both hands, and move it as soon as you see the arrow coming above the eyes. Then it is to be firmly fixed, and does not descend or become dislodged, allowing the patient to see things as they should.
and if it does not descend, let the patient know that this is acute, and ensure that the bowels are arranged as we have said.
If the patient lies down between your hands, then take a subtle ointment and rub it on the thickened skin near the horny membrane, along its continuation with the horny membrane and crown, until relief.
And when it is resolved, if you distill in the warm oil mixed with honey or water and fenugreek boiled and honey, then be treated with another remedy until healed.
Of waters in the ear We have found similarities to waters in their separation, and what is required for piercing. If, in practice according to health.
It is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and oil him with holy oil and hold firmly.
then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if his eyes are on the right, or in your right hand if his eyes are on the left.
then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almandine," or in your left hand if his eyes are on the right.
then place the tip of the instrument near the crown through a slit as wide as a ray in that corner of the oil at the lower part of the orbit, and insert the instrument called "almandine" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces into the hole of the oil, feeling that almandine enters the empty thing.
And it is proper that the measure of the Almagdala way be at the front of the measurement of the space from the elbow to the end of the finger. and this is the crown of the oil;
If you see the bone on that paper due to the whiteness of the tissue, then place the instrument there where the blood is, and express it along another vein afterwards.
If the water now flows out, see the patient before you and the instrument in its place.
After resting for a bit, and the blood returns through the second vein, apply pressure with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not move upward, gently twist Almagdala lightly with your hand little by little.
Then place some alum in the blood, and leave this oil inside. Then insert a stopper or linen soaked in oil rosary and abundant with egg white, and seal it with the clean oil.
And those of our time, place on a small compress generously with egg whites.
And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as some people have very hard nails, you must use an instrument called "albert," of which this is the shape.
And pierce therefore only the joint, not too deeply, but make it slightly underneath, then apply an amalgam as we have said.
And for the completion of the work, position the patient lying down on their back in such a place.
And they should be immobilized from all movements, and give them light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left, and make them rest according to their condition until the next day.
Then remove them to the same dark room and test their vision, let them see various things, and then rejoin the limb until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this at the time of treatment or after incision now, but you must elevate it because the swelling rises quickly.
When an abscess forms quickly, remove it within seven days, and apply the remedy of that which heals the abscess.
And when it is calmed, remove the dressing and apply something on its face to cover for a day, and let it remain in that dark room.
Then gradually leave the house little by little, and return to normal activities.
And understand that no interference should occur in this case. And one came to us from Yrach, who said that we are at peace and making something called almagda perciet, through which water is produced, but I have never seen any in our land nor read of it in the books of old. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are similar to forms of alchemy, because those who do not know them regard them as such.
and they truly are: And the head of these has three sharp corners.
At no time are various dislocations born or come to be, of which some appear like scorpions ready to sting.
and if they have such characteristics where there is fiery redness or they are pale of bone color. In the case of such dislocations that are pale and not fiery red, it is proper to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
In the case of such dislocations that are pale and not fiery red, it is proper to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun. and blow through his nostrils, and pour oil into those dislocations, and massage firmly. then do as you can to support the subtle point at the tip of one finger, until you know that dislocation is entirely bone.
And if anything remains which cannot be covered, apply all possible ointments gently, ensuring nothing is left. And if it does not rise on its own or an abscess forms, then apply a compress as needed.
And if it is with malign abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the wound is closed and all edges are smoothed, then pour oil or vinegar followed by water. If there is no effect, and moisture reaches the throat, ensure it is safe.
And if moisture does not penetrate as needed, ensure there is no swelling in the bone above it, where inflammation does not occur for cutting:
Then you must wrap it with a slightly thick thread of flax and soak it in our hands, leaving enough space between each piece. And place the patient's head with its neck as straight as possible, and turn it gently until it can be seen inside the mouth.
And many times this is done on children at schools, and it is an easy task for those who wish to do so.
Then take the head that comes through the neck with one hand and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and examine each in turn like we who are his sons.
Do this as long as you know that the children have violated that vessel, then draw out the child, evacuate the blood, and wipe the head with Egyptian salve, and return it to its place as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointments have dissolved everything that remains.
Then afterward put in a gauze bandage for several days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying remedies, then apply them.
This is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, into which oils and medicines are poured.
And it is made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a cauldron, and you conduct in the same way.
And if you see it, make a closed cauldron, and fill it with plain emollients to purge the head.
And let there be an attachment atop for holding while heating the oil or liquid.
From the chariot onto the neck
Many times there appears on the neck a disease called "telloul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye.
And therefore you must begin by cutting out (the affected area), and then apply a strong incision with either the hot caustic or a burning medication.
And if you do not remove it while it is still small, take care to observe if when grown they are hard, of strange color, and poor in sensation.
If it is not touched with iron as it is an inflamed abscess, because whenever one cuts into it once, the patient suffers great harm.
And if the abscess is of a burning touch, not of strange color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then drain the patient without fear, and cut away any dry or constricting things.
Believes that when a solution of continuous bleeding occurs in any of these delicate bones, it benefits little, for some people.
Then it is necessary when this happens to anyone, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood. And then sew the two sides together and treat until it is sound again.
And if the sides are separated on both parts, it is necessary to scrape all areas of their core until they heal, then join the two sides with a stitch, bind them tightly, and powder the blood of a dragon, and use incense ashes. And place a piece of emplastron on it from strong or other emplastron that draws, and leave it until pus comes out through it, then treat with ointment until it is sound again.
The manner of suturing involves this: assemble the dressing. or by needles, as we have said in stitching the abdomen; or with thread, as I have previously informed you.
In treating lip abscesses.
The hands often produce hardened abscesses resembling small pebbles, varying in size from smaller to larger ones;
Then it is necessary that you return the abscesses and split them under each one, and grasp them with forceps and divide into each part.
then place the body after trepanation of an abscess so that it is sutured closed;
and then cleanse the wound, and treat the body until it is healed dry.
Many times it appears above the gums dislocated, which the ancients called "albulus".
If it is necessary to support it with tongs, cut at its root, and let the vein or blood flow.
Then apply mercury vitriol powder, or other binding and drying agents to it.
And if after the incision it returns repeatedly, and often happens, then re-cut and cauterize again: If it does not return after the cauterization.
Never gathered at the heads of teeth, between the gums, rough scales that are ugly and sharp. And never become black or yellowish-green with worms until the infection reaches the gums, and they start to smell.
If it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your holy hand, and raise any lumps or scrapes found, until nothing remains. And thus do the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other discolorations, until they are healed.
And if you remove what is at the first cause, it is good; If not, resume on the second day and third, until all is removed.
Know that the teeth require various forms of dressings to heal, according to what the work shows, because the scrapers from which one removes between the teeth have other shapes than those removed between the teeth. Et ces formes et autres encore sont avec toi préparées.
It is necessary when you treat a toothache that you delay the drilling as much as possible, for it should not be done hastily. because this is a matter of great importance up to such an extent that there can be no excuse for the extraction.
Then when the patient is suffering from strained teats, one must be certain of the toothache. Often the pain plagues the patient, and he believes it to be a healthy tooth, but drills the bad one. and in any case, the pain does not leave until the evil cause is removed, as we have already tried this with these healers.
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the entire tooth until the gum is thoroughly protected from all sides.
Then move it to your elbows or use subtle tenailess movements at first and then gradually, until it is well aligned, after which you firmly secure the tenails. And let the head be painful in your holy space between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly and breaking it, if it does not come out easily, take any of these substances and apply them within each piece gently; then move it as you did initially.
And if the tooth is pierced or dislodged, then you should fill it with cloths where the gaps are. and if it is pulled out subtly with tenailess movements, that it does not break while being extracted.
And it is important to work gently near the gums to remove the tooth.
And ensure that it is not broken and a part remains; returning to the patient with greater pain due to the root's evil nature.
And be sure that you do not act as the unlearned barber does, who through their hastiness and boldness break the jaw many times, without providing any of what we have mentioned.
But bring about any relief through the application of a poultice for this great disease by addressing the roots that reside there, or from the carriage they break, as we have often seen.
And when the tooth is torn out, wash the wound with wine or olive oil and salt;
If bleeding occurs as often happens, apply the poultice of powdered antimony to the wound.
And if it does not heal, then you should cauterize it.
The forms of the teeth that first erupt are with sharp points and large roots, which should not be doubled when extracting the tooth.
And these are the types: And be of large teeth such that they do not bend while pulling, and be well-crafted of iron, and have teeth to grip when pulled.
From the root of the spine When the roots remain during extraction, it is proper that you place cotton soaked in oil on the wound for one or two days until the area is smoothed over, then insert the instruments called "algofri," which make the head of the shoulder appear as if a bird's beak.
And made hollow as a file, and it is shaped thus:
And if the roots do not pass through all these pins, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali" (a splint), which resembles a staff:
And be thick enough so that it does not break, and if the root sprouts from this place, it is good.
If not, assist with all possible means by which shapes can come hereafter:
And if you use this instrument with two tongs, the form it creates is as follows: and other tools in front of him for teeth, and from this instrument that looks like large pincers, the form it takes is as follows:
And these supports must be strong so that they cannot break, and know there are many of dense support. And likewise other supports, which are not counted:
And the wise master subtly uses his instrument by himself according to his practices and the diseases he demonstrates, because there are partial ailments or ancient teachings did not show instruments for variety of causes; so it does not break at all on the cart or other bones, or elsewhere where it protrudes. Seek the supports that should be used as I have told you, and assist with gestures such that this shape occurs:
And they are large and well held to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can be held and removed.
And then restore it to its place with suitable remedies for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, that the patient has all this instrument.
When the visible teeth do not follow the natural course of the body, and their shape is unattractive, especially in maidens, it must be known if the tooth root has been removed after the tooth, and it is not naturally placed on the right side, and cannot be pulled or filed down.
Then cut off; And if it is adhered with the tooth, take this instrument of which here is the shape, and it resembles a small beak, and is made of iron inwardly sharpened.
Et place the coping piece by piece over time due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file the coping so that its shape resembles this.
And it is as with the limb of which needles are made;
and in a similar manner to the bone from which nails are formed, and it is gently wound up little by little over several days so that it does not move until it sets.
then the surface is completely smoothed at the end without any roughness, and if its density is too severe and it blunts the tongue, then you must file the sharp edges so that they are even, ensuring that it neither blunts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
When the tooth is loosened either by impact or falling out, and the patient cannot apply pressure under what they bite that it does not fall out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but this is ineffective.
If necessary, constrain with a thread of gold, for silver threads turn green and rust, but gold does not move ever.
And let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the points.
And if you see the points aligned, take the thread and loop it twice between the two healthy points, then place the knot between the points until you reach another healthy point on the other side. Then resume coverage up to the part where you began, and gently yet skillfully pull your hand back until it does not move.
And keep the ligature close to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then wrap the head of the bone with iron wire using pliers, and join them, and position them so they do not touch the tongue.
And then let it remain tight as long as possible, and if it loosens or the wires break, restrain them with another wire.
If it remains and functions in this manner throughout its strength, and it is the form of the jawbones and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two replacements as you see.
And when a tooth falls out, reset it back in its place, freshly each time, as we have said.
And do not involve anyone who is wise and compassionate, nor at any time shape it as a tooth from an ox bone, but place it where the deficiency is, restrain it as we have said, and it will last and serve for long periods.
At no time does this injury occur from below the tongue or throat, as is commonly found. or by accident of a swiftly cut wound;
Et les opérations sont telles que vous agissez sur la bouche du malade, et assurez-vous que sa tête soit stable, et élèvez sa langue.
Ensuite, coupez le nerf facial, tant que la langue soit délogée de son état normal, et s'il y a desdouces ou des noeuds, c'est une plaie profonde, alors introduisez l’unciné et coupez soigneusement.
Et assurez-vous que la déchirure ne soit pas trop étroite près de là où l'artère se trouve.
Et après cela, soulevez la langue rougeâtre et molle, ou froide, puis insérez sous la langue un tampon en lin.
And let the lice bite the patient every night so that his joints cannot settle.
If bleeding occurs, then apply vinegar-soaked lead over it. If the blood does not stop, then cauterize with a long-burning cautery, which is good for this. Then apply another treatment until it becomes healthy again.
And if you see that it is of a different color or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it is decaying and swollen with moisture, then apply the oncinic bandage, which has a subtle odor, and release from both sides. And if the bleeding does not stop at your work, then apply sulfur paste until it becomes firm, and return to your work as long as you have treated everything.
Then raise the limb with ease and skill, and treat other injuries as needed until it is healed.
by sore lese ire ou d’or is a l’in such as both, that et cure it even, and your own teisso; and m both est and the e is the lier. And so and of and swell too much leu si on les de la testee is and s and then oint eau or they are treated with salt and reactions and a tu heal of to l’est et les, and if themes; and both lese est, and the cure; Never does the condition of swollen throat occur which is called 'godath,' and these are properly referred to as two almonds; when treating them, as we have explained in the section, if they do not heal, be cautious.
If it is an abscess that's small and has a flat color, don't probe with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, also don't probe with iron for the bleeding. but let it remain until it's matured, and then you shall divide it, or it may break on its own.
If it is of pale red color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument for coping, but first examine if the abscesses rest and are soothed.
Then have the patient sit in front of the sun with their eyes shut and mouth open, as you work on them, gripping their temples between your hands, and press their tongue out from under all instruments so that it takes shape.
and be of silver or fine iron just like a razor blade:
You should be pressing the tongue against all this instrument and observe the abscess. Take the needle and insert it into its core, pulling fluid out as much as you can;
And treat any wound with cloths, then apply the bandage using an instrument of which this shape seems like a force. And thusly the head is bent, with one side higher than the other, and it's very painful, made of iron or bandage.
: And it has a sharp edge on one side and no name on the other.
And when you have bandaged one of the almonds (referring to parts of the body or perhaps metap#160metaphors), then bandage the other in the same manner. After making an incision, gargle the patient with warm water and saltwater for ease; if bleeding occurs, continue gargling with warm water until the bleeding stops. Alternatively, use juice from cooked pomegranates or crushed myrtle leaves. Then treat until it becomes healthy again;
And no other abscesses appear in the throat except for two almonds, if they occur as such like the two almonds themselves.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, which is to say, one small abscess.
and had closed off the entire throat so well that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she stayed like this for one or two days.
And the abscess was so swoln that it had been pushed through both nostrils by the two openings of the small one.
So I did so immediately, and inserted an ivy cone therein, then the thread was pulled through, and a great portion of wax came out.
Then rejoin it on the other side through the nostrils, and open the mouth and compress the tongue;
After inserting the needle into the abscesses, and taking some material from it, but did not obtain much blood. And thus they dilated the woman's throat passage, and began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop trying to remove that abscess for long periods of time.
And the abscesses returned again and filled up with what I had emptied from them until they became quite large.
Then I deceived him and cauterized inside his throat: So he stopped growing.
And from these parts, and only God did anything to him afterwards.
them. 7-30.
When they attempt to return it to its place, and it is inflamed and long, then call it "perpendicular";
And if it is very large and round, then call it an "eyeball".
When it is treated as we have described in the section, and the treatment yields no benefit, and you see that the abscess has calmed down but is subtle, then it must be excised.
And those that are round and not elongated. And if it is of blood or fishy color or blackish, then one should avoid making an incision in it. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it as I have described regarding its appearance and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we previously mentioned. Then insert the needle into the vein, withdraw it slightly, and follow the procedure for two small incisions as previously mentioned for incision of the stones.
And it is necessary that you do not fill more than what lies beyond the natural limit;
for if you fill too much, it causes pain to the voice and speech.
and after the incision, follow what we have said in the incision of the stones, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears being covered, then you must apply an instrument for the reassurance of the cover.
The manner of this cautery is acute ague. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument as we have said in the fire cautery treatise, and rinse with lively fresh water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear. And with this instrument, here is its shape:
And it has a handle or hollow where the medicine is placed, like the handles of a spoon, and places the instrument with all the medicine under the eye.
and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth containing the medicine inside, ensuring it does not descend to the throat and belly.
then hold your hand with all the medicine and press it against the eye, a quantity about half an hour's worth, until you see movement easing and the bitterness of the medicine is soothed.
and if you see this, take some cotton and wrap it around any instrument, dampen the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument onto all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton becomes moist on the eye.
And often do this until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry, and falls off after IV or V days.
And if you need to repeat the medicinal caustication, upon repeating it, and after caustication around the eye, use a cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is surrounding the medicinal area.
And be raised from cold water, and be healed by gargling until it feels normal again.
This treatment is more about the incision, not just the caustication.
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamine and wormwood and origanum (oregano) and rue (herb), and chamomile and avronne (horseradish) and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of these into a pot, set it to ease, and make boil.
And let the bone be well fixed with strong clay, and within the hole have an instrument fitted according to this manner: And be it of silver or iron, and let one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapors rise to the eye through the canal, until the vein is constricted.
after its recurrence often, until the vein dries, and ensure that you do not touch it at the beginning of the emergence of the hot abscess, for many things can happen. and do not touch it when it is in the decline of a hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a canal and put in its head an eagle's feather so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot. For the crack of a tooth does not greatly affect the breathing through the mouth, and it is good healing together with health.
Often, one may feel something in the throat or spine of a fish, or anything else.
Therefore, if it is necessary to examine what you can see, and press the tongue to the sunlight along the entire instrument, so that you may observe any movement.
And what does not open and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit at this point as well, so that the meat may be cooked in the stomach. In case the thing has been expelled through vomiting;
Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of thread, or a lettuce root, or crust from dry bread. And tie it to the sponge or thread, and then swallow it again. And when it reaches the stomach, if it dissolves, then drain the fluid;
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take a tool of bone as described here:
And raise the instrument's handle so it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised high. And be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so it does not close, nor insert the bone too deeply.
And to move it means the patient touches the instrument, because it is out of place or unnatural. If desired, where he traces with all instruments evenly until firm.
Of throat constriction
Never is there a treatment without suction, as I have said in the section, through medical treatments; And when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument I have told you.
And if you see stiffness, treat it entirely with small pincers or delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if that is not effective, then take a hollow reed, and put it into the patient's throat, and repeatedly perform warm compresses with the heated iron rod, as often as necessary. And if you give the patient water all day long.
Then take full sip of cold water and work the mouth, and it produces the urge to swallow, and often moves with its hand. And as soon as suction feels the water, it flows.
If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with strong onion using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
Do this many times, for it will burn very sore.
And the manner of fumigation is that you shall have a pot with coal embers in it, and place under a cloth sieve through which the head should be inserted using the instrument.
Then pour your fumes, and the patient puts their head in a container with their mouth closed so that no smoke enters but reaches up to the eyes.
And now the eye will begin to burn, and if it does not come out, restart the fumigamination many times.
And sufferers experience thirst, and consume salted and sour things, and do not drink water.
Then it becomes necessary for him to be released under this regimen.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats swelling is, when it can be seen, similar to crooked tongs designed for entering into the throat. and it resembles the beak of a physician's tool, and there is roughness of lime, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
There are many forms of abscesses, as the memory comes to this and that in this book, and they differ between perforation and cutting.
And there are two ways of which one is as it appears itself, and because it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for boils which occur within the body.
For an abscess in the head is different from that at the base, and an abscess of the shoulder blade is different from those occurring in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
And if at an abscess we should not pierce, until the bowel is fully matured according to its completion.
and if of such that it must be pierced when they are ripe, do not die according to their completion, as abscesses which are near joints.
When an abscess occurs near the joints and is left to rot therein, on occasion it may be so that the tissue and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Or if an abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay the piercing until it is matured, harm will come to the main limb.
or if it is near the base, then one should pierce as soon as it is matured.
and it should not be pierced without completed digestion, except for those near the base, that it may not burst forth too quickly, extend inwardly, and become a fistula. And cannot heal completely.
And it is necessary that you know the time of abscess perforation when healing progresses, and when pain eases, departure of fever, diminution of swelling and redness, and faint debates and sharpening of the abscess head, and other signs.
And it is necessary to wait for some time after the perforation or as long as needed from the abscess site, and where movement occurs.
And the perforation should be long in duration for the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or at joints and veins, and at arteries, in all cases where there is no swelling. When they swell, according to which limb.
And when an abscess is in the churned flesh, you must allow the opening to remain until it is fully healed, as we have said.
If you pierce it before this spot, there is venom running through his body, and it is filled with much filth. And sometimes the lips harden and the deepest parts of him.
And for any abscess that you perceive according to the width of its body, as befits the limb it is in.
And it is necessary for you to treat small abscesses and small wounds. and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many ruptures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess.
and if with such abscesses it is necessary to cut the flesh, and cover them up. when they become just like rags, and are moldy, then it must be done as with barrels.
and if there are those that are split into three corners, and if so with such as are covered like the bellows of mire, like hookworms.
And if there are such places where one makes a round incision, or other cuts and similar injuries.
For those without heads, as with superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them straight through;
and when the abscess is large, with great swelling, and you pierce it, do not drain all of the pus in that hour, but rather a part of it. then probe the abscess until the next day, and then fully drain it. do this repeatedly, gradually more each time, until all of the swelling subsides.
especially if the patient is weak in vigor, or a woman carrying, or small children, or elderly and infirm men. For the arrow can sometimes leap out with the release of the bowstring, and inadvertently kill the patient, so be cautious.
Discharge this chapter with great care, and when you have detected your abscess, drain the wound, and examine if the wound from the abscess is small. And if it is a neatly sized one, then dress with either linen or old cotton; And if it is large abscesses and there are many outgrowths, then one should dress each with a bandage so they may come into contact with each other.
And if you have cut into the abscess near the skin, and removed it entirely, then fill it with old cotton or flax cloth without moisture, and bind until the third day.
Then consult a doctor, and apply ointment as long as it is healed.
If bleeding occurs on your wound, treat with cold water and ease, and moist cloth, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
If the bleeding persists, if it is well-managed and cared for, and the powders I have mentioned in this book are used, and if it is winter or when the affected area or abscess is very inflamed, then you must apply warm woolen tents and linens soaked in wine and hot oil.
If it is summer and the affected area or wound is fleshly, then you must apply warm linens soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day as we have said.
And then release the abscess and drain it, and treat it as necessary, until it is healed.
This must be known universally in treating abscesses:
Or I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
When small abscesses arise in the scalp, they are handled as silk, similar to the follicles of a girl's hair, and there are many like this.
There are those that are greasy and sticky like hairs.
And if there are such things that are hard and thorny at the tail, then there is no doubt as long as the arrow does not go against it.
And the techniques of bandaging are such that you must try with all instruments called 'entromissors', from which formations come afterwards and what they contain.
Because if it contains moisture, it grows above the long one. (This could refer to a growth or formation that occurs when there is an excess of moisture.)
And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave nothing behind.
Then dip a piece of cotton in Egyptian salve if available. If not, use water and salt, and apply the balm to the wound, leaving it until the next day. And thus will run those who are displaced during the night.
And then begin the wrapping again, as before, on the second day and third, until you are certain that it does not dislocate at night.
Then treat the wound with ointment as suitable for him, until it is healed.
And if an abscess persists, then apply this according to this form, in the long manner; and collect thy pus, and scrape away all scabs, and apply your healing treatment to the sore as it lies.
And if the arrow causes him pain in return, do what I have told you afterward.
And similarly treat an abscess if it is pus-filled, and with scraping and cleaning as I have told you.
And the treatment of a pus-filled abscess and its moisture is easier, for it contains less blood. And if any of these abscesses or heads without moisture are present, and those old-fashioned ones that I have described at the head.
And I found the abscess like a hard stone, sharp and bruised, which could not be broken. But if one had hit it with anything, they would have made a wound like from a stone.
In other abscesses coming or at the top, such as those that come from the top of children's heads and rooting in their ears, open it daily near the most dependent point, so that pus may exit.
and treat them as needed.
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and from under the shoulders, and in the armpits, and never come to any other place or body parts, and they are very much, and closely connected with each other.
And each scrofula properly forms within its quarter, like the knot and the top abscess, as we have said. and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
and the similarities of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and others that hold malicious intentions which do not wish to obey healthiness.
in that one then which you see of good bodily arrangement at the touch, and is similar to the color of the body overall, and moves from all sides and not so loose on the skin nor veins nor arteries or vessels, and it's not deep.
If it is necessary to treat it from above, and peel off each part, extend the two lips double the thickness of the nail, if needed, as we have said in head sores.
And move it little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, nor is it necessary to remove the spatula or cutting tool, lest the hand slips and does too much before you need to stop when necessary.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not bleed, place vitriol paste in the wound, or any powders that coagulate blood, and bind the wound. and let it rest until the sore is soothed, and made softened, and begins to heal.
And when the blood is stopped, return to your work until you have completed it.
Then go back to your proper course if there are small tumors remaining after some time; treat and clean them.
And if the blood vessel at the root of a tumor is large, do not just excise that tumor at its base but instead tie it with strong double thread and let it hang without harm.
Then dress the wound with well-boiled cotton soaked in Egyptian salve, then bandage it.
And if you completely remove the scrofula, it is necessary to bring together the two edges of the wound and hold them closed now, so that there is no excess due to the size of the scrofula. And it is necessary for you to bind up the root and drain pus, and close as we have said.
And it is necessary for you to bind up the root and drain pus, and close as we have said. For tumors that cause excess, puncture where they come to an end;
and do the same as previously described, then clean it with salve and other similar things if there is decay present. And when the wound is thoroughly cleaned, apply a poultice of soaking oil until it heals.
The ancients spoke and wrote about throat surgery. But I have never seen it done in our land, and it is the writing of their words.
For those with stridor, it is necessary to clear out the incision in the throat called "epiglottis". And no aid is provided through this method because all the veins and the evil humors of the body are found in those with abscesses burning hotly within the mouth, throat or arms.
When the disease is in the channel of the main source, it is necessary to remove the epiglote to avoid destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should make an incision just above or below three circles or four from one side as a small slit lengthwise between two circles or along the quantity of the fissure, but not into the trachea.
And those who are so sore have their section of the epiglottis performed where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long within.
And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched with skin from the throat to its full length, then cut the flesh until reaching the windpipe. and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing else, then close the sac as we have said;
and demonstrated by the section of the windpipe vein that tears apart when it is ruptured where the voice fails.
and leave the open wound exposed for a while.
And when there is doubt about strangulation after some time has passed, gather the two lips of the wound in the throat area and suture all together until the cartilage is felt.
Then administer medicines that generate heat, until it is sound.
the uzerd: and  (or they:s. Then place a covering over the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
and so they instruct the patient to leave the wound open until the illness is gone, which takes 3 or 4 days; then they command it be sewn shut and treated, until healed.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden take a knife and plunge it into her throat, cutting part of the tongue.
And so they called me to heal her, finding her almost dead.
I examined the wound and found that blood had come from it; however, she hadn't bitten a vein or other tissue, just her throat, and the blood flow was coming through the wound.
I addressed it quickly, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
and nothing of this occurred to the lady except that her voice turned red, and she recovered afterward into her own condition.
for I tell you that in treating the epiglottis there is no need to fear.
These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses the color of jet black, and occur mostly in women.
and there are two ways: natural, and accidental.
or naturally, it has no cause.
And the accidental one is in two ways: one seems like fat to us, and the other way it resembles an abscess that comes from our arteries. When there is fear, and it does not matter to work on external things except in that which is small, and test and search for everything involved. If you find it as we have learned, and do not apply to any vein, if the bandage is applied as one would bind wounds, and treat the entire area, if there are points. And search thoroughly, and heal it as necessary, until it is perfectly well again.
There are many ways to us, of which I will say all the variations;
And here I must explain all the differences between them and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is accompanied by heat and fever until the boiling has passed, and tissue destruction is complete. Then rests the fever and heat.
With ours there is no heat or fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and according to the body's color, beginning like glass and becoming larger.
And they follow II similarities, or grease, or moisture, and the colors are as I have mentioned in the section.
It is necessary when you come to the care of us that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermitted", according to its form or chapter which follows.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses in us is that you extract or find more moisture than you see in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the discharge has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the intramedullary bone, and take care so it does not break.
If there is a running discharge through the skin, if its color matches what I have said about other abscesses;
And if there is no discharge after extracting the intramedullary bone, it indicates fatty tissue, then cut accordingly in a cross pattern, and grasp with forceps, and lightly scrape from each side, and cover the cloth where it lies to treat it cleanly with needlework.
And if you cannot treat it cleanly, then cut in pieces so that nothing remains.
Because if anything remains, it will return to you many times;
And if it remains a bit and does not bother you, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and put in soothing substances to treat other remedies until it is healed.
And if they are large, cut the two edges of the wound, and treat as though burned by a hot liquid.
And if the burn from scraping is opposite or different, quickly apply the lead of antimony paste, and let it rest for two days or three, until the wound heals, and allow time for blood to replenish. Then return to using what was previously left out because of this.
See here the forms of interposed suppurations, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
And among them are three types called "albarata", one type is called "rebebo," and there are three kinds. large, means, small, to search for abscesses of a fistula;
and they are like needles with which one pierces the sorcery, made of citrine stone, iron or silver, whose movement is valued as that which is yellow, and more tested for searching blisters of a fistula by black bumps.
and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the holes.
The forms of tumors are mostly similar, as you see here:
and for tumors that have two blisters in three ways also;
and for tumors that have three blisternails are found under the skin. They resemble small lumps or pimples in different sizes according to the size of their openings. There are large, medium, and small vari
And if there are knots with two horns, and knots of one horn only, and they come in three kinds.
And all these are necessary at their place.
The head of these that are sharp is cutting, and some do not cut other than one side, from which we scrape the skin, so the vein nor nerve is severed.
and these intruders are reset in layers, so that the patient does not suffer at the onset of boils.
And they come in three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And they are not used anywhere else but in the joints of legs and arms, breasts, shoulders, and similar areas.
And at no other time is another instrument made small, resembling the sharpened sticks of lancets, according to this method, which punctures blood. And it is placed at no time back into its proper position of veins and arteries, and does not return according to this grand form.
At no time do the breasts of any man swell when he begins to be corrupted, until they resemble a woman's breasts.
and remain ugly and swolled, and those who wish to treat them must do so according to this method of the treatment line; b. until g: (The latter part seems incomplete or unclear in Old French, possibly referring to a specific section or page number.) then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with cleaning clay, then stitch together the two edges of the wound by sewing, and let it heal until it is healthy.
And if it inclines forward, becoming weakened due to its size like it often occurs in women, causing pain in the ribs above, by two similar tears. For this is why one hangs from the other at each end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. up to line g. Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and prepare what we have mentioned of stitching and powders, as well as everything necessary for the treatment, until it is clean.
And if it is not clean or the incision isn't fully made because the patient doesn't want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a cloth of compressed cotton in a corrosive salve. And he leaves it to settle until it reattaches and absorbs fat, then treats it so that it becomes clean.
These abscesses that arise from the limbs are hard sores or ulcers, and some that contain pus.
Those which contain moisture must be cut following this form, from line b to line g: an:
And if the abscesses are similar to hard tumors, treat them as we have described in cutting open hard tumors, and if the wound reopens, prepare the fire cautery as we have said before.
When the vein is torn and the skin is sutured on top of it, often there are many abscesses, and similarly, blood vessels bleed and become infected.
And if the cone is placed in this way for the artery, then the abscesses are large at their origin; And when you touch it on your elbebows, it feels extremely painful.
and if it is for the vein, then there are often visible bulges appearing;
It is foolish to try and cover this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the nails and joints and where there are many other openings, and they are very large. Therefore it is necessary to remove the iron bandage, and those who are at the neck must also have it removed, and in those with swelling of arteries above the long skin.
then work on the tonsils, and carefully release the vessel from the sutures, until it is fully exposed;
then insert a needle from underneath it and pierce through to the other side, and secure the vessel with a double thread in two loops, as I have shown you during the extraction of the two vessels located in the temple.
then make a hole between the two loops with an introducer until no blood flows from it, and release the abscess.
Then apply a bandage to reduce swelling until it subsides. Then apply an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed.
And if an abscess is due to the size of the vein, it must be treated with ointment that you can apply to all over the affected skin, then insert the needle from where you hold in your hand and pierce it completely through the skin, making sure to use double thread as you pass it across. Then treat the abscess as I have instructed, or if possible at both ends of the double thread.
And if you doubt that the threads are not strong enough, then insert another needle through all of it from the incision made by the first needeled and pull out both ends in four lengths.
Then cover the abscess until excess tissue forms, then remove the excess flesh and leave what remains.
Then apply a poultice of wool in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
As abscesses come in arteries and veins, they also appear on nerves when struck or from excessive work, and similar things.
And this occurs often in shoulders and elbebows where there are joints, and they have serious abscesses, their color resembles that of the body, and they cause pain in various ways.
And when it is pressed firmly, it causes the patient great pain, but not throughout the body, rather away from the core.
And it is moved equally in all directions; neither forward nor backward, up nor down, and those with joint issues should not be bound with iron. Perhaps they would go against it; And those who are at the head or forehead create ruptures in the dura mater.
And those who are at the head or forehead create ruptures in the dura mater. If abscesses are small, if you have pincers, and cover it at its root;
And if they are large, use a hook to extract it, then scrape and suture the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
It never occurs in limbs and not elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its appearance, and the roots are fine, but the head is large.
and there are both small and very large ones.
And I saw in the home two stomachs that were more fungus-like than anything else, with no differences, they were white, had fine roots, and were split, causing excessive moisture.
I weighed them and found in one eighteen ounces, and in the other six, and the work of incision should be such that you examine if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a fine root. If it breaks to the spatulum wide, and there are in your presence the fire cautery.
If it breaks to the spatulum wide, and there are in your presence the fire cautery. For from cutting often comes great blood loss, and if it does not stop, then quickly use the cauterizer.
and if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then you constrain it, and continue to strain the thread of wax until it fits the articular cavity, and thus work is done through it.
And if the roots are large, be wary of using it in one sitting for fear of burdening the stomach, but do well to cover most of it, then cauterize so it does not return.
Then treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the thole which is of sickly color and poor sense and lacking regard.
This is an encrusted boil, and I will come to treat this syphilis hereafter.
When the mouth is forcibly closed. If the appearance of gangrene comes from cauterization of a wound or fistula opening and is around the abd [domain] without swelling, as it occurs in other regions, or bleeding from veins or arteries according to what lies before, or edema;
And if it is by the rupture of the sinew and the exit of the bile, then the color of the abscess appears similar to that of the body's flesh, and it is a slight matter without pain, open from various exits. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then there are various outcomes; and when one presses on its extremities, it recoils, then returns, and at times it may be hardened, with significant enlargement at the entrance of the bowel for intense work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and open well when you apply pressure with your hand, do not constrain.
And if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens through these signs large and hard, and it adheres according to a quantity. And if it is due to inflammation, then it is tender upon touching, and the evacuations are such that you observe whether the appearance is from blood of an artery, or a vein, or inflammamenent.
And if it is due to inflammation, then it is tender upon touching, and the evacuations are such that you observe whether the appearance is from blood of an artery, or a vein, or inflammamenent. If it is necessary to leave the healing alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or the belly, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dip his finger, and be extended straight up, then tie all around the bowels. Then command him to lie supine between your hands, then go around the limb that you have tied at all the spermatic veins, then extend half of the abscess above all along the large penis. Then bind it with a strong thread or a cord of sturdy silk firmly, and be sure not to loosen the ligation.
Then work on extending half of the abscess above the ligature and apply your mustard plaster, then envelop the intestines. If you find it caught by the ligament, if you dislocate it, and put the intestines back into place through the abdomen.
And if you find that there is swelling, if you grasp the tendon, and remove the excess fluid.
And if the artery is acting against you, or it pulsates, and runs out abundantly, then return to your work and take two needles, insert them in a cross-shaped pattern where you previously made an incision.
Then stretch the abscess in four directions above the needles and if you see it, remove the neednails, and let them remain until they heal, and drain any necrotic tissue. When you may the cow with its udder under and plucked, then treat as necessary, and when the abscess occurs as we have said.
When you may the cow with its udder under and plucked, then treat as necessary, and when the abscess occurs as we have said. And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and sew it shut.
Of burning sore We have said in that section the similarities of syphilis, and how one should work with remedies, and how to purge the bloodletting.
And say the syphilis erupts in the skin, and great caution is needed for treatment, and our ancestors said that when syphilis appears on an exposed area or can be removed like warts in armpits, groin, and similar areas, it should all be excised at the beginning.
nor has anyone ever been healed by me before.
And the procedure, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said, involves emptying any black pus from the patient.
then cleanse the wound if there is evident swelling, and prepare the patient properly to perform the procedure.
then pour in your suppurating sores or ulcers, and any flesh at their base, and the bone without leaving anything.
and allow the blood to flow freely, pressing firmly with your hand or another object, and if the spread of blood is opposite to the incision in an artery or vein, cauterize until it ceases. Then treat with another treatment until it is set right.
From dropsy (edema) We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, the signs of each kind, and the treatment made by medicines, and that which is treated with iron.
and one should not touch with iron in these two kinds; that is to say, tympanites and hyposarca, because it's a deadly thing;
Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "swelling" with medicines and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides drops지, as well as vomiting and similar things. If you do not use iron, for there is doubt.
And if you see the patient in good physical condition and has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then work thus: Lift the patient upright with your hands, and the assistant presses the belly, pushing water to the lowest part of the groin, then take the spinous-spatula as follows: And so employ sharp instruments of two parts. At an angle, and always ensure that it does not go too deep until reaching the intestines when inserted. Do not spill it:
Then look to see if dropsy has settled toward the intestines: If it is necessary, you should insert into the bowel on the side III directly above the elbow. If it is dropsy due to a liver disease, make an incision on the left side of the groin II inches.
And if it is due to an ulcer, make the incision on the right side, and it must only be so that the patient lies above the incision where excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
Then penetrate the skin with the instrument and stop it, and lift your hand to cover all of the tissue between the skin and fascia as when scraping for an amount equal to that of a fingernail or slightly more.
Then penetrate the fascia until you reach the level of eight tissues, and it is the source of water; then proceed further, and stop with this instrument which has this shape. It resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of silk or light linen, and in the part below the small eyelet. and it has a stitch on one side, three loops. and two on the other side, one in the center;
It is shaped as a pen tip, and it's the shape of the incision that the writer makes to cut the quill:
at the top underneaturally, so when it becomes moistened with water, they descend upon the instrument now.
empty the majority or one-third of it because if you empty more than is needed at that time, by chance the patient may die due to exhaustion from holding their spirit against the weapon, as they sweat profusely, or approach death.
However, depending on the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's vitality indicates, and his hair.
Then prepare the instrument and hold the water in it, and now retain it using a key that plugs the hole which I have described, to pierce according to this method.
Then continue with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering such symptoms, and draw a small quantity of water.
Do this every other day, and be careful not to apply heat until it stops but for a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and leave him with too much water, whether by burial or hot sand, sweating a lot, bathing in sunlight, and drinking wine. And the care of medicinal desiccants until it is dry enough, and cauterization over the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
There is never a child born with no foreskin on the penis, or if present, it is small, or not in its proper place.
If there must be done soon that he has pierced all the phallus very finely according to this method:
Then place a fine plug in the bladder, and let it heal for three or four days or so until it feels ready to urinate again, then unblock it, allowing urination.
And perhaps nothing is needed in that case because the strong flow of urine leaves no blockage behind.
If it is found that his urinary tract is small, then it is indeed the medicine of a lead plug as we have said, which will enlarge.
Those who do not naturally have the bladder in place are blocked, because none arise with the bladader at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless their penis is lifted upwards. And they cannot bend it because the matter cannot reach up to the bone, and it is a serious illness.
And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the penis and scrotum elevated like a small barrel, so that the peritoneum can be incised appropriately.
And beware of the bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, use the clamping point where blood is drawn from, and treat the wound until it heals.
Of pustules of the penis Many times this swelling comes in the penis, and it has an unattractive appearance of a burn.
And there are both harmful and harmless ones;
If it is necessary to pluck them with a fine hook, cleanse and purify all, then place cottonwool soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then apply the diaphincum ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and suppurating, it is necessary to treat it with fire cautery.
Once you have cleansed it and the sore is on the shaft with part within hairs and part towards the other end, if necessary to remove the sore that is within. And when it is healed, treat the other end.
Because when you heal it together, ensure that the head of the shaft is not pierced and does not come to blackness and decay within the shaft or at the base.
If it is necessary to treat all that is black and corrupted, then place them on a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranate peels and vetches, then follow other remedies until they are healed.
If bleeding persists, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The caustic helps with two dispositions together: This is to know, in the discharge of blood and putrefaction.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, one must insert or guide a cane in the penis and urinate on the patient.
And when the hair is found at the top of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then one must scrape with a sharp instrument until the ties are loosened and free the head of the penis from all parts.
If it is a serious matter to address this issue, you should scrape at the fissure with an instrument no more than halfway along the shaft of the penis and hair.
Then carefully separate them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water on it without removing anything completely.
Circumcision is not a disjunction of continuity like other wounds; However, when we perform this work of our own free will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the easiest for health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I want to include the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision before me on the organ, the strength, and everything anew;
If it were the head because there are two tufts of hair, and occasionally one might cup it above and below that one without touching. But it is recovered from cupping, and the pain doubles, and with the cleansing that involves much fire there is not assuredly secure the tip of the limb;
and with the cleansing of the nail by chance it escapes from the iron, and worms burrow in, and many times they emerge thus there is no need for further cleansing and I have witnessed this.
From the trimming which is done using force on all parts of the sinew, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the force cuts equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, make the cuts evenly throughout all parts of it; but let the veins be well narrowed around the skin;
and let the manner of the first work be such that you make it appear to the child if he listens, that you do not tighten him but bind the thread around the penis only, and then allow him to breathe in all ways possible.
Then make a hole between your hands straight through, and the joint rejoins with strength in your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the movements.
Then place your hand on the shaft and blow or cure it, and pull up until the head of the shaft is aligned. Then cleanse it well from any impurities that have accumulated there, then tie the socket with a double thread, and fasten below one end to another ligament.
Then cleanse it well from any impurities that have accumulated there, then tie the socket with a double thread, and fasten below one end to another ligament. And hold it with two fingers by the second tied ligament to the scrotum and urethra, and wrap between the two ligaments, then lift the head gently and pull up the shaft of the penis. Then let a small amount of blood flow slowly because it is a male organ. And place powder on it and over the powder; a paste of half an egg cooked with warm rose water is applied, mixed with good quality olive oil, and left until the following day, and treated again as necessary until healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is this:
Both ends of the forceps should be held and sharp, and the jaws as large as the pincers uniformly:
The mistake in cleaning is when the fluid within escapes from the incision:
Therefore it is necessary that you stretch your thumbs this way so that the eye makes an opening. (Note: This text appears to be discussing techniques or instructions related to medical procedures involving forceps and possibly suturing.)
And cover evenly, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, if it has tweezers, and then cut the callus.
And if they persist for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess has calmed down, and lightly scrape.
If you cut as you can move, and protect the area of the rod, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Therefore treat the sudden wound with powder as we have said or treated in our section on powders, and if you cut to an excessive depth, and it goes too far upward, it will not do harm.
Treat as we have said until it is sanitary.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or foreign object, which we have discussed in that section.
And if the urine is not flowing freely, and you see retention due to a stone that is located at the bladder neck or urethra, then it requires that the patient be placed on their side with knees bent. and place your hands on the patient's back, extend their abdomen from above the lower back, and securely hold them as far as possible. and then he presses on the bladder to dislodge the stone from above, which causes the urine flow.
If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction using all the instrument called "seringue," which has this form:
And it should be of fine, light silver wire, like the feathers of a bird. And let its length be half a palm long and narrow at the top.
And the manner of urine extraction is to take a doubled thread and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at its top, then insert it into the wire.
And trim the excess wool and insert it up to the top of the wire, then grease the wire with oil or butter and frankincense powder. Have the patient sit on a stool, and apply oil from urine, olive oil, and water to their bladder and penis.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, up to its root, then bend the penis towards the scrotum.
Then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the male's approach towards emptying his thing, but it is not done according to this order because where she goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread through all his hair little by little, and he urinates along with the hair, then extract it, and let him pass the urine.
And repeat with the syringe as long as his bladamo is emptied, and settle the male's issue.
When incontinence or blood appears within the bladder, with pus accumulating there and you see to distill waters and medicines, do all that is called "clêpesdre," which is its form.
It is closed, and if at three holes: Part one, and part two, as you see.
And the tools with which the medicinal cord is such that it properly fills the wound without addition, and if possible to drain the moisture, and apply as needed.
And when you see your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the catheter where it should be to drain into the moisture, and leave them as they are.
If you draw out the moisture through the catheter, then firmly reset the tube back in place; If more moisture enters there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema used for cleansing the bladder:
And it is of silver or iron, and the head lies higher.
and below the neck where the ligaments tear.
Then take a sheep bladder and place the moisture you wish to apply via enema inside it, then tie it between two breasts with a good double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
Then insert the head with an enema into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladastery as soon as possible, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly through. Then insert a strong thread into these openings, then form the circle as you would with a wick, and put in what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it within the instrument.
And do so as you did with the bladder, pressing into your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Stone
We have discussed in the section the methods of stone removal and arrow extraction together with remedies;
And I explained the difference between stones formed by rain, and all other signs, and in which type of stone one must work through cutting. And in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that stones formed by urine in the bladeboily often occur in children, and it is a sign that water leaks from the bladder resembling water due to its subtlety.
And it has hairs on its surface, and it weakens the ill person's strength, and they do so many times, and then straighten them out. and to numerous wounds, it affects their foundation;
and the healing of children is easy until they reach four years old, it is very severe in the elderly, and moderate for those between youth and old age.
and its treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema in order to expel all the filth from the intestines. For this prevents any time seeking for stones.
Then take the sick person by their feet and stand them up straight, turning so that the stone descends to the front of the bladeback, and sometimes comes out from above.
Then make them sit between your hands properly laid, with their hands below their thighs, so that the bladeback is completely inclined downward.
Then grasp and touch within.
If you feel the stone in the space, quickly proceed to cut near the stone.
And if it does not come out with the touch, grease your index finger on the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child or an adolescent. and push into its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, grip firmly at the bladder's neck.
then press with your finger, and push down where you plan to cut.
And instruct the assisting person to press the bladader with their hand and command them to extend upwards with their right hand the testicles, and pull away the skin beneath the testicles at the incision site.
Then he applies the splinting bandage as follows: which is its form: And it is made between that which lies between the joints and the base, not within but on the left side of the sinew.
And it should be straight above the stone, and between your thigh and base, and let the shaft be as wide at its widest part and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Occasionally press on that which is between your thigh and base so it feels no strain.
And say if there are stones or edges within. If the stone is difficult to remove.
And if it appears soft and round like glue, of which removal is easy.
To make a celi where there are edges and margins, enlarge the incision.
And if it does not come out, then you must extract with tongs similar to a file at the tip, in order to fully remove the stone so that it does not escape. or place your instrument delicately like a curved awl at the top;
and if you cannot do so thusly, make the hole slightly larger, and if it crumbles, extract with vitriol.
and if there are multiple stones, first remove the largest one from the bladder neck, then cut into it, then crush it, and after that, take out any smaller ones that remain.
If it is very large, one must sear it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: If he dies or his urine returns through the same place because the bones cannot unite.
Yet make an effort with milking or using tongs for debridement, until you clean it in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, along with compresses, and place an oil-soaked cloth over it, using wine or rose water mixed with cold water to cool down a hot abscess. Then rest the patient on his back and do not loosen the bandage until the next day.
And when you remove it, wash thoroughly with oil and water; then apply the final ointments of dafinicon and basilicon until healed.
And if an abscess comes out in the wound and ulcers appear with blood clotting in the bladder, and it is retained as such that urination occurs without difficulty: Thus thrust your thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, blisters will form on the vein, and pus.
Then lift the wound free of water and exudate and feculence, and aid it in every way you can, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that all wounds you treat, bind them with two bandages, and apply the remedies to the area.
And if the stone is small and it is caused by an inflamed vein and embedded, and the urine cannot flow out. If you follow the treatment I have described here, enlarge it several times through this procedure. I have also found this to be so.
Take an iron rod according to this form and it is pierced at four angled tips in one piece:
Then take a thread around the rod under the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder.
Then insert the probe into the rod gently until it reaches the stone. And turn the probe to your hand in the stone little by little, as much as you can pierce through the stone from another side.
If it comes out soon with urine, then press your hand on what is lodged in the stone within the rod. If it breaks quickly and rises swiftly with urine, and the patient recovers;
And if you cannot do so due to any obstruction, then place a thread under the stone and another above it, then break the rod where the stone is between the two threads, then extract quickly, untie the ligatures, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound. And care for it until it becomes healthy again.
of women's stones
Sometimes a stone may be embedded in women, and if this occurs once, it requires careful treatment and is forbidden for three reasons.
one because the woman might possibly be a virgin;
and secondly, we cannot find a maid who is willing to undress in front of strangers, especially when she is chaste.
and thirdly, it may be that we cannot find a woman skilled in this art of healing hands;
and fourthly, if the stone in the woman is more deeply embedded than in men, thus it requires deeper cutting, which causes great fear. And if necessary, one must seek a midwife who knows well and has little charge for her services. If you cannot find such a person, there are no guarantees of success with this method.
And he presents a well-trained dancer in the life of women, or a woman skilled in part of the art, and he commands that she do as you command regarding the inspection of the stone. And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: Then it is necessary for her to insert her finger or instrument and search for the stone.
And if she finds it, she should hold it by her finger or instrument and advise that she inserts her finger or confides in the male companion, and presses her left hand against the prostate gland area.
If she finds it, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder towards below until it reaches near the root of the thigh.
Then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the leg where it is loosely attached, and feels the stone in that part. And do not move its two sides above or below the stone, and make the incision a small size initially.
And do not move its two sides above or below the stone, and make the incision a small size initially. Then insert the rod in the thigh, if you feel the stone scrape away at the wound until the stone can be expelled, and know that there are many types of stones.
That is to say, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and with veins.
If you examine the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not come out, then apply powdered alum to it, and hold it in place for an hour until the stone is dislodged.
Then return to your task, until the stone is strong, and have the herbs that I have told you for helping in your work with stones.
And if it weakens you, and it is from the artery that has been cut, apply powder at the site and compress with bandages and splints, and do not repeat this action again, and leave the stone as it is unless the patient dies. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood is subsided and the pain diminishes, return to your work as long as the wound remains closed.
Respite is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white sores, which are from beneath the head of the joints that contain pus.
and they are called "syfas", and never properly in the fabric of the pus, if one thinks it is another kind. And this is the proper location of the vein we have mentioned, between the white fibula.
And it has no other course than that. And the creation of this hernia is due to weakness in the veins, where that matter expands.
And never comes from striking on the joints, and this moisture is of many kinds: or it shows a leaning towards jaundice, or it lacks redness, or is black, or watery white, and this occurs more frequently.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly because if it is as we have mentioned - between the white fibula, then there are real boils close together like an egg's figure, but they do not break open the joints, for it has moisture all around them.
And if there is moisture in the actual fabric, then they are real boils with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it's another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white flesh, so it feels well.
Therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, if experienced throughout the entire affected area, then its form is as described above. Accordingly, after the interspace, judge what is within it.
And when we cure it with iron, it must be that the patient remains uninjured to the best of their ability and ensures the body's restoration.
then he lies on his back, under a slightly elevated object, and covers himself with plenty of cloths.
then lie on his left side, and command the assistant that he sits to the right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs near the jointed skin.
then take the splint and pierce the skin of the joints along its length up to near the finger, and make the incision straight away turning towards the white fibrous tissue, and peel it delicately as much as possible.
Then pierce his sore clean with water through a wide opening and extract all the fluid, then apply cotton wool, and lift the sore upward.
And do not touch the root of the veins, but only the sore itself. Carefully cut or piece by piece the underlying tissue of him subtly, so that if you do not cut it skillfully, the fluid will return.
And if the vein bursts during your work, reset the limb to its place when you have completed the treatment of the sore.
Then join the two pieces of vein root with stitches, then heal it as other wounds until they are healthy.
And if you find the vein tainted with another disease, it is necessary to bind the vessels that are swollen, suspecting a blood discharge.
Then bandage the shoulder completely, extract the bunion as we have said.
And if the sinew is joined into two parts together, know that these are two branches. If you bandage the other part similarly to how you did the first one, then drain any blood, and place a layer of linen soaked in oil into the wound.
If you bandage the other part similarly to how you did the first one, then drain any blood, and place a layer of linen soaked in oil into the wound. Then place another layer of cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two joints, then cover with doubled sheets, and tie it securely around all the bandage as shown in this form.
Then take two sheets and place pieces of shredded cloth according to this appearance and assemble them by sewing at the waistline, with one piece over the foot foundation up to the back, and the other on the part near the fingertips.
And the other two heads above the arms of Illium, and it is entirely fastened within the loop of the armor.
And never is this medicine of caustic herbs without the use of iron for cutting, and you must take a delicate scalpel-like cauterizing tool, and scrape off the leather from the sheaths, and it should be moistened as we have said before; that the white sack containing water is revealed.
If you take the caustic according to this method, and pierce that sack with needles, and the scraping is done by this delicate hot caustic.
And scrape in all ways you can, until you have stripped it all away;
and keep that the fire does not touch the wool.
And you must know this work is more healing; and maintaining proper blood flow, ensuring the procedures of cutting are done.
and if nothing else opposes you, or abscesses or blood issues arise, then heal whatever opposes you, as previously mentioned.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horrific nature, then perform a perforation as I instruct you. Ensure that once you are fully certain by understanding what we have said about fluid evacuation being best, make the patient sit on the raised seat; and pierce the abscess below at the wide part of the thigh. Place the perforation along the long body.
And let the passages be wide enough so that all the water runs strongly.
Then place cotton at the site, bind it, and let the remaining water flow out, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the gauze bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or instrument as used in treating fluid leaks, of which the form has been described above.
And widen the wound slightly and ensure that water returns, and it assembles after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will regain their strength over time.
Be aware that in this treatment of this branch there are various preparations, which is why I think it should be left alone.
And I will tell you about the treatment and resemblances of an abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come in the body, especially on joints. and this is due to various causes.
It means that it is because of excessive acridity and humidity spread on joints, or from impact.
and the appearance of an abscess follows the body's natural coloration. and it does not cause pain initially, but is a serious abscess.
and sometimes it can be fearful and pus-filled abscesses with a shocking coloration, never originating from our arteries or vein swelling.
When it is from us (the body), then recognized by the heat of abscess when you press with your hands. And it does not require you to touch it at all.
He who has swelling of veins is known by its tendency to pain upon the touching of joints, and can also be well treated with bandaging on this appearance, and on other injuries. And you should cut off the heads of veins, then lift them upwards, and draw out the white thread soffion, and release the sphincter from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already softened by these treatments, then it is necessary that you draw out the vein and cut its heads.
And if it is hard in the white thread or within the vessels, then you must release all its contents and roundly cut it off.
And if the birthmark is present where it should be, one must excise it completely and remove the bone, as we have said.
And once your treatments are complete, apply the woolen bandage with rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other remedies until healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a membrane resembling wings, with the softening of tendons, and the patient moves sharply when touched.
And the treatment for this illness is as frighteningly painful as that one mentioned before, but we will instruct you on its procedure, according to what was done by those who came before us.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then apply a suspensorium to their knee joints and extend it towards both thighs, stretching all muscles near the groin area, and fully straighten their limbs.
then cut with a sharp scalpel across the thighs, until they are exposed, and then scrape off from each side, as we have described in the removal of veins that lie within temple areas.
Then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and attach it at the initial location where the vision appeared, then firmly secure to the opposite end. Then wrap around tightly, according to the body's length, and treat the corrupted pus pockets.
Then heal the wound as with other bandages applied, so that no vessel is left unhealed from either side.
Because by this, there comes no harm, and all vessels are visible, then it is necessary to treat the joints for every vessel. If the bone loses its nourishment due to the incision of vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
The treatments of this snakebite are by the cut that occurs or infected with worms, or the extension in the abdominal area near the wings, because the intestines descend from there to one side.
And this treatment is with such a snakebite or from its extension, and they come in these two ways from many causes:
Or by blows, or sudden movement, or screaming, or lifting of heavy weight, and similar things.
And the signs when it is from the spreading of a snakebite are that it happens little by little over long periods and does not come suddenly. And the boils appear equally towards the chin because the snakebite hastens the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of severed snake, which causes sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse abscesses appear near the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body after being bitten by a venomous snake.
And it never leaves in circles with the intestines, and is retained within, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron which cause fear, one must be careful to remove them.
And the manner of treatment is that you command the patient to cleanse his intestines with his hands within the wound if it can be inserted. Then take a spatula over his neck between your hands, and lift the buttocks.
Then stretch the head above it, and cut all the skin of the thighs lengthwise; Then insert the hooked blades of the trumpet into the belly according to what you need for opening the wound, and make them such that the guts can be expelled out.
Then scrape off the sack that is outside of the thigh skin until all the white fat has been removed from every part.
Then insert your index finger into the part that is between the thigh, in the place where the white fat is outside of the skin and between the second fat sac, and pass through what is behind the urethra, and between the second fat sac.
And then move the hand inside the head of the clavicle, and extend the white snake to your left hand, and lift the eye from all of its fascia toward the waist. And instruct the physician to extend the eye upward, and detach what is behind the ligament;
And if there are loops of intestines or hard white fascia on his legs, and if you find anything unusual, then cut into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle or thick thread made of many threads, and insert it into the back part of the fascia, which is after the clavicle's skin. After the waist, then cut the veins that appear from threads, until there are four threads; Then they join them one on top of the other in a cross-shaped manner, and tie the sica, which we have said is below the leather thongs, with a strong ligature made of two parts. Then wrap the heads of the arrows with the leather thongs and tie them securely with two parts, so that no worms that might infest can enter inside, to prevent any infection. And place the main ligature following the first long piece of that length, and after these two ligatures leave the sica which is under the heart of the thongs with a length equal to one finger. And then according to the roundness that the yew carries on.
Then cut into the part which is underne.lye's leather thongs as well as the bow, as we have said earlier here.
Then prepare linen with oil, and apply it to wounds, and fasten the ligature as we have mentioned. And never is the face that we have mentioned cauterized, after incision, due to fear of blood loss. For this often happens, and leave the ligature until it is soaked through with its own fluids;
And if there is delay in bleeding, apply warm water, and place as we have said, until it soaks through.
Then treat the wound with another dressing, until it is perfectly healed.
For a carnous hernia
In this method, I have never seen anyone who dared to attempt treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is made like the threads that are wound around a screw, in such a way that you tie the ends together, slightly above the cut.
Then cover it with your thumb, and treat the abscess where pus works, until the threads saturate;
And for treatment as we have said, until it is put back in place.
Never comes thrombosis among them, as we have said, and open the eyes.
And they do not send out any of the intestines with clots, and if there are any, it is slight, and returns within hours.
And in any case, if it lingers too long in this area, the wound develops or a hernia forms until the clots are expelled.
And this occurs from the extension of pain in that area, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen are the eyes and open.
The treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously stated;
At no time is treated with iron in this manner: And it is that the patient lies down on their back between your hands, then cut off the swollen area of the gout with a width according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then extract the sack that is under the skin which emerges, then take the thread and place it over the visible area of the sack.
And press firmly on the front belly, then cut the two visible parts of the sack near the thread's end above its head, and cut both.
Then extract the thread's head, and do not cover the sack or extend any other substance, as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal wind. Then treat with wound healing methods.
Then treat with wound healing methods. And when you bandage the wound, cleanse it and treat the injury until it is healed.
The sinew is bound, and it has no appearance in the rotation, and the cautery wound heals quickly here, and closer to health.
For softening of the leather of the joints
Many times is softened the skin of the joints in some people because the cartilage inside them becomes softened and appears to sweat.
and it is necessary when one wishes to treat it, that the patient lie down on their back, and cover the softened skin with a natural layer of fat.
then bring together the two edges into a suture, and if you do so, make first the excess softened skin into three or four firm stitches.
then cover between the stitchcuide care as with other wounds, until it is healed, and let the thread fray.
By purging
I say that these treatments are outdated according to our law, and for this reason I wish not to discuss them in this book.
And there are not necessary for two ways:
one is that the bones in their place resume when asked, and they take the treatment.
and the other, for we often need cauterization of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and other beasts.
I say that cauterizations are done in two ways: either by attraction or incision.
In that which we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its joints are softened and flexible. then grasp with your hand until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Of cauterization by incision: It is proper that you grasp the best one, and press the skin of its joints with your left hand, then tie the sling, and cover each head with it after they have been properly scorched.
And leave no portion untouched by such a thin wart or subtle wart found on the limbs.
And this manner of treating is more effective than the one made by attraction, because sometimes nothing happens at an attraction, so the animal seeks excitement.
Then treat the wound until it heals completely.
Hermaphroditism refers to a condition where an individual has both male and female reproductive organs or characteristics of both sexes. This term was derived from Greek mythology, referring to the deity Hermes/Mercury, who was born with combined features of his parents Zeus (the sky god) and Hermah (a nymph). In modern times, it is considered an outdated and potentially offensive term; preferred terms are intersex or transgender.
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways at home: One is where between the two openings it appears just as a woman's natural form, and may have hair, or sometimes they urinate.
And the other manner is in women, and it is above their wrist like a rod and two hoops.
And the treatment of the body and flesh is such that you bandage all swellings as with other wounds.
In the second way, for men whose urine flows through their thighs' skin, there is no cure.
A tumor is a swelling on the natural part of the body, so ugly to look at. and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is its treatment.
It is necessary to trim the excess of the tumor with your hands or hooks, and bandage it lightly.
and do not cut too deeply so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with another treatment until it is healthy.
And to another kind that arises at the base of the marrow, and swells, and occasionally bursts forth, and is similar in appearance to a cow's pustule, and therefore the ancients called it "malaedicta kowie". If it is necessary to address it as we have described trying beforehand, and treat until it is healed.
Erratic if the nature of womanhood is not well perceived, or the anatomical features are small. and it is natural by birth or has come about through disease acquired therein.
and it is natural by birth or has come about through disease acquired therein. or it's due to close contact, or by a stealthy fox, and is caused on the bone surface, in shins, behind, underneath, or elsewhere.
and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly having children.
And its recognition depends on observing how it behaves.
If the swellings are appearing in the arms or thighs.
If it is a thin sheep, and it comes near the eyebrows, quickly snip thusly:
Place your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs;
Then extend the eyebrows properly, as long as the thin sheep moves, and cover the stumps;
Then take wool, anoint with oil, and place it on the site, and lay the woman at rest each day until she can move.
And if the syphilic is hard and spreading, then one must treat with a cream resembling myrtle leaves.
If the stump is from a horse or cow, suspend it with a string and a bag;
And have the healing blood remedies such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, abundant with egg yolk;
Then prepare a bandage of broad cloth so that the wound cannot reattach.
And thus it should be left for some time, and then replace with a tent made of dry flax.
Then treat other wounds until they are healed.
And when a boil comes with pus, one should cover it as follows in this manner, unless there are hardened abscesses. For the hardened abscess in the boil, it is not to be touched with fire.
Hemorrhoids are a condition characterized by swollen veins in the lower rectum and anus areas; it's often due to straining during bowel movements or increased pressure in that region from various causes such as pregnancy, constipation, sitting for long periods. For treatment: encourage gentle hygiene practices to prevent irritation, use of mild soapsuds and avoiding harsh chemicals; recommend softening stool with a diet high-fiber foods like fruits, vegetables, whole grains. Regular exercise can improve the blood flow in the body also important reduce pressure on veins from sitting for prolonged periods or straining during bowel movements to facilitate easier passage of stools; warm water baths sitz. For relief swelling treatments may include topical creams and suppository, cly-dilated veins. Apply aids ointment that can reduce inflamed areas swellings with the following: Wearing tight clothing or undergarments snugly socks; as they cause worsen'tilize after bowel movements to the area with warm water and sitz baths twice a day until symptoms. Improve; avoid pressure irritated itch, swelling painful hemorrhoids do not sit too long periods on seat: Morphea are outbreaks of veins that without customary habitation, and when morpheas become old they turn into tumors.
And we have already said in the division of those aforementioned, and the signs, and I will now say here those that receive treatment.
I say that swellings and ulcers, when they are fully in the boil and do not appear by touch, but only heal with iron.
Those that can be felt at the edge of the boil are those that can be treated.
Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the tumor with tongs, and wrap it around its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood such as ground herbs and dragon's blood and incense.
Then pour out his feet on an open space for an hour, then place them in cold water.
And if bleeding ensues, let him sit in a decoction of sumac and peels from red apples, hawthorns, and similar things; then take oatmeal flour, mix it with honey and herbs, and apply it as an poultice on his back.
And if it becomes stuck, that is good. If not, make him wear pneumatic cups on the back and leeches without causing pain.
Then take linen cloth, and soak it in plantain juice or aglet tree sap with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
And when the abscess heals, treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
And that which is called "albathir" is red and appears similar to raw flesh, so it should be covered similarly as I have described in the treatise. And then cleanse it until it becomes healthy again.
Many ways of abscesses come in the flesh: like chancres and pus-filled abscesscups and herpes and erysipelas and styes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot sores, as well as other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Thus, I must explain in this treatise the hot abscess that arises in the flesh, which is not just any boil-like swelling.
and if you know how to treat with iron, observe whether the abscess is hard at its onset of appearance, and hot to the touch along with fever, and red when seen. Then do not hurry to puncture it, but let it be treated until the pain is alleviated.
Then make the patient sit on a chair or bed, and place two small pillows under where they lie, and support them on their back while aligning their limbs to the dislocated leg.
And spread out his thighs, and place his arms under his knees, securing them well with a good binding.
Then bind him to the right side of his back, and bring in the instrument used for working with the mouth of the marrow, after which comes the form.
And it is necessary that when you see to use this instrument, insert the rod first in order to know the depth of the marrow; so that whatever enters through the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not hurt the patient. If the muscles are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the tendons with linen so that they do not harm.
It is necessary to place the tip of the instrument above and clean it thoroughly.
And when abscesses are opened, and they cause severe pain, if necessary, cover the head with bandages or dressings.
And when a bowel is empty, it is necessary to place softened pads soaked in rosehip oil or dried green olive oil into the wound.
Place the hard dressing on the beginning of the tendon and put it below the tendon and above the inner lining with softened cloths soaked in water or boiled linens.
Then treat it after applying ointment for two days until it is healed.
And never lift the boil and wound by using an enema of water and honey, then later just water or root extracts of lily and aristolochia, which have been long cooked. Then apply ointment again.
And if the wound is healed on the muscle, it must be tended without using iron, but treat as we have said in the section.
Of childbirth First ensure that the midwife knows the natural features of childbirth and can recognize signs if she sees a woman straining to give birth quickly, and desires to smell the ambergris.
Then hasten for the baby to be born soon. Then say that such births follow natural patterns, and the umbilical cord is attached at its head, with the afterbirth accompanying it.
And when you see these signs, it is proper to gently press its belly so that the child soon emerges.
For when they descend upon their head, with them is also joined the second twin, and freed are the parts of its body by proper cleansing.
And this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes upon its feet at no time, and afflicts the body or head, hands, belly, or buttocks, and is twisted by chance around its neck, and in other malformed ways.
One must be skilled and subtle in these things, and avoid errors and deceit, and I will show you all the ways one should help it.
If a child is born naturally head-first, and the mother labours heavily, and the strength of the child is weak, so make it sit on a saddle or hold onto by women.
and if oil of olive or fenugreek is cooked, then apply balm between its legs to the small gland which has this form. and split the seam, and cut off the nail as long as the moisture that runs forth is.
and lubricate the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then enemas must be given to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil.
then make her sneeze and cough due to conditioning, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour. Now insert the child.
And if both hands emerge, it is necessary to reset them gently and gradually. and if they cannot re-enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet upward. then stand the chair on solid ground, and soak the woman, that she does not stretch while standing.
and if the hands cannot re-enter, and the child has died, wrap his hands with a cuff placed here beforehand, extract the child, and reset evenly.
Upon the exit of the child from its feet When the child comes on its feet, it must be pushed upward. and then rotate slightly and gradually until evenly straightened.
then bend the legs slightly and extend them slowly.
If it falls just to the thighs, as commanded, one must pinch, and this causes sneezing due to the condition. If it rises again, so be it if God wills.
And if not as we have said, slowly and gradually until it becomes according to the natural form. For then it is easily done.
And if it does not rise again as we have described, then take musk in tall oil, and ointment of saffron, and melted resin, and grind all into a mortar. and apply the substance to the woman's interior and exterior with this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until it reaches below the ribcage.
and when she is softened below, you should apply a coat of myrrh, place it there, and leave for an hour. then make her sit on a stool, then induce sneezing and strain her mouth and nose, and gently pinch her belly, as the child is now rising.
For the dislocation of the child in his knees When a child enters this form, the healer places his hands gently but frequently. then slightly stretch their neck, and hang their feet downward, and let them lie on the bed. and bend their hands gently now and then, and then press the hands above the belly, and remove the pillows underneath until they are positioned downward. and if the child does not cry, take their feet and move them properly, then lift the belly forward, then place the hands. and therewith the child gently but frequently. and command the woman to breastfeed as long as the child sucks.
From the dislocation of a child who comes forth with one hand extended wide. I require to engineer returning the hand: If it cannot be brought back, lift the woman up and go.
If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed and raise both legs straight.
Then treat the swelling as I have described.
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair and then try to return the hand. And deliver the child as per natural course, make her sneeze, and command that she purges until the child is born strong.
by c, and lire iste et sof; And that they n'l. It is necessary for you to wash your hand, then turn it slightly, and do so gently.
And when evened, apply the natural swelling of aloes and oil as we have said, then command her to move slightly.
And when you have done this, let it sit on a chair, and command that she be quiet. And make her sneeze. In this same manner, reset it all at the second attempt
In this same manner, reset it all at the second attempt When it comes in this manner to the second stage, remove the splint with your fingernail, until all moisture is dried.
and if the child leans on his face and neck, cut off the gag so it is not held, and let the child move.
then put the child inside, until you have positioned him as required, and command the woman to remain quiet at no point.
From the displacement of nerves Be aware that hemorrhoids often occur, and never as a group of three or four at once. And this is not a strange occurrence, and little happens. Two are strange occurrences, and do not live without them for long.
Two are strange occurrences, and do not live without them for long. I know these, that they multiply greatly, and are displaced by the leech who sends them out, connected to swelling.
And none of them emerge naturally like a sore under the skin, as we have said.
And if they emerge quickly, the treatment is as we have said, and be subtle bailiffs, doing swiftly what they do. And it does so as it should bring healing. Of many children
Never are they formed in the marriages I through XVII or more, and all take on the form of a child by careful measurement with the holy reed, and it is appropriate for the bailiff to know this because sometimes similar things happen. If done according to what is appropriate.
Of the dead child.
When you treat a woman who has given birth to a dead child or miscarried and there is no bleeding, and you are forced by the situation. if it is necessary that you determine whether the woman is in good health and has not had any accidents or fears of death;
if it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back with her head tilted down and legs raised;
and you bind the minister's thigh at two parts, or if she is tied to the bed so that she cannot deliver the child;
then rub the mouth of her thigh with oil from hellebore and fennel seeds and flaxseeds, then anoint the minister's hands with these oils and extracts;
Then gently put it back in the joint, then seek to restore its natural position or make it even with the bones that are suitable for this, and be careful if the child is born prematurely so that it descends under its head.
If the bones are out of their place in his eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or from the chin or near the shoulders or at the elbows, and if dislocations occur on fingers, they stick out or into the middle ribs.
And it is necessary to heat the bone in his right hand, and place the splint between the two fingers of his left hand, and gently put the bone into any of these places we have mentioned until it fills the vacancy.
Then place it against another oncinous, or if you need to extract one, so that the extractions are equal.
And then extend it evenly by moving from one side to the other in order for them to come out, and make the oncinous teeth fit together so they can stay closed, as here is the shape.
And if a part remains, grease its sides with oil and insert it there, and treat the other part.
And if none remains, place that oncinous or higher up, and cut as much as needed until it falls out completely.
And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought together for grip, it must be wrapped up with a cloth until it slips completely. Then bind with a bandage at the joint of the foot or on the arm, so it is necessary to do the same in the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and stuck at dislocation, or it has an inflamed wound or swelling, then you must push the cautery needle between your thumb and forefinger, and make a wound to extract the pus. or you use the instrument called "almidach," from which it is formed with the strum or paste that follows this.
and thus make the child have a large wound naturally.
and then break the bones with tongs, and if the head is forced out and twisted, split until the puss that exits from there.
If it cannot exit, cut with a knife in such ways as you may.
And if swollen on the belly or under the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce until the moisture flows.
humdroit, And ils s'e d’est as it; if the tisnt eyne, and; In the lespie until you is to them so much li byttir, they of lits:
And if strained in the belly or udder, it is necessary that you drain with a cloth wrapped around by hand. and make the belly or udder well-drained until the moisture within flows out.
and if other limbs are broken or the head lags behind, hold fast with your hand on the foreleg from the joint, and pull to the mouth of the joint. then blow it into an enzyme twice or thrice, and triturate.
If the mouth of the muscle is retracted due to an abscess that has arisen there, do not exert effort but instead administer moist and fatty substances. And apply plasters, cut into fresh, softening, and moistening strips.
And if the child is on his back, you can position him evenly, and apply what we have said in a live child.
and if they cannot move it, cut the thread into segments, leaving nothing of the tail.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said on abscesses that come in muscles;
and if bleeding continues, put it into fresh restricting bandages, and apply other remedies.
And I see a woman who had a mortal wound, then treat the other as described by. After long time came an abscess on his buttock, which swelled so much that it burst open, and began causing great suffering.
I went to seek treatment, and thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
I placed it under strong attraction, and an bone emerged, followed by others after some days. lesse et so that t;t, the: ziz quet, eus;l.
If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and for a long time handled it without touching the bone; until the woman was much improved. And thus she remained in this condition for many times, and soon there was some bowel back in its place;
And I have not recorded this chapter further because when the master encounters something strange, he knows how to handle it properly;
Hereafter comes the form of pressure, by which one reads the books;
and with two turns adjusting the two keys to them. Nevertheless, the horn be more subtle in restriction, and made of smooth or boxwood;
And let the mouthpiece of the staff be one foot wide, and the edge of the trees two feet, and long a span and half. And among the two joints there are two dislocations of the same nature, which are secured in each one, with a span half as long or slightly more.
and these two dislocations are twisted into the mouth of the joint to open when turning both horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in nature, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs. and has two joints with dislocations, as you see, one span in length, and two fingers wide.
and when you see opening the joint completely with the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, laying her arms and legs outstretched, then place both dislocations together into the joint while holding the head of the instrument between her thighs. Then work with your hands on all the instruments, just as you did with the pincers equally, according to the quantity you see open the mouth of a hare, until the patient makes what they want.
These tools are all kinds of tongs, and there are multiple appearances of them; And when the patient is prepared, then the work is faster and higher in quantity for their needs.
If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the breeching is retained during childbirth, then you command the patient to retain their sinew, and next you make them sneeze into position, and restrain their hands at the mouth and nose; And if they jump out of that position, well is it. (This line may be a bit unclear without further context as it could mean
If not, take a small pot and make a lid or cup, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the ulcer, such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, saxifrage, and dandelion. All these herbs or any of them should be boiled or steeped in hot water over the fire.
Then place a cloth or lid on the pot, and put the other end in the mouth of the ulcer, and let the steam enter the ulcer.
Then have it sneeze out, as we said. If you hastily grasp the shoulder blade.
And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, command the healer to have their left hand greased with pressed oil or an emulsion of alum paste, and then apply it again, seeking a second opinion. And when you have located it, then pull and extend it slowly and straight so that the muscles do not contract during extraction.
However, it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled through. If it returns and dislocates again.
And if the mouth of the muscle is elongated, we have said the remedy is to sneeze and smoke medicinal herbs.
And if nothing we have suggested works, ensure that you do not attempt surgery.
But it is necessary to tie what is at the mouth of the muscle to the thigh bone of a female, then enema with medicinal ointment from Tetrapharmacist. If repositioned and reset, it will return stronger.
However, if she dislocates too often, a foul smell comes to the stomach and head, causing nausea in the patient. If so, then fragrant incense should be used here:
None of the ancient ones have tested the fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman for holding flowers and string is as follows:
And it appears as if from a serpent, placing the head in subtlety within its natural form, and wide-set eyes near the fire.
And it should be fumigated with burnt coals, until tinea is exhausted, and then restart anew.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is threaded with subtle filaments: Thus it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce that which needs to be drained at its rightful place, and not with an unclean implement or needle, and ensure the dressing does not touch it.
Then apply a cloth soaked in wine and oil to it, followed by an ointment until it is healed.
And if you suspect that it may reoccur, then apply a poultice of mashed plantain and let it rest for days; remove the bandage when the child wants to get up from bed.
And never does this swelling from wound or abscess come; If necessary, operate on that swelling: Then treat it as we have said about the bone splinter.
Fistulas that arise from the base are inflamed and swell further if they appear near or within two feet of the base, whether there is one fistula or multiple.
And when that dislocation is old, work on it, and use moist or subtle bowels, and never are these perforations present.
And it is known by what comes out or excretion when the patient has an emission, and perhaps at times a vomiting occurs.
And if there are perforations that penetrate up to the bladder, and almost to the middle of the member; And they reach up to the hip joint, and near our anus' hole.
Thus one finds a perforation in the base, but not leaking: And it is to insert your index finger or base and inject with a fine needle of silver or iron into the perforation when there is no twisting:
If there is twistedness, then if you insert a fine pincers or horsehair, as long as you feel the pincer or hair in its proper place.
and if you do not sense it, and there is no ejection nor windiness nor swelling as we have said: assure that it does not pierce. if the wound is cleaned thoroughly.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or the urethra of urine, then he soils himself with urine and cannot be cured by any medicine.
If it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the pincer comes to its place. If there is no twisting of the joint and the cause of pain is elsewhere, then it must be set back properly, and medicines or salves are not effective.
And in these Persian abscesses, there is no strong remedy other than the effort of treatment, and the foolish advice from those who meddle with them.
In those that are neither Persian nor ancient wounds, with hope of healing by iron, as I have tested, and the patient lies on his back under your hands.
and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs inclined towards the belly. then insert an ointment of alum or plaque if there is twisting, until you know where the ointamo goes.
If the patient feels pain around the lower jaw, it is proper to thrust your index finger there, if you sense then that the bite has been perceived.
and should reveal or between your thumb a sore or abscess is present, then declare it as pierced; if one cannot treat it otherwise.
It is commonly said that one can well heal some, but this happens rarely;
and the advice is to proceed as follows: carefully apply the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been previously stated. and heat it thoroughly in the fistula until it reaches near the jawbone; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that the scars must be healed over, which appear like an eagle's feather.
And then treat the torn tendons with fat, as long as those fibers are lifted, then treat with soothing ointment and binding it tightly.
If it is thus treated, it is well.
If not, otherwise cannot be sound;
And if it tries to pierce through, and does not reach the bottom which is at its foundation, and between your two teeth and the tendon there lies a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the abscess coming through that part where the skin is thinner. If you begin treating the abscess, and place it back before the tendon, then perform the cauterization afterwards, until it reaches near the top of the tende. And thus the tendon will be relieved, and healed.
Then mend those crooked bones which resemble a bird's wing, and leave none behind.
If blood is lost, and it cuts between you and your work, cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
For the fire cautery gathers two things: It is to know, that is, the hardening of these dislocated bones, and the tightening of blood vessels and scarring from moisture.
Then the curing of soiled linens either by boiling or in a brazier until they are well-soaked, and then let the dislocated bones be secured in the lining.
Then treat the wound of sudden burns with a durable cloth, and are the medicines dry.
When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
And when a fistula comes near the root of its foundation and is distant from the body, if you push with your thumb or finger into it and explore it.
If you feel the tent, and within it is leather or bone fragments, or they are to be pierced, let there only be one hole for faith and hope, by means of one of these three methods:
If you cauterize it as we have said, or until the bottom is reached, or if there are signs and treated accordingly first.
And do not go too far inwardly, that you do not cover the entity holding the foundation, and come out through the opening as it willingly does. Then treat it, as we have said;
Then treat it, as we have said; Sometimes it will be healthy again, or remove that covering and cleanse after it has been uncovered near the foundation, or by touching or with another instrument prepared. Then shape the proper flesh which is in the wound as you see fit; Then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula on the part following the foundation.
Then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula on the part following the foundation. If there were an easier thing for the patient.
And at no time are abscesses according to this manner: and when you push the tent into the abscess, and it is near or against the foundation of the skin above, then take a pierced tent according to this form: And take a thread twisted twice and insert the tent into the hole throughout until it reaches the top.
If it is perforated in the margin of the skin's foundation within, then draw out that pierced thread so you can push your thumb or foundation:
and pull the head of the thread, and bring together both pieces, and hold them tightly, and leave for one or two days:
and you should not bind it at any time as long as the threads cover those spaces between them, and bleed.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
; they totir; a (1: The 1 (uze the first. For it is not fitting to first bind too tightly for support, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well-adjusted.
The shape of a pointed thorn used to make an abscess soothers, which is quite sharp and one-ended, piercing. and on the other side not, for it does not open or cut as one should see here:
Edema occurs in two ways: or they are embedded in the foundation, like resin grains, and there can be small and large ones, with blood accumulation here, and one or more present, causing weakness of the foundation and atop it.
but those that are embedded have little moisture, and with them there is or a bit of yellowish water or blood, and they retain the body's color.
Et the treatment of those who have them in their foundation, it is that you command the patient to strain themselves to walk in chambers, until their foundations are firmly set and they show signs. If you hurry, and the nail is loose, or if it's caught on your fingernail, then clip its roots.
And if the thorns cannot be held due to their moisture, then grasp them with thread, or with cotton, or with a strip of chamois. And extract them from your fingers, then clip them, and powder them with hot ashes that are at hand for cauterization. Or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, and heal other wounds until they are sound.
If the foundation cannot be removed, then enemas the patient with pungent and bitter clysters to cleanse what is at or near the base, so that it may open freely. If the patient perspires and if threads are strongly attached to the foundation, then [the treatment is] light.
If the patient perspires and if threads are strongly attached to the foundation, then [the treatment is] light. And it is that you pluck them with your fingernails or pliers, then remove the threads, and treat as we have said until they are cleaned, and so he fears the incision with iron. If it is necessary to dress the wound in this manner:
If it is necessary to dress the wound in this manner: Take a twisted thread and tie it to a needle, then pull the thread through from above and make the eye of the needle larger on the other side, and turn both ends of the thread away from the eye so that it is wide.
And one strains the thread finely, then knots it, and removes the needle, and do likewise for all others, leaving a bit loose to allow excess blood flow.
Then lay the foundation with fine cloth soaked in oil or wax, and place it on the foundation, instructing the patient to rest.
And let them stay that way until they fall out, and when they have come out, then apply ointment or other treatments until it is healed.
Of the bandage of fat or foundation not t: (x1, c; and s cont : If it's necessary to remove the skin from a ganglion or an ingrown fingernail above, do not let it remain wet. Then treat it until it is sound as needed.
If it cannot settle, resume scraping more forcefully than before until there is sufficient healing, and then it should be cauterized. Then the treatment continues until sufficiently healed.
In trembling A formication is a small faulty appearance on the body and spreads widely.
At no time is there a quickening of coldness, and it feels to them just like death by shivering, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong crow feather and place that quill at the shivering point until the purple circle completely surrounds it. Then turn your hand around to all of the quill until you cover it completely on all sides and remove it fully, and root out the shivering from its origins.
And if you see, make a quill of copper or iron as in this manner, and be subtle from below and traverse across. Do not feel; hold them together, and squeeze tightly.
And if you see it, causticate the shivering point as with a fire cautery or branding iron.
Never has one made an enema of silver or lead, or melted wax or honey.
And never have these small and large suppositories been prepared in such a manner as they are described. the I:
the I: The shape of the small and large enema is as follows: if the belly is tied thus -
and there has been a rupture or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the head pierced within.
and one of the sides may be perforated, while the other remains intact.
and the belly or one's arm may be filled with medicines from an animal bladder or parchment. Then, pierce entirely through small perforations, ensuring there is space between each puncture, then insert a strong thread of twisted iron wire within, wrapping around as needed, and stitch the belly like that of a goat. And when the medication is inside, tie it with a strong thread at the instrument, then enema.
and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medication be neither too hot nor too cold, and rub the head of the enema with oil or butter of egg, or similar substance, then apply it gently. then the minister squeezes with both hands together until it is fully emptied, then removes the enema, and lifts the patient's legs off the bed, and as long as the medication flows out, do so as much as possible. and if it sleeps all night, then provide greater help.
And if you apply the clyster in cases of bowel disorder, and the patient quickly needs to expel it, then repeat as much as necessary until they are well again.
and if the hemorrhoid is at its base or an abscess, let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
And this is the form of a subtle suppository with which the bladder can be tightened.
We have said in the section on wound treatment;
or we will speak of hand and eye treatments, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of, and where or how the lacerations or injuries are made, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made involve cutting with stones or swords and axes, or lances, clubs, or arrows, or similar objects;
or those made according to the parts of the body, such as wounds that bleed from the neck, head, groin, thighs, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, because this recollection will come in its chapter.
When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's due to a stone strike or similar causes; the skin is entirely torn and the wounds are large, so you should slightly doubt an abscess at heat. If the wound bleeds immediately from the head injury and is otherwise on the uninjured side.
And avoid giving the patient wine and fatty meats for nourishment.
And if it does not want to eat, let its meat be reduced, and do not drink wine or mix dishes with sauces.
And apply a cloth to the wound if an abscess arises, then use softened cotton in oil only, or stipulate wine.
If there is no abscess present, apply it to the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and has not moved due to air or dust, which I will say more about later.
And if the arrow has been moved, apply some ointments until it heals.
And if the wound is large like a sword's edge and gaping, and the lips cannot be brought together with bandages, bind them by suturing, as I will say for stomach wounds, of sutures.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and deep, and holds only slightly, then bandage it thus: Then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard leather to its place, instructing the patient to eat large meats as tested with wheat, also similar things such as hairs.
And if you find the hard leather or skin rotting, and there is nothing to it but bone, cut off all of it, then pour wine on it, and treat.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without bandaging, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, whatever you find the artery, and if you discover it dislocated, tie with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize.
And for small and simple wounds, there is a light remedy: and that you apply this powder which dries as well as the ash of saltwort.
And the manner to make the powder is: Take incense one part, blood of dragon two parts; calx vivus three parts, and grind the powder finely, apply to the wound, and bind firmly, until it dries well and reattaches with all its blood.
And then bind it well, and let it not dislocate again, if it does not swell. because the medicine is not taken until it is healed.
. The English (and the t'tf; and;
And if the wound has moved, especially in this case, do not apply this powder again.
but apply some digested ointments, or crushed barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals. then continue to treat other ailments once it is healthy again.
And if the bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, extract using delicate tweezebar or similar tool.
and I will tell you about head fractures later.
From the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck or below and it is a simple one, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins of the neck or the artery are injured.
If it is the sinew, there is no other remedy than to let the poultice remain, and not put anything binding on it, for it harms the sinews and makes them retract. And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the sinews is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
But use the medicine as if boiled in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked similarly in soft water, along with other mineral substances according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce or make an opening lower than it is located.
If the arrow is near, and blood flow occurs, remove it, elevate, and cauterization may be necessary.
If the spine of the throat is near or cut, and the vessels are guarded, which determines how flesh heals, if possible to lift the edge of the throat's cradle, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. Then allow rest and time for healing, then treat with cleansing ointments until it is healthy.
And if the wound has caused pressure on the bone, adjust as needed. If there are bone fragments, grind all that you can and those you cannot remove, let the wound remain until it heals, then clean and align the edges.
If the wound is fresh, then apply powder as I have mentioned. And if there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat as I have described in its chapter.
If it is a puncture from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then observe if there are any signs of venom as they affect the patient's condition. Then say that the wound is fatal;
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder at first hour or bind it to stop the bleeding that may flow out in large amounts, and harm the patient. but put attractive balm on it twice a day;
and if you do not have balm, put in the wound a piece of old cotton to absorb the moisture, and make the patient lie on their back with the wound facing upwards for three days, or four, or more. If there will not come muscle spasm, nor unpleasant shaking of the body or straining. And when you see the proper alignment of the bones, know that the wound is healed. Treat with bandages and other remedies until well.
And if it cannot heal on its own, and works, then know that there is an abscess.
If the treatment is done as one must. And if the wound is a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or elsewhere on the back, treat as one would for a wound in front. If it is large, bandage.
And if it is small, powder, and if it is embedded in the bone with broken pieces, treat the wound, and extract the spears if they are lodged. And if they are not relocated, allow the wound to rot, as it lightens extractions.
and with other wounds in other members there is judgment as we have said.
if they are not can be c sting et, and de le ou deset l'est est due to heu in les oment le puest men or, with a la est much: b
The falling of the belly is great, medium, and small;
From a great wound never enter the intestines or the veins of the intestines, preventing any influx.
And the surgery is more challenging, and never worse than a small wound compared to a large one, for when you reset the intestines often, it must be done gradually.
Because the intestines swell so soon when they feel cold, they become more inflamed, and thus it is easier to move with a small wound, therefore you must reset the intestines to their original place rather than elsewhere.
And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways:
The two common sutures occur in the abdominal wound, and the sutures of other bodily injuries and the other two specific sutures are shared with other types of wounds.
Et indeed they are better with a stitch on the abdomen, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines is torn, it can be repaired in two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Moisten an absorbent cloth or a piece of clean linen in warm water, or boil it in hot water and add salt and pepper, and warm the intestines until they are inflamed.
and never use anything to hold them back; rather let it be moved to deflate.
And when you see the swelling separated, soften the intestines with water or vinegar and if they are hard, for through this is made easy the entry of little things.
And if they cannot enter, make a small cut with an instrument used to remove bunions.
And the first remedy is that you may trim it, but no one should cut without great necessity or need.
and this is to split open:
if you make a hole in the hollow and it does not bleed out, then examine its shape: When the wound is enlarged and the intestines have burst forth, if you can put them back in place according to their natural form and proper location, do so if possible, for this will move.
When the wound is wide and located below the belly, it is appropriate to make the patient lie on their back with legs raised higher than their head. If it is in the part below the belly, raise the head and the hindquarters higher than the lower parts, and similarly when the abdominal area is on one side, balance by making the injured side raised so that the affected area is higher than the other.
And thus you should treat as I have described in large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what has been prescribed, then take an emetic with healing properties in your hand, and bring the edges together.
This is the common method for suturing, and you should take a needle or several according to the size of the wound's width, then leave space from the top edge of the wound as needed, and insert a needle with good strong thread. And pierce the two heads of the clavicle with the two heads of the scapula, which is under the skin within, until you have cut through that part and join together the two heads of the scapula into four.
Then strain a double thread through the needle's eye twice, then immediately join together the two heads of the wound, leave space for one finger, and insert another needle.
Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so according to how many more needles are needed until the entire wound is tightened.
And let the needles be of medium size, between subtle and thick, because very fine needles can sew through completely, but too thick ones cannot penetrate well. Hence it is necessary for them to be bent back into place.
And you must not push the needles too far from the wound and through the skin, as they may pierce and reopen the wound before it is healed.
And then bend the tips of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place pins or cloth at the tip of the needle to hold them in place, and leave until the wound is healed.
And this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
The second suturing method is common and involves joining the two edges of skin together with one needle and strong, medium-thick thread.
And when you have perceived these all together IV times in succession, adjust the arrow at the part where you began, as one does with fabrics.
and place space between each stitch the thickness of a small finger;
These stitches serve as a suture, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his abdomen, which was afflicted by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, with intestines protruding about two palms wide, located within the abdomen.
I brought back the intestines because it had been fourteen hours since he was injured, and I dressed his wound until the fifteenth day, and cared for him, and he recovered.
And the physician judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine. And put a cloth twice daily over the wound, and wash it with honey water until healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take a needle and pass it through the part forward up to its inner depths;
When it has felt the head straight left or right, where you have inserted the needle into its socket or casing, and pierced from another side to within until reaching that far.
And the understanding of this suture is that you cut it as a tailor would with scissors, and leave one side of the socket once, then rejoin from another until the suture is completely done.
The second manner of suturing that Galen properly describes is as with those who join two parts together naturally and apply one end of the socket to the other end in such a way.
Pierce with a needle or nearby metal rod and make a cut there only, leaving the two ends of the socket. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through to the forward part up to inside the socket of the eye.
Then make it pierce both forward parts to inside the socket of each eye, in two other eyebrows that are opposite.
And this is the proper method of suturing and the most common one.
Galen says this word, and no one bears witness to it, that you must sew the abdomen with two needles, each having thread.
and one needle should be inserted from one side, and the other from the opposite, in the manner of those who sew belts.
And know that when the rupture is within the abdabinee, it must be sutured more carefully than other parts of the abdomen.
The judgments of wounds are such as the judgments of other wounds.
and it is that when you find the fresh wound fully supplied with blood, thus as the art directs, reset its intestines and the cord.
then apply to it with the powder of jarnac, and if the art has moved it, place any salve that is available until the wound closes. and strip the hairs, then cauterize with tar, honey, and myrrh; then treat the wound as you would others until it is healed.
and if you have no medicine, apply these immediately when the wound starts to close: cotton, and stir it twice daily until healed.
In certain situations, there is no need for additional medicine when wounds are simple.
And if you suspect that the wound is affecting proximity to the main members (limbs), it is necessary to gently grind linen in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the limb and underneath the elbow pads.
And if it causes pain or swelling in the armpit, which often occurs, apply a black wine enema and particularly when the swelling reaches up to the intestine.
And proceed with probing, and know that it is easier to heal when it concerns the large intestine than the small one.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is distressed, and this is because of the subtlety of its veins throughout the body, and its closeness to one's essence.
And if the kidney protrudes from the wound, reset it as well as the intestines while they are fresh.
And if it is old and has turned or black, then you must reset the dislocated part that is black, so as to prevent bleeding from vessels and veins.
Then wrap what is between the joints and hang two belts from below the wound area to ease extraction when splinters are removed, and the wound bandages.
From the treatment of a boil
When the intestines are exposed and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in certain cases, as I have seen a man afflicted by an arrow or a stab to the abd([domain])ent.
and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, which became infected and turned into a fistula, causing diarrhea and gas.
I gave care according to what I could, and did not stop probing until it was healthy again, and the joints were restored.
And when I saw it healed, I suspected that the patient still had pain in their stomach; and there was no harm, but they remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
and experimentalists said that for small wounds in the intestines, it should be treated in such a manner: take fat from large kidneys, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the fat has fully closed its mouth, place it under two lips to stretch its mouth out.
then wrap the head with bandages and keep it so that it cannot loosen, then place another piece of fat afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed. And observe the wound.
The head so swells in the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient, and it is possible to suture the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a manner:
Take the head of this thread of intestines that is well cleaned, and then tie it to the end of a fine linen thread twisted tightly, put the thread on the needle, and sew through the intestine, and return the stitch.
And this method of suturing aims to be only as strong as trust and hope guides it.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when located in one of the triangular intestines, there must be no remedy nor health, only subtlety.
of a fistula or when it occurs Every wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula," especially when it opens and bleeds.
And a fistula follows incorrect nourishment that is hard and pale, where there is no pain, and it swells like the feathers of a bird.
and sometimes clear bowels, and other times thickened; and at times scarce, and at other times sufficient;
And I have spoken in the division of wounds, that any wound not healed has no cure unless by one of the nine causes: It is to be understood, by the insufficiency of blood or body. Or due to its own malignity. Or because there is hard cure within, and under the lips, that it does not allow blood to grow. Or because there is too much boweling. When the bone is fractured, and the material is of poor quality. Or when the medicines are not good in the treatment; Or because corruption is a form of pestilence; Or due to the property in that region being slow digestion and delayed health, and fleeing by nature; Or there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in the section.
Now it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula that is done by handiwork.
Say that abscess occurs in all members of the body; because there are abscesses that come from large veins and arteries, nerves, or the liver, intestines, bladder, some ribs, spine of the back, or any joint in hands or feet. And if there is pain coming to the principal member's property, and similar things.
And all types of fistulas that are of this kind have poor healing, with only effort and ignorance involved.
And if there is no fistula that reaches the location I have mentioned, and you trust in its healing, and witness it coming to light, then take a tent of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight.
And if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of lead, because the lead sinks and bends around the twist.
And if the fistula has openings and you cannot properly search for it with tenting, then cleanse by enema through one of the openings, as moisture quickly moves from one opening to another, and cleanses.
Then skillfully use your power, to know if there is bone or nerve, and see how deeply it's cut into, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressing with your hand, and where they feel it.
And when you truly know how deep it is, and if it's far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any of those places I have mentioned to you, then proceed as I have instructed you, and remove the broken bone and the corrupted cartilage within.
And then heal it as much as possible, and if the abscess is well deep in its right place, you must cut into it fully, as far as you can see, then insert threaded ligatures with medicinal vinegar up to the top of the abscess until the medicine erodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
And then apply balms with holy herbs until it becomes sound.
And if it does not heal with this, then proceed as we have described to cauterize; and if the bone is corrupted by an abscess, protect accordingly.
If veins or nerves do not trouble you or principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackening, treat with holy herbs until it becomes sound.
And if it does not heal, and the bowing remains as before; know that you must not go beyond this.
if exposed and festering, cleanse until reaching the bottom, remove all decay, then return it to its place.
And if it is thus healed, well done. If not, know that the infection is too deep, you cannot address it. if there is no other remedy than applying heat naturally.
and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with pincers, remove it using an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, extract all of them without leaving any.
and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, strip the flesh and bone and separate the bones.
And if you cannot remove them all at once, place an unpleasant substance to prevent decay on the wound, and leave it until flesh grows around the bones, then they will have easier access to the bones.
And if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, so thoroughly eradicate the decay until all the darkness has turned to bone, then repair the wound.
And if there is a large part of it affected by decay, and it reaches close to the mole of the bone; If it needs to be cut away and covered up all the way to the decay, then heal until it is solidified.
And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in the leg of a man, so take example and assistance from your craftsmanship.
He was a youth under thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause that came out of the body, as the substances reached the leg and were expelled through a large abscess, without any cause to open it.
But the wise men worked so much on the abscess that it opened up, and they used a lot of materials, which then became an ulcer, causing great discharge and wetness throughout the body.
And many wise men attempted to heal it within two years, and there was no successful treatment in the art of hands until I came upon them, and saw the leg and the remedies with which they treated him, as the discharge affected much of his body. And the body of the youth turned red, and had a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent in one of those places, and then searched all the places, finding that each came toward the other from all parts of the leg.
So I proceeded quickly and examined one of the discharges until I discovered a piece of bone, which was found to be decayed and porous, with the infection reaching deep into the bone.
I saw what appeared to be a rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
And began to heal the wound with powerful medicines for long periods, but could not close it.
And then I resumed the treatment, and found the bone as before, discovered continued corruption in the bone, removed it, extracted it, and attempted to close the wound. But I couldn't remove all within an inch of the bone, and it rebelled against everything, so I then treated it with medicines again. And it became clean and closed quickly, and did not need to resume the treatment except due to the weakness of the patient who couldn't endure more, and because of my fear of his death. For the evacuation of blood often makes him groan, but he was wholeheartedly healthy, and in place of the bone grew a hard callus, which was well-disposed and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither coming nor going.
And if the bone is broken at any place on the body, it must be treated as follows: Take hold of the ligament, and stretch to the head of the fractured bone, and command that no one stretches it upward. And place another thicker ligament alongside the first, and tie it above the cartilage that is over the bone, and extend the head, such that you remove any corrupted cartilage from below, and reveal the cartilage at the location where you need to work, ensuring not to damage the cartilage.
And place a knife or a spatula below the bone to scrape off the corrupted cartilage.
And it must be done as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and do so again if necessary.
If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a joint or part of it, expose all the flesh.
Then apply a hot compress off, and then connect the part with another of the corruption, and let it be as long as the corruption allows, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and connect the bone where it was located on the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there should be no other aid than coping.
And if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or foot, it is a very strong thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion and how it opens. And clean it in all ways you can, but let neither vein nor nerve oppose you.
and know that the cutting instruments and needles to repair these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and therefore it is necessary to equip each type of work with its instrument.
and know that the work will show you which instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the ways of diseases. if you consider the instrument needed as it should be.
The head may dislocate from within or due to weakness;
And when you have the medicine for treating that corrosion with medicinal remedies, and they are not effective, it is necessary to amputate the limb where the corrosion occurs so that the patient may escape death or evil, which is greater due to the fault of the member.
And the signs are that the limb turns black and appears to be burned with fire, after which comes the spread of the member's corrosion throughout the entire body.
If you hasten the amputation, and if it is by the sting of venomous beasts such as scorpions, snakes, and similar creatures, when the corrosion is at the root of the hips, perform the cut, so that there will not be space for it to reach up to the hand.
If it reaches up to the hand, so that the cup touches the joint, so that no erosion comes up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, so that the cup meets the bone.
And if it passes the bone, then it is death, and there are no remedies except for the amount of its virtue.
And so act as follows when erosion comes or pierces: If it comes to the first joint, then the cup after the other joint.
And if it pierces or penetrates, then cover the entire wound. And if it moves to the leg, so that the cup meets the knee joint.
And if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than putting the sick person to death by leeches.
And the manner of using leather or silk on the limb is such that you tie it above and below, extend two strings one from each end of the ties, and cut the bandage between the two bands to a width of one span.
Then the bandage or silk and place a thread of flax on each side, ensuring that the silk does not touch the healthy skin, otherwise it will cause further injury and abscesses.
And if bleeding occurs while you work, promptly causticate the wound or apply certain binding powders.
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a tough bandage and care for it until it heals.
And I shall tell you what happened to a certain man who was ill.
It came upon him a darkness that seemed like scorching fire, and this corrosion first affected his two feet, to the extent that it consumed the entire foot.
And when the man saw the corrosion, he quickly covered the foot with a copper pot and was saved.
And after some time the corrosion returned to his two hands, and it came upon me, and I put on things with impact following body purification, but could not stop the corrosion.
And he prayed that I cover his hand, and although I hesitated, I had hope of reinforcing the material. And I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would not survive, because the virtues of the body were weak.
And he is utterly perished, and returned to his land, and struck with a sword on his hand, and was healed.
and I have not recounted this method except for the sake of providing alternatives, if they are needed.
No abscess ever occurs in a hardened spot, and it persists so long that it forms a large collection of pus. and then they burst open and drain, with the pus flowing out like water from wells. and the skin above is as delicate as finely cut silks, and they do not run all the way to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "healed," and they are not called "fistulae.
But if it is so stretched that it reaches up to the bone at its center, then it is called "fistula";
And if the cure is such that you must cut out all of it, especially when it is thin like a piece of cloth; and it cannot be for its corruption.
And if you suspect that the tissue is hardened, and the corruption is not at its core, and the tissue is composed of earth, then use the treatment as follows:
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels that lie within are of foul smell; then you must use an Egyptian medicinal clyster made as follows: Take saffron, and oil, and litmus, in equal amounts, and put to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medication is red and thickens like honey;
And then take as needed, and make it with onion and honey, and cleanse the chest, and strain urine. Leave the medicine in place for two hours, then extract by squeezing;
Do this many times until the chest is purged, and waste is released from the bowels.
Do not use watery purgatives of ash unless this medicine is absent, and gather ashes from grapevine wood, pour water on top, then strain, until you know the chest is thoroughly cleansed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water, strain with a mixture of water and honey containing some litharge. When you cleanse with honey and sweet wine, may the honey have properties to purify and wash, and the wine make healthy.
And when you have done this, and assured that the intestines are properly cleansed, if you instill something to encourage heat within them, then take a hollow reed and do so with rose oil and wine.
Or you instill some medicines and unguents, whose properties I have discussed in treating with unguents.
And if the intestinal opening is small and what's in the clyster cannot enter, slightly enlarge it with a piece of iron, and place there an Egyptian unguent or basilisk unguent until widened.
If the wound is too wide, and the edge allows it to remain in place where the enema can enter, and if there is a tear with blood flow above or below its location.
And if you cannot expose the bowel as you see fit, then arrange it so that the inflamed bowel is directed to the lowest point possible. For when the bowel is inflamed, do not irrigate it with saltwater and if you cannot open the abdomen as you wish, then set up in such a way: so that the bowel flows gently downward, and do not leave any part of the bowel.
so that the bowel flows gently downward, and do not leave any part of the bowel. And take binding medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over it a cloth of flax that covers the entire wound. Then wrap the affected area with strips wider than the initial one, and apply ointment under another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to reduce swelling, without removing the large cloth for many days afterwards.
And for those with a wound on the body, they often remove and clean it to alleviate swelling, and know what flows from the swelling, whether it's poison or little or quite a lot, or digestive, or indigestible.
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there's an abscess or not, and when the medicine has spread in such a way that you see its nature on the wound, understand that the injury is healing, and approach treatment.
And then you dislocate it in the morning or after a day has passed, and when you open the wound, change to another bandage and renew the ointment application.
If subtle symptoms come after long periods of time, do not despair over health, for the sickness approaches.
For there are people who delay healing in their wounds with wine, and those who do the opposite;
and they suffer an indigestible breastache after many days, affirming that the breasts are not swollen.
and they experience delayed breast milk flowing, and it is prolonged. They use dried medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, like an expiring ointment, for there is much of antimony powder, which is the last remedy.
They take an expiring ointamoisture, and prepare it with rose oil, ensuring equal substance of old wine;
Then he applies a compress and uses it;
And the same does more good when applied to swelling, especially if balms of myrrh, olive oil, and incense are not available, take frankincense and aloeswood and incense, grind it, and powder it over honey as it heats on the fire;
And then wrap it in a cloth and extend it over the chest, never apply long-lasting arsenic (arsenical soap), and roots of the holy lily, which are like flour and semolina. And use simple or complex remedies; Grind them, turn into powder, and mix with the honey as I said, and apply.
And if the ailment is prolonged and not healed by this remedy, then say that decay has set in, causing pressure on the bones or hard limbs, or joints; If the treatment of a fistula as we have said before.
Pus is an abscess that arises from under the fingernail of the hand or toe, or sometimes occurs in other joints.
And when it is infected and not attended to, if an abscess breaks open, and worms and pus flow until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps consume the entire nail.
And it reaches to the bone causing intense putrid pain, and the toe joint is swollen, and the skin turns black.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, then one must excise all the excess tissue from underneath the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound. The fire cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is clean.
If the hair begins to press into the skin and starts to itch, it is necessary that you trim the nail from under which the hair points, push upwards, and carefully extract the fine hair. Then apply a remedy on the area with heating and corrosive substances to remove all of it; Then treat with ointments until it is completely healed.
And if there is corrosion on the bone, and you scrape it out, and treat with fire cautery, because as long as the bone is consumed by this, it cannot heal.
And if you see the joint being corroded, scrape out as previously mentioned, then treat until it is healed.
If it is struck, and swollen, and it causes great pain, you must first soothe it.
Then cauterize the double thread with a diagonal cut above it, and be careful that the incision does not reach to the bone under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if this happens, apply something soothing on top.
The dislocated shoulders that are found in some men by chance are all flesh, and sometimes there are bones present, and at other times only a part of them is there, and none of these arise from the root of the joint where the origin is among our shoulders.
Those that arise in any of the two thumbs do not move, and those that arise at the knuckle joint, sometimes they move.
The incision for one who is fleshy should be lightly made, in a particular way: Make the cut at its root of a wide double thread.
Those that arise in the base of the joint are difficult to cure: If you hold it with a cup.
In those that arise from the last of our shoulders, it is necessary to first bandage roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then treat until healthy.
so that the main; y-line contertret ond le JJSH: he c m, forta.
If it is necessary to cover the sweat, so that they may heal according to their natural forms; Then place between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together. Or you put between two pieces of fine linen until the wound is healed, as it should be.
should be and they are not the s.
These are large sores covered with excessive fluid of a melancholic nature, appearing on various parts of the body.
and it often occurs in the legs of those who walk or work and carry things, more than others.
by him t saye est plus other thatt.
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: One way is to cover them and bleed the black blood. And the other manner is to lift the vein, and pull it all through.
The size should be according to this method: The first step involves the leg with very hot water, until the veins are sufficiently dilated, then hold the leg gently by pulling it from above the hip to below the buttocks.
Then cut the vein in one place (either I, II, or III), making it wide, then extract and pull out black blood into your hand from top to bottom, as much as the virtue of the malady can endure.
And then bind it, and instruct them to dye with black meats;
And begin evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, without causing harm to the patient.
The movements of his limbs follow this manner: Raise the patient's limb that is painful if there is much hair, then give him a bath, and soak his leg in warm water until it turns red, causing the veins to swell.
and if you do not have bathwater, warm it by fire, then cover the veins along with cloth at the knee or below the ankle.
then proceed to treat the skin at the bend, and scrape the veins from each side until you can feel them.
And it appears red and black, and when entering or cutting skin, it seems like a gray cord.
Then insert the blade gently until it pierces through the skin, and then secure it with light stitches, then tie at another location above three joints.
Then scrape the skin around the wound until it appears, then lift with forceps as you have done, and stitch with another suture line as before.
Then make another incision or more if needed, then lift it and cut near the joint, then stretch and pull until reaching the second suture.
Then extract from stitch to sticht all at once, then stitch again.
If you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle through it all, pierce the skin and pull, and push up from under the vein, and turn your hand this way and that until it pops. And ensure it does not crust over, for if it does, it cannot be drawn or lifted, causing harm to the patient.
And when you have completely drawn it out, place a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site. And treat until healed.
If the vein is twisted and tangled together and not straight as we have described, then it must be cut lengthwise but not crudely. And the treatment is as we have previously mentioned.
The form of iron used to make the cautery must be curved and not sharp so that it does not cut the vein.
and is of large thickness, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but be broad as we have said, here is the form.
This vein is situated in legs, warm areas where no plants or trees grow, and on land that lacks moisture.
and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens from swelling that arises beneath the skin, as it does internally with serpents and worms, embedded between the skin and flesh.
When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it comes in the leg as a great swelling, then the lump changes, and the vein begins to bulge outward, like a plant root.
When the head is opened, it must be wrapped with a bandage of lin cloth about one and a half yards up to two yards along the leg, leaving the bandage on the limb, and each time there are no stitches left undone, wrap it again around the bandage.
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and then wrap the remaining portion, but do not cover it entirely at its root until completely removed. because if you cut it, it may enter the heart and cause an abscess or decay there, leading to a severe illness.
for this reason, it must be treated little by little up to the root, and nothing or any part of the core should remain.
and this vein should never be treated when it's length reaches V or X hands, and a man came to me with one of such lengths, and when you cut it, it bleeds I or II drops, and the wound goes through to the bottom, causing everything in it to flow out.
And let the matter within be emptied, and bring suitable herbal remedies daily for a day, then treat as with abscesses.
And never strike the vein with your hand until it opens in the joint of the foot or toe, and when it bleeds profusely, and the blood flows out.
Then treat as we have previously mentioned.
And from worms that arise between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "ox disease," because it often occurs in the veins, and is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, moving up and down throughout the body, feeling painfully as it passes through muscles until it pierces the skin where it travels, and bleeds profusely.
And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as those coming from worms and snails and ascarids or belly.
And there is doubt about its nature because when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the brain, by chance returns, and destrocks the eye. And this occurs many times.
When you see it being treated and drawn out, one cannot force it when it goes:
So it is necessary to bind the area above and below a strong joint tightly, then cut into and draw out thick matter, and if you cannot reach it entirely in its place, burn with fire on top until it dies.
And the greatest harm it causes is that they run a fever, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or near the eyes, firmly pull out the eyebrows, then cut around them, and tether.
And it is necessary to use the patient of bodily purification with dissolving medicaments for bad humours, and wash off putrid meats.
From the pain which arises from windiness This disease is called "wakeyre" in our land, and it brings pain to certain limbs, then moves from member to member.
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to an unwell woman, and discovered some swollen arms, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm.
And shortly after, the vein rises as if on a shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like silver when it falls from one place to another.
The pain departs from that spot, and spreads to the shoulder, and then shortly after courses throughout the entire body, until it reaches the opposite arm.
Then he told me that it returned within his body, as I saw it.
sofle a lisso: Nevertheless, I had wanted to make sure that the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman as I observed.
and I thought that this was because the woman had dry veins, with open wounds, and thus appeared to be bloated.
And they do not appear according to this reason for those who are diabetic, and who have moist bodies and veins restored.
And when you see that this disease needs curing, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then scrape above and below swiftly, and afterwards cover until the inflammation subsides. and cauterize thereafter.
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat as for those who are troubled by inflammation, like rotten pills, and pills of iron ore, and similar things.
Arrowheads are diverse, depending on their appearance and the way they pierce the body.
The variety in them is that there are those who have large points, small points, hairy ones, and smooth ones. And of those with two edges, and of those with tongues, and of those with projections.
and that which flows in no limb, it flows according to the following methods: or in principal limbs such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it flows thus in no part of these limbs, the sign of death that I will tell you hereafter is evident: if it must be considered for the extraction of this arrowhead, as death comes afterward in various conditions. and when these bad signs are not evident, and the arrowhead is not completely embedded, then treat it as such, and care for the wound.
When the arrowhead enters and penetrates the bone near the brain, causing a hollow behind it on the skull, which is when blindness occurs along with numbness, trembling and reddening of the eyes, and inflammation and red tongue, spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile. and sometimes it is without force in the nose or ears. and occasionally it affects speech and voice. and the wound appears as white hair-like growths, and heals like blood from a wound.
If these signs appear to you, pursue the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not embedded.
When the sign of the arrow as it passes or enters the body, is near the left arm, and feels similarly as if it had been driven into a hard object, not hollow. and perhaps the arrow moves like hairs, with black blood flowing outward, accompanied by coldness, pale sweat, and fainting. Thus they have doubts that death will follow.
And the sign of arrow wound is that without clear foam from the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow penetrates into the fleshy part of the buttocks, it is near the small intestines; and spills a great amount of blood, causing severe pain and groaning; and they move all the limb joints in the shoulders.
When an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach, if it comes from the wound, then no part of the digested flesh is spared.
And if an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach and does not pierce any part of the intestines on its exit, there is no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow penetrates into the bladder, causing urine to leak and flow out, and the patient feels intense pain; The wound appears to be fatal.
The other limb, as made by the fingers and knuckles and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and neck and thighs, and similar members are safe according to various conditions. When the shaft is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisonous as I will tell you of how it happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
It happened to a man whose arrow struck the knee near its root. I tried it, and injured it on the other side through the ear fat, but was not severely damaged.
And injured another joint with an arrow shot into the cheek's fat near the gum below it, and the arrowhead was pushed back out without piercing further than the tip towards the bone, and the arrowhead was large like one from a Turkish bow, easily fitting no ear.
The joint remained sound, and nothing adverse occurred to it.
I injured an arrow from the throat near a Christian, and the arrowhead was Arabic-style with ears.
I shaved the beard, and acted discreetly as long as it was necessary, and the Christians were safe.
And deceived an arrow into one of them, which was lodged in his belly, and believed he would die.
and after it had been more than thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow shaft, manipulated it cleverly, and successfully deceived it, without any harmful incident.
And when I saw a man with an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound was swollen up on top of it;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not affect his natural conditions or cause harm to any of his natural functions.
And then I saw another man with an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was swoln up on top of it; Thus there will be great pain suffered similarly.
and many similar things.
And pierced by an arrow in the upper part of one's body among the nobles and king, which was located midway upward, and slightly inclined to the right. and the arrowhead was fully inserted.
I went to treat it after it had been there for three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
I enclosed it with all subtle techniques, and did not feel it at all. and there was no sensation or pain from his right ear.
I thought it was the tip of the arrow and placed a soothing emollient ointment on top because his eyes were not swollen. And I appeared to have found the path of the arrow.
And I appeared to have found the path of the arrow. I placed the embalmment in both hands and dried up the main wound, and the patient stayed thus for a long time until they felt the arrow within their body.
And he told it to me. I applied the medicinal acrid water to the wound by hand until it was opened, and tried closing it, and felt the arrowhead at its intended place.
then I secured the opening of the wound with that medicinal acrid water until the arrowhead appeared clearly visible.
and it passed through completely within four months, and then I loosened the wound so that I could insert pincers on both sides, but it couldn't be removed.
Then one must cease from subtle techniques and devices of anesthesia until it is firmly grasped in a day with well-made tongs, according to what its form will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat the wound, and return the injury.
And they judge that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored: I will reset it then, and the wound is firmly sealed, and the patient is completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of arrow extractions, so put your care on what I do not mention here, for the book cannot cover everything.
but the wise master physician compares little about many things, and focuses on what is currently happening and failing; he provides nine works of knowledge and nine instruments for handling strange occurrences in this art.
I say that arrows come from limbs where they are embedded, according to two ways. or by their entry point, or from another direction;
and those that enter through the same opening they entered from are arrowheads in living flesh, and will do so again at no time.
And if it does not come out now, leave it as long as the flesh is rotting around it and there is pus coming from the wound.
And similarly if it is embedded in bone and cannot come out, leave it as such for some days, changing its position each day.
And when it comes out, and if it does not come out, pierce all around with a very fine drill until the flesh is fully healed, then extract it.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body and cannot be seen, then wrap the entire area completely. And if you can feel it, remove using any suitable instrument.
If you cannot widen the wound, and deepen the arrow's entry, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then bleed as much as the wound allows.
And remove the arrow if you can, and if it has holes on both sides to which it is attached, then break or bend the stick that is firmly lodged in the two places that you are able to move, and then break or snap off the ends of the arrow shaft as much as possible.
And carefully do not break the arrow, pull it out more firmly.
And if you cannot at once, should the arrowhead be deeply embedded near its entrance, then draw it out, for extraction would be painful. And if the flow of blood is in a different direction, follow the treatment we have mentioned in its chapter;
And guard the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a method as you would pull an arrow without danger, whether soon or later, firmly or gently.
And place the patient as they were when the arrow fell upon them, for that is their greatest help, and if you cannot do so, then put them according to what signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction or pierces something of theirs, or where the skin is swollen can be seen or felt distinctly.
So cut accordingly as long as the pincers can grip it, and then extract it: If it juts out now. (This line seems to be incomplete or missing
And if held within the bone, rotate your round hand so that it enters the bone, then widen the bone before extracting it.
And if it cannot come out, let it remain for now, then resume extraction until it comes out completely.
and if the arrowhead remains in it, you must remove the entire shaft;
and if it breaks off, you should administer binding, and if the instrument is a knife, such that the tip of the arrow enters into the handle of the tool.
and then remove it completely, and if the arrowhead is loose, place the instrument with its point inserted to facilitate extraction.
If the arrowhead is contaminated, it is necessary to cut out all surrounding tissue where the poison resides, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrowhead breaks or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is recent, you may cover up, as needed.
And be careful not to puncture the vein or nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary. and perform the treatment until it is healed completely.
The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many ways to do so: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowheads.
The form of the pointed hair is also like the feather of a bird, to direct it towards the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here.
There are veins to be opened that have XXXI in total, sixteen heads included, which are as follows: II jugulars located behind the ears, called the double "herbeck". and the two arteries that are visible in both temples. and two veins that are in the groins of both eyes, called "inspire". And the vein that lies within the forehead; and the vein that is at the temple, near the hairline; and the two temples which are on either side of the head; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are called "Egoheirich" veins. and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins of which there are commonly five in each arm:
One is on the head, and it's to the left ribcage side, and they call it "the vein of the head". The other is named "fast", and it's composed of the head and abdominal parts, and they call it by the local name "vein of the body". The abdominal part is to the right ribcage side and they call it by the local name "vein of the belly", and it's below the navel, and this one where blood can be drawn, clearly shown at the top of the pouch.
And the small vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two streams.
And in the leg where there are three veins: One is located below the hollow of the left breast bone, and the second (joint) which is at the ankle of the right leg. and the vein called "sne," which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those (joints).
The sting from the veins that are after the ears can cause old headaches and migraines.
and the quality of this sting, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient, and rub the area or veins with a coarse cloth. then tighten the neck of the patient with a winding motion until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places above the head. When you find the knots on your fingers, and where you feel hairs under your finger, beware of them.
Then take the lancet and puncture from under the vein to the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire vein, and cut and remove the skin and vein clean until you see blood.
Then strain it tightly, as long as it is cleansed;
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The cleaning of the two arteries that are in both temples should be done with an ancient, hardened, and accustomed practice for tears from the eyes;
And the quality of the surgeon is as I say: and it must be that the patient keeps his head distant, until both veins are clearly visible. and feels pain from under your elbow, then securely tie (a tourniquet).
then lift the skin above your elbow to the second level of your elbow, and place the lance below it, then lift the vein up, and cover it, just as you did with two other veins, and control the bleeding according to necessity.
then lay the patient down, and place your elbow over the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton. and bandage firmly, leaving it until healed.
And we have discussed this in their care and extraction, which begins the book.
The bandage of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as that for headaches from ancient face diseases, and migraines, and redness.
And its quality is such that the patient should turn his neck until the vein appears; Then take the instrument called "Fossor", which has this shape:
And place its tip on the vein, and pierce under your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see; Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is neither slanted nor bent at a wide angle of the flesh.
However, it must not be too tight; And the ligament across it, for the bone is close by, and sometimes it breaks the membranes when they are delicate.
The ligaments of the veins that are in the joints should be supported with bandages and to the tendon, redness, yellowness, and swelling in oil, and illnesses of the face.
And the quality of these ligaments is that the patient twists their neck by pulling at any attachment, as before.
Then the bandage and be sure to have the ligament across it, a little long and wide membrane, for there is no irritation. And if the membranes are delicate, they may sometimes break;
Then let there be sufficient bloodletting as needed, and then apply linen, and secure it well.
The vein of the nose if it becomes congested should be treated with cold water and soothing ointments, as well as face ailments such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when they are longstanding.
The quality of the congestion is such that it causes the patient's neck to be strained. Then straighten its nose with your left hand and take a long, fine thread through between the two nostrils, as the vein does not open easily, so the blood will begin to flow immediately.
And do not pull too hard initially, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then tie it off for a night, as it is quickly restored.
The straining of the sinews assists in extending ligaments, and at the beginning of leprosy, as well as many other diseases, scabs, corrosion, herpes, and itching.
and the quality of straining is that it pulls away the patient's neck from both sides, as we have said.
and the master stands over the patient's head, then slices slightly on both sides, then straighten the vein a bit widely, then quickly cut the blood as needed.
Then make another incision on the other vein, then loosen the ligaments, and strain both veins moderately so that the patient does not become strangled. And let it remain until morning, so that the wound may heal.
of the liver inflammation The healing of vein lips above contributes to wounds in the mouth, and decay of gums, and tears of lips, and ulcers and abscesses.
And the nature of the healing is for you to seat the patient before you and hold his neck as I have instructed. Then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one is in the right lip and the other in the left, and recognize them by what they are black, and by the small black veins surrounding them.
So then cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them, or you are in doubt, cut the larger one from each side, and likewise for all veins above and below, because they are of a similar manner.
for inflammation underneath the tongue The healing of the veins below the tongue helps after the cerebral healing, and it is during the extension of the throat, and for eye diseases and mouth ailments. (Note: This line might contain typographical errors or be difficult to translate due to historical medical terminology not aligning with modern understanding.)
And the quality of the saigner is that the patient bleeds between their hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down either side for a black vein.
Now clean both, and do not cut too deep, as from there are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly bled have two methods of practice:
or by poking through all along with a wide lancet blade, or olive oil subtly as sharp cutters are called "anise."; And they are wide and subtle according to the breadth and length of the veins.; The form of the wormwood is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
It is necessary to open plain-haired veins with abundant visible blood that contains thick and turbid blood; And this is the form of the olive bile.
and are more subtly pointed, and suitable for tying up fine veins where there is subtle lemon-colored blood.
The saintliness of the basilica, which is one of these veins, assists in diseases that are from the throat, and neck, and groin, and abdomen.
And it is fitting for the physician to bleed properly, and that he washes from the artery which is below. And if it comes out of the artery, and a stream of blood flows, then he should staunch it as I have said. And the bile must not be sharp but cut evenly as I mentioned.
And if the vein does not open clearly, then one should extract it and change another. or you want any hair from it, or bleed into the vein within its arm. It becomes clearly apparent; and the sore at the nape of the neck as we have mentioned.
And if you see the lie of the sinew, then as I say, when you raise the arm, gently touch the head until you recognize the hairs. then sign your name at the top of the parchment and then lift the arm, treat the vein at the nape of the neck. and be careful not to injure the artery when you see the head swelling, for it is the artery: flee then.
And if you see it bulging as well like the urine of a child, and the flesh is red and tender, know that this is from an artery: Quickly proceed, then place your hand underneath for a while, and afterwards straighten out the arm which is bent. This often happens. ties the arm together, and leaves it like that, so the patient does not move it.
And there is fear of death, so do not move until he is well again.
And if the arm is not straightened out and it heals, and there are no medicines provided, then cut the artery in case of rupture, as they retract. and straighten the arm.
And take a piece of willow bark, break it, and choose one half to tie up securely until the next day.
if the arm is straightened out properly, that's good. If this does not work, apply the treatment with powders that coagulate blood as we have said.
And the coagulation is not always in various positions due to the slight location of the wound and the strength of the joints on the arm.
The action of the vein is such that it transports blood above and below, because it consists of the basilic and cephalic vessels, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the physician to examine below the nerve, and if too much pressure is applied, then the nerve can be damaged, causing swelling and severe pain, and sometimes cannot heal.
And this nerve can be found many times, and if it is not in any places due to its subtlety, one must explore with the dilator instrument. And escape the nerve at your will.
And if there is blood between the two veins, it flows for a long time.
The heating of the skull helps to draw blood towards the head and benefits the eyes;
And it is proper to heat by touching the area of the olive or myrtle fruit, as it's the safest among all treatments because there are no nerves or arteries there. However, you must choose the lightest one to apply and do not put anything if it's the first time, then repeat. And sometimes it causes swelling in some men when applied for the first time, but it does not harm them.
The quality of this disease is according to what you think.
The first thing you must know about heating is that it's not performed just to maintain health but also to avoid future diseases.
And there is to be made a suture on one of the three veins present. that is, namely the cephalic, saphenous, and basilica. And it should be sutured at the beginning of pre-prandial fasting and in autumn and winter after eating when signs of repletion appear.
And it should be sutured on the first day or third, after two to three hours.
The suture applied for diseases has no fixed time, but when needed it is by day or night, at all hours and times.
And one should not suture children until 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month up to seven months. Do not let them exercise too much if they are old men who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to purge themselves in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a mild enema, if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw the excess from the intestines which could harm the main members.
Nor should those who are too greedy on meats nor drunkards, no matter how much they are so, or have dropsy.
and one should purge after an attack of colic, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent intercourse with a woman or traveling, staying up late and conjugal relations, and whatever the rest, whether by something from weapons or the body.
Then subtly manage the humors, if they are large, through meats, drinks, and medicines, if you have permission to do so.
Then enter a bath if nothing prevents it, to subtly manage the blood and cleanse the vein near the wound.
And keep clear of work, pain, leisure, and such things.
And be tied and raised, and let the healer stand higher than the patient being treated, then rub the arm two or three times, and then stretch out the ligaments moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct the humors.
Then rub his entire body with hands until the veins become inflamed and are felt.
Then moisten the muscles with a bit of old oil, then place your thumb from your left hand over that vein below the wound at the spot you wish to move it so that the vein does not slip and stick to the blade.
For there are veins that escape like cords in the muscles, and some with such flatness from swelling, so when placed over the flesh, they retract into themselves, and cannot open up, thus these people suffer. And if the vein is opened, then the wound may be too narrow, so it must be that the surgeon is knowledgeable in these matters.
And if the vein works on the first attempt, this is good; If not so, then begin again from a little further below where it was last set if the joint is not swollen.
If the joint is swollen and the patient fears it, leave for one or two days, but do not bind the arm. Perhaps an abscess will develop there later on;
Do not bathe or immerse it and then resume the cure if he wishes to do so.
And if the passage is small or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not amount to as much blood as you see, then pinch it at the same place all along.
And touch a little gently, so that the joint becomes swollen; Because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the location swoln, do not begin anew with a saignée, and apply some egg yolk oil there, as it lightens their body's blood, and softens in this place the lye with the oil.
And thus administer the egg yolk oil to each saignée where you sever veins, in order to stop the flow of blood.
and do likewise with triacle and bowels, when it is placed upon the location. if delicately, the lye separates and splits as soon as it becomes too large.
And if there comes an abscess often, especially when it is not properly drained only at that time or the opening of the vein is small, hurry and place on the location a damp sponge in water and oil with some heat, and hold for an hour.
And it is necessary that you then do this after the blood flow of the vein has stopped, and if it remains in place for some days without blackness or greenish discoloration, there is no harm. And if you see, apply any substance of olive oil or myrrh diluted in warm water, along with a charm or similar object.
And often there occurs an abscess and appearance near the site of the bladder.
So then place your hand upon it, and if you feel the area becoming swollen with pressure from your hand, that is an unfavorable appearance. Then be sure not to place anything as we have mentioned, for there may be risk of striking an artery without realizing.
But make an incision dry to harden the joint, then treat it with further treatment until it is healed.
And apply each medicine according to the quantity and color of its virtue in the blood.
For if blood is black, let it drain out until it turns red; and if you see a large one, allow it to be drained until it becomes thinned. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And this applies to those who are flat and broad, and require blood extraction, then make the wound wider with broader slits;
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, support them gently and often, and when supporting it should be done at a slant rather than by pressing.
This manner of injury is free from blood flow issues and nerve impingement, and it moves as if the limb were neither long nor wide.
And for those whose body needs to be in bed rest, one should give them fine flour bread soaked in pomegranate juice; If he is feverish, wash three times or four; and if of cold complexion, serve fine flour bread soaked in syrup with mead, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, and sweet-smelling syrup.
If it is swollen with blood after the loss of much blood, then one should give him a broth of charcoal, and an aromatic syrup, and use other remedeby which we have spoken in the section on fainting, for evacuating blood.
And if one wishes to drain the arm veins or treat elsewhere when it is greatly swollen from blood loss, they should bleed slowly and continuously according to the amount of its potency.
et s, by the so pleis an t and; and:
And if you wish to heal another area, it must be healed on the second day or the third.
Because there is much blood within the body that has become feverish, and it brings about fever; If it becomes necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as possible. Then you ensure all the wound's conditions are cleaned, and place your hand over the hair when it heals, so that death does not come to the opening, which often happens if the wounds are neglected.
And it is not necessary when you see dislocating the arm and blood issuing a second time, to keep the opening closed, but instead apply pressure around. If it's a fracture, extend the arm quickly, as that would be bad.
But let it heal until it does so a second time; Or you do not touch the tip of the lancet, until the blood that has been expelled from the vein ceases and you put some bandage back on it gently, and apply light pressure.
If the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
And if bleeding is needed a second time, let the blood flow to the same place or another vein, or in the other arm.
which painful and.
And the method of anointing is such that the patient places their hand in hot water until the needle turns red.
Then one should bind it moderately, so that the vein appears well, then anoint across and not too wide or long.
and the needle should be wide, and anointed well near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it, then place the hand in hot water and let blood into the water until there is enough.
And if this happens, do not place the hand in hot water again, for it will be done more often in winter than in summer.
And this anointing of this vein is more effective than all other treatments, as there are no vessels or nerves within it.
The fat of the salvatelle of the right hand is suitable for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
squeeze the hand and pour hot water into it until the veins are visible if seen. and take the fat across, and cut a piece large enough for all, as long as nothing is wasted.
and do not take too much at once, for the nerves are close together without separation, then put the hand back in hot water if any blood is frozen in the wound, which cannot flow out.
And when you have treated the bleeding as much as is necessary, apply oil and wool to the vein so that it can be quickly healed, doing this for each cut.
; you maye:Tud:t; the same and then that is c. The 1: don master they can le Otre toha vie (O contcur� su cesse est paire;
The treatment of the Sophene is suitable for all diseases that arise from within the body, such as bone marrow ailments, retention of fluids, kidney disease, and old conditions of hips, thighs, and legs, among similar illnesses.
And the quality of the fat is such that the patient puts some stone in hot water, and rubs it on the veins until they wear away, then places it over the joint where the stone was. And the veins are near the ankle, with many roots extending above the foot.
Cleanse and ensure it is dry or larger in size, at the ankle, to prevent movement.
And if you cleanse above the foot, watch for nerves exposed therein, and the veins cut as when shaving.
And ensure it is smoothly healed.
And if the blood cannot flow out, reset the foot in water, and let the vein empty completely.
And if the veins need to be cleansed for the first time, start again within a bit, as the wound is sore.
Do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do similarly with the other foot equally.
The source of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to heat.
And the quality of its cleansing is such that the patient must enter or bathe, and elevate above the aneble IV fingers by twisting, otherwise it does not open the veins.
And if it opens, so heal in all ways you can see, and through. And use methods to cover it, for the head is loose, and it has risen greatly on the hands of mankind.
And use methods to cover it, for the head is loose, and it has risen greatly on the hands of mankind. And if you do not heal it, then use any remedy that opens or closes the wound and around both sides of the small finger, and protect from the nerves.
And apply enough healing as you see, then loosen the bandage, and put on cotton and fasten it tightly. It is now healed.
Vents are made of horns, or glasses, or vermilion.
And the procedure is done in two ways: By striking and drawing blood, or feeling struck.
And this inflammation which causes a feeling of being struck occurs in two ways: Or it is with great heat, or feels like fire.
And inflammation that occurs by striking and blood extraction happens in fourteen parts of the body, so one is completely at the head. And the other is near the neck. And two others are in the ribs of the neck. And the inflammation below the chin. And the inflammaturities of both shoulders. And the inflammations over the heels. And the inflammations within both arms. And the inflammations in both legs. And the inflammations at both ankles.
And the bleeding does not produce much blood, but from tiny veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not bother anyone, as with normal vein bleeding. And it does not require any treatment, nor heat or cold application, in no disease that arises from excessive eating, as long as all the body is emptied.
And if it is necessary due to diseases or habits, we provide each injection at the beginning or end of the month, and before and after every hour.
because there are those who, when they need injections, feel heavy sensations;
and for those who experience fullness and reddening on their face, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes.
When such things happen where they encounter a drop of blood on their tongue, causing it to swell and spill blood. And if there are those who think about it, seeing near the painful and deadly aspects of such things.
the or ent chir plowed with bleus is not to them and, then s't and it if you so, but the paints in them et de that are, ici les peche l'on est.
The healing of the moisture helps with the pain in the head ... which comes to them, and it is not necessary that this be after removing all from the body.
And this purging is for the healing of the headache, and it should not be used by those who are naturally cold, or have catarrh, as they suffer greatly from it.
And therefore it is not appropriate for them to use vinegar.
And those who suffer from it often become lazy, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply the poultice slightly lower down due to fear of inefficacy.
The ventosation within the neck is at the level of the cervical spine and basilica, and for this reason it extends to the body of the spermatic cord, and splitting of the channel of the peritoneum, and all parts, and filling.
And it should not be pushed too firmly, for if held too tightly, it may cause displacement or distension of the stomach and body.
Ventosation of the two ribs in the neck causes pain in the head, otalgia and migraine, strangulation, and pain at the root of the teeth, and is at the level of the cervical spine.
And it should be commanded that the nurse express his hand in insertion without cutting the artery and causing bleeding.
The dryness of the mouth below the chin is due to oral disease, and decay of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. And there is an excessive flow from the sores on both lips.
The inflammation of the shoulders is a disease arising from heat and fullness.
The dryness of the corners is as much like that of three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
and instruct the glands not to secrete too much at first, for the core is still tender, and it consists of nerves and arteries.
The sore that is on the buttocks is like hemorrhoids at the base, and diseases of the area, and it must be large blisters, made from flax, which need to be well drained. And perhaps, if subtle, it would break. and it causes large wounds.
The leg veins become swollen easily because they draw blood from the whole body and are effective against ancient pains of the head, joints, bones, and bladder;
And they are in place of the two hips and the two ankles, but generally weaken the body after prolonged use, causing swelling in various conditions.
The way to apply the ventose is that you put it in a hollow spot quickly and do so promptly, placing it hastily, moving equally, and continuing this action until you see the area turn red and swell, and blood appears slightly.
Then, apply heat, and reset the cupping glasses, and carefully observe the position of the limbs, for there are those who have severe cholera, and clear discharges. If it is necessary to make an incision, one must make wide and deep ones; And squeeze gently.
And if the patient is large, it is fitting to make two incisions: The first time to facilitate the passage of much blood;
And if the patient is very thin, it is fitting to make a third incision;
And when we wish to draw out little blood at a time, we do so only once. And if we want much blood, let us repeat often;
And if the patient is thin, apply heat thoroughly, and for those with thick and hard skin and susceptible to bruises, you should warm the lids of the cupping glasses with an aperitive and dissolving oil. If it is so, use olive oil of a certain type, or almond soft oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is so, use watercress oil, or of lily, or chamomile, or similar substances.
And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
And if for the one you are treating with a tender and broad bandage, do not put any oil on it, but after ventosation with rosewater, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd juice, or pearl ash solution, or any similar substance.
And those with much moisture should rise easily, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar substances.
And those who have excessive swelling rise with old wine, or of boiled watercress, or of anise or chamomile infusion, or similar substances.
and they must not be saunaed before the bath nor after the bath but one hour to two hours later.
and should not sleep after saunaing, and it is necessary that they sweat, when they need to be saunaed and once they are saunaed.
And watch for those who are pale from cholera, and whose skin is too dry and inflamed. If it becomes necessary, they should take cold things such as red apples, endives, lettuces and similar items. and mild spices, and lamb fat, and moist meats.
and mild spices, and lamb fat, and moist meats. And those with a cold disposition should take honey syrup, and moderately aged wine, along with some spices, mild spices, small birds, and partridge.
and on the day they exercise, should drink more than eat.
and it is advisable to give certain individuals neither triacle nor musk before or after vomiting to strengthen the main body parts. Be subtle with them, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The cupping that is applied without causing injury are those placed over the liver, and joints, and gout, and abdomen, buttocks, legs, and groin, because these limbs do not tolerate being pierced or punctured anywhere, it is only done to draw blood from one part of the body to another, as we place on wounds when they are healing.
for removing swelling that is in the limb, as we apply cupping to the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the limb.
and alleviate pain when there is edema or stones, and remove them by its attractive property, possibly removing the edema or returning the stone to its place.
And so it is done when placing over the liver and kidney where there is retained wind-swelling, and these blisters are prepared empty to drain as needed. And never are they prepared together with fire, nor with plain water as in some diseases of the chest, and thusly you fill the blister with hot water poultice or with water that has boiled medicinal herbs for this purpose.
The form for administering a cauterizing agent is as follows:
And it should have two sides each half a palm wide and with a tiny puncture within the center like to piercing with a needle, made of silver before so that it does not harm the patient when placed on the limb.
And have at hand a rod of crossbow or iron to insert a candlewick while they are large and small depending on the diseases and condition of those who take them.
because children's cupping is different from that for adults, and for thin individuals as opposed to fat ones.
And so one must place this cupping on the limb:
take the candle of wax or lubricant and place it inside the cupping over the rod that is also within the cupping, so that the light shines to the bottom of the cupping without burning the patient.
and then place it on the limb, and you should do so at the points we have mentioned, so that when desired, steam will form, and remove the cupping.
And you take the lining as before, and often it recurrences if needed.
In the ventouse used for treating pleurisy, which is filled with water at once, has neither penis nor outlet, and is only managed when full of water, and placed on the limb fully.
And it is formed as follows:
Suction cups are managed only where you cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, for example. And on the heels of horses, whether hooves or nails, and others like them;
And its quality is such that when you find those without stains which are in soft clear waters with some slime, then take them.
and place them into a clean, soft water source until they become accustomed to it, and have nothing in their bellies. then make them safe from veins and pus, then rub the member until it is reddened, and place the previously cleaned stones there.
and when they have sunk and settled, if it is possible to place them near an outlet, then do so, for this is highly beneficial afterwards.
If not, raise it easily and then expose to water very well, and then squeeze out the liquid.
If too much blood is left in the body after removing the stones, then wipe with a linen cloth dipped in cold water and place it there until the stone has been squeezed out.
If there are multiple abscesses, apply crushed vitriol or galewacke, and similar substances, until they are healed.
Or place it on the middle of scraped fleshe, and leave them until they have healed at the lee, now seal.
And if you need more remedy, then take other substances.
And if the substances do not take effect, then rub the flesh with fresh blood or place a needle until the abscess comes out, and then apply them to it, and soon as they feel the blood, let them heal.
And when you see that they bleed, then powder with a bit of aloe and sea salt, or ash, so they will now heal.
Here begins the book of fractures These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and involve the restoration of breaks and dislocations.
Learn well, dear student, that the foolish do not delve into this chapter's wisdom, for they have never seen any ancient books or read their letters.
and therefore, knowledge is scarce in our land, as I've found no good examples of it.
and I know little about it, though through the wisdom of ancient books which I have studied thoroughly, by experience, and from my life's habits.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, shortened at the end, and clearly shown the forms of inflammations that are produced, as I did in these two previous chapters.
It is necessary therefore that we say here the preface of this book containing the essence and chapters in which the sage applies his understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when any breakage or dislocation, twisting, or contortion occurs in a limb, you must support the injured side of the patient with parts weak due to childhood, age, or frailty. If the tension is not too much, or too cold.
And mixing with cold things, that is to say, cold baths, and fodder for birds and horses, do not drink wine or eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much on foods that fill the veins with blood, until you no longer have doubt of a hot abscess or material spreading in the limb.
If it comes to the patient being so weakened again that they cannot be governed as before.
When the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote nourishment, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, barley, sheep's stomach, eggs, fresh fish, rich wine, and similar things. For proper nourishment allows for faster healing of the fracture.
And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well healed or united according to their nature for limb strengthening, nor those as tender as children's bones.
But do not worry, reset above the broken bone with strong ligaments that join the limb together, until it is restored as if it were before. And do not finish all of your work, and for this reason you should nourish on large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For a head fracture is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all kinds of fractures. There are fractures that occur from dislocation, and others by being bent, as with the breaking of a quill for writing.
There are fractures that occur from dislocation, and others by being bent, as with the breaking of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a crack throughout a small split.
And each method has its means, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings in that place.
And is known the fracture of the bone by what the twist is present, and opened widely due to force, and it presses near the palm.
And when there is no twist or touching of it, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
However, it may well have twisting, or splitting, or a small break. the in sone de pru;
And know that the fractures which curve upward, and are two parts dislocated, they must now be aligned evenly, so as to abscesses when they arise.
and if abscesses occur, leave it for no day until the abscess is eased.
then make it even with movements that you can lightly and easily perform, knowing that its restoration is easier than those of others where there are missing pieces.
then straighten it if necessary afterward.
And if the bone has broken pieces, and is separated into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or on your hand, if it's small limbs, or at II tendons, or at one tendon and your hand.
And place the member according to its natural shape, so that when parts of the injured limb are dislocated, you reset them by any means necessary and guide it back into position as best as you can, ensuring that through your work no injury or pain befalls the patient.
And properly set the two ends of the bones according to their best shapes.
And if you feel that it does not heal well with your hand, then... (Please provide additional context or text for continuation)
If the dressing is done well and do not strain it too much, nor compress as those who cause abscesses to boil and contract in their limbs, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is at risk of infection, so treat the patient well to ensure it does not move, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning or otherwise. (Note: It seems there might be a missing part of the text here for proper continuation) And ensure the limb is so securely fixed that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, not even slightly, and then it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain.
And ensure the limb is so securely fixed that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, not even slightly, and then it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain. and ensure that it is placed correctly, so that any twisting does not occur when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb depends as I tell you.
Seek knowledge that broken limbs vary in minor and major ways, and shape.
For there are small members, such as fingers and toes: If necessary, wrap soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, like thighs and legs:
if it is necessary to bind with a wide and sturdy bandage, as the wide bandages can encompass the entire large limb evenly, without any unevenness.
then place three or four light pads (or as needed depending on the limb), and tie one end to the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and make it tighter there than at the break, moving away slightly from the break.
and soften the bandage a little at a time until you cover most of the healthy part again, then take another bandage and wrap around directly above the fracture site.
Then return to the part below the fracture and strain it gently, not too hard or weakly, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place between the splints linen or cloth so that they are all equal, then bind it above with bandages, and then put well-made supports underneath if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, then place something soothing on the abscess and that removes the swelling, leaving it as such for a few days.
Then strain the supports and make pads of a piece about one hand's breadth thick, or of wood used for making shingles, or of palm fronds, according to this pattern:
But it is necessary for the stake that someone places on the fracture to be a bit larger and wider than the others.
and so long as needed for the member's smallness or greatness; then fasten the stakes in the same way as you did with the first fracture, and later over time, using a thread as in the initial treatment of the fracture. the tighter it is, the less there will be;
and it should be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
because if the thread is too thick as I have seen in works of folks who make their rope cords from twisted flax threads, and it's a significant error, for the fracture cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it should not have less than two inches between each stake.
And if the patient is in pain from the head of an extremity after it has been tightened into its proper place, then apply linen or cotton padding under them so they do not slip.
When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, I will describe the treatment for this afterwards.
And remember that it is not necessary to extract all fractured bones on the first day. When the limb is large, one must not put staves unless after five or seven days, or more depending on the risk of abscess occurring soon.
and here is the method of ancient eyebolts to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists:
And take some flour that is held within the walls of the mill, and knead it with abundance of eggs, and use this concoction which should not be too clear or too thick; this is the common method for an eyebolt restoring a break in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of applying a dressing that heals breaks, dislocations, and twists: Take oil of aloes, myrrh, nutsgrass juice, arabic gum, and honey, about 12 drachms. Myrrh and aloes, about 5 drachms. Alethinon (or another suitable astringent) VIIII drach And make the powder, and mix with honey and egg white. If the body's constitution is hot, utilize this plaster as it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Another form of plaster useful for sprains: Take muscat and wormwood, soaked in strong wine. Myrrh and aloes, also infused with the same amount of wine as before (IX being a Roman numeral for Acacia and frankincense, likewise infused. Armenian balsam (X liters), finely ground and mixed with either water or milk, to be administered.
Another form of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their place, alleviates acute pain, and is used to cut the bone, with fractures being addressed. Take new linen, and soak it with ease and oil cooked, and place it at the location.
These dressings do not restore, but are beneficial for cooling of abscesses and properly soothing the pains.
Another method to mend broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, mix them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for dressing to restore bone fractures and ease remaining abscesses. Take wormwood root, chamomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour, each one in equal parts;
and grind it up, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, then apply with fresh coriander water or plain water, and use.
Another way to treat more effectively than the first, when an abscess comes with member restoration. Take wormwood roots, flax seeds, balm, melilotus (sweet clover), and senna, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; And it is bruised, and concocted with salt water or soft water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not place anything above the broken limb to promote healing except a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen suggests placing dry and slightly warm substances on the broken limb to promote healing, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Other way of dressing appropriate for injury and pain: Take musk and chervil from chopped men's nether regions or bird feathers, wormwood, and saffron in equal amounts; grind them up and make a plaster with it.
And then leave the dressing on for some time, and be cautious that the patient feels no pain or has moved any bones in their place. If not removed after a few days. And if pain comes to the place or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling occurs, hurry, remove the dressing and take off the plaster now.
And take light cloth, and sponge of sea water moistened, and immerse it in clear water, and raise the place where the pain exists, until the itching ceases and the pain is eased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry cloth wrung in clear water or rose oil and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
And rest the swelling of the limb and ease its pain, then resume subtle manipulation and a bit of opium, but do not bind it as tightly as before. And proceed delicately until it is safe.
And if you see that the abscess is red and painful and swollen throughout the limb, and you need opium and ligature, then proceed as before.
And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it unless after three days or four or five or seven. And never leave it XX days, as one sees, until the breaker is ready, and approach the shoulder joint above.
Then initially reset again, and the injured area swells with flesh, as I have said before.
And if you see it drying more than necessary, know that infections cannot come there. Then the patient must take warm water baths whenever you release it, and do so every day, and wash a little more frequently.
Through this treatment thus prevent infections on the member and quickly heal what foolish doctors have done, returning the limb incorrectly.
It is wrong and such actions are fearsome; I see nothing else but laziness and working improperly.
Many ways of fractures are, with diverse shapes, and their causes distinguished.
because there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the bone splits through all the bone up to its facet which is from under the bone, as if it were an axe or club. and therefore this kind of fracture is called "axing".
Or the sword cuts through the bone from above, and this type of fracture is called "absolute".
and there are wounds from these large or small fractures.
And if there is an embedded blow, or split or crack of stone-like bone, or falling on stone, or other such things.
And if there is persistent bleeding, which reaches up to the tela under the bone, or above it, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that fills the bone as subtly as hairs, and it is a small crack, and therefore this type of fracture is called "capillary".
And if the wound is made by being struck with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, and allows entry of the bone shard, making the head appear as hot crossbows do when fired on their targets. If within the flesh beneath.
And it happens more in those who have bones underneath that are as soft as an infant's skull;
And occurs in all these ways of fractures where small pieces are dislocated as such. And I shall speak of them right there.
And let us know all ways of fractures by distraction upon them, and examination with probes, and through the corrupted cartilage that is beneath.
The resemblance of hair is known by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed well over it; thus there appears black breakage.
In the treatment of a breakage, beware if any unfortunate incident occurs with the patient; and if you see no evil event like vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, palpitations, fever ague, eyes exiting forcefully and reddening, and other such manifestations in various dispositions, do not heal without doubt.
And if you see no hopeless incident, and expect a remedy, then begin the treatment.
When the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone by the fourteenth day when the moon can be seen.
And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone by the seventh day before the fleshing around the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture comes near the cloth that covers the brain, it is necessary to split the broken part thus:
and it is that you grasp the wounded head, expose over the bone in all ways you can, and on top of the wound's shape as gently as possible, if bleeding occurs upon exposing the bone or abscesses appear, then aid with whatever is needed, and ensure the cavity is filled with wrung cloth soaked in oil. and let the wound rest until all abscesses are eased, and be sure that bleeding ceases; Then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two methods of operation.
One method involves cutting a narrow section in front, thus shaping it as follows:
And then make another cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is to have various cuts, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of different iron types.
and work lightly, not cutting into the bone.
And if the bone is tough and hard, it must be pierced all around, as you make cuts with chisels, not perforating beyond the outer layer of the bone. There should be a margin or circle above the tip that does not allow the point to go through the bone;
And you must have several tools so that each comes in its place for the examination of the bone, and you will have tongs for all tests.
This is the form of the three kinds of tongs:
The quality for probing around the broken bone is to place one tongs on the bone and turn it with both hands until you know that the bone has been cut.
Then place the tongs elsewhere for a while, and do so all around it, then cut into the space between the fragments with incisors. Do this more delicately than possible, gently, as we have said, until you can feel the bone at your hand or on any of the tools that you hold like pincers.
And ensure you do not touch the brain or the spine.
And when you have broken the bone and exposed it, if necessary to resect the protruding part of the bone that is attached to any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be much finer and more delicate than the other chisel.
and if there is nothing of small bones or scales remaining, then lightly rub with the appropriate instruments. then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another way of treatment is what Galen prescribes, which is more subtle; and it should be done strongly, as he says. Firstly, you must expose a part of the bone where the break is most open. Once you have exposed that part, place the pointed end of this lenticular chisel on it as follows.
And do not cut deeply on one side, and it is a swollen area on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
Then with a small mallet underneath, so that you gently strike the bone entirely through it, and be careful of the sinew that is above.
If it is loose to the bone, strike the bone gently, for striking too hard can cause harm and fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the skin and the bone is cut slightly above it so that there are small pieces, then you should treat the severity accordingly, and remove scales with a fine razor of which you must have various quantities in order to administer at each place what is most beneficial according to the work done and the shape of the fracture.
If you have many coarse razors and finer ones after that, continue doing so until it is well done.
In each of these hair-cutting techniques and subtle fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its specific condition.
And this is something that cannot be taught to those who have not devoted their study to this art.
And if the sinew is exposed, it is necessary to take a bandage of lin cloth according to the amount of wound, and soak in oil rose water, and apply over the wound. Then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, and moisten with wine and oil, and place it on the first cloth. And do so more gently as you can, not burdening the patient's neck, then administer underneath it the ligature, and only tighten enough to just cover the wound.
And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove it, and apply medicines as with lily roots, and barley flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and such things.
And make a powder from these things, and place on the wound, then apply remedies without biting.
Ensure the wound remains clean and do not leave any pus or allow it to fester with bowels, for when bowels gather on the brain's cloth, they cause harm and great distress.
Because if one places something sharp upon a wound, it must be cauterized above. Therefore be cautious; if by chance something happens to the patient as we have said, it is uncertain and without doubt.
And if darkness does not occur from the medicine applied, ensure it has potency; then you must take a piece of honey and mix three parts with rosy oil and one part woolen cloth, and apply it to the wound. then proceed with appropriate treatment methods until healed.
Remember that no time should the two parts of the neck above be broken or twisted, for these are two bones;
And those which are dislocated are cartilaginous, and do not break or cause entrapment or twisting, and then they heal.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must push your small finger or thumbnail into it, making an equal break inside the index finger joint, and along the hinge backwards until the nail regains its natural shape. And do this gently, so that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee and cannot bring the foot to its place, it should be set level with a thin stick slightly thicker than usual.
And if it is a break of two parts, do likewise and hasten to restore the first day, if you know how.
If not, after the seventh or next day, when the swelling of the puncture has calmed down, then push at the tip of the nail with a fine linen cloth if the break is in one part.
When you bind another from the other side, if there is a breakage there. And they are tented so large that they fill the windows with their presence.
And some healers say you must grind down the stings with butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me entirely good, but it is necessary that they be made of wool and egg whites, and powdered mill. Then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hardened, and the cartilage stiffened.
And never blow into the nose or eyes near these tents, and if there is a small vein present, and it holds the breakage, and blows on the patient's pain. Or do whatever you see fit.
When an abscess occurs near the eye as you work on it, place beeswax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a drop of diaperin.
And if there are no abscesses forming, then apply plaster afterwards using fine flour, and powdered incense, mixed with egg whites, then place light gauze on it, but do not tie the nose or eyes.
If the break of the nose is small and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract with suitable tissues, then cut the fracture, and treat various complex wounds and injuries, as appropriate poultices and ointments for this.
If there is no wound on the nose and it has been treated with bandages, apply pledgets soaked in liquid until healed.
When the jawbone is dislocated and there are no wounds nearby, and the fractures are minimal, so that it's not broken in two, but rather splintered within, if one can notice this lightly.
It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, to insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient. And if the breakage is on the left jawbone, insert your index finger from your right hand into it and gently press the fracture back in place with that hand, while supporting with the other hand evenly.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced on two sides, it is necessary to arrange for an equal extension on both parts.
If movements of the teeth occur, or grinding, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and place on a broken jaw cerate, and place under a double cloth. And place the great splint well made upon it, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it under the movements you can see, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, then reset it every day, and then put back what has changed. And place poultice on it, with fine-ground powder or meal flour from sesame seeds, after you have removed the cerate.
And place a light bandage over the cast, and if the cast swells, and the patient's position does not change, leave it until healed. Many times is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, arrange as we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, be sure no part of the bone has broken through; If subtly into the flesh near it.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it as necessary according to your discretion.
When you have set all the bones in place and they do not move out of position, if the wound is wide, cover with one or two bandages to support healing until it has fully mended.
The severe fractures many times before, toward the shoulder, and the fractures are as follows in three ways:
or it is broken and displaced into two parts, and there are fragments, and it is easier to restore;
or there is fracture with wound.
And such works are when there is broken bone without wound, so have two assistants, one to treat the dislocated shoulder that feels weakened. and the other stretches the neck towards the injured area.
then set the fracture with your hands, so that it forms as it should, and there is neither visible deformity nor instability.
And if you need to extend further, place a round rod of cloth or leather under the patient's shoulder as needed, and make it thick according to necessity. and elevate and relieve the limb, holding the rod in your hand to ensure the fracture is aligned as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the fractured limb towards the back because it comes out frontwards, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their stomach, and place half an earthenware pot under the shoulder, with the assistants lifting the shoulder while keeping pressure until the bone in the fractured limb rises.
And then bring the fracture towards your hands, and if you find fragments, cut beneath them as needed.
And pull gently on the fragments if the bone cannot be joined by any splinting; and wrap with one of the bandages that you have. but use a tourniquet for this instrument to prevent bleeding:
and make it into a cup shape, not pointed, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the hand:
and have two handles, as you see fit, one wide and the other narrow, corresponding to the shape of the wound you created when setting the bones:
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the shape is small or you doubt it being hot, use a bandage and gauze as needed according to its quantity:
When abscesses occur there, apply a cloth soaked in oil with roselle and spices, and place it on top.
When the breaking of a bone is sensed with wounds and splinters, place plaster powder from finely ground mill on it, add egg yolk, and apply light gauze pieces over, and put a stick underneath the bandage if needed. Then take a very wide strip measuring one palm in width, then put on two layers of bandages above the gauze and plaster. Then take a subtle stick measuring three fingers in width and length, and wrap the entire bandage around it, ensuring that the top of the bandage remains taut. And place the stick over the fracture, then turn the bandage at the shoulder, and under a healthy lower joint, and under an injured lower joint. And the reset of each part, and when you see that the joint holds the fracture immediately, and you clearly see that the splinter does not move over the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligaments are relaxed, hold it in place.
And make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow under their shoulder to lift the dislocated joint upward. If you lighten the strain of the fracture by aligning the shoulder or tying the arm to the neck, and that it does not come off improperly until twenty days.
Then resume the splint if it is needed, and hold and leave it so until it is restored.
And it is restored within at most 28 days, and sooner for some men.
Of a shoulder fracture
Occasionally the shoulder breaks or dislocates out of place, and it cannot be moved except by touching it.
if you set the fracture according to its pattern, and reset the limb in all ways that you can.
then apply powdered lime with plenty of egg whites on it, and lay a light gauze over it. then place a wide and fine bandage that is slightly wider than the shoulder, and if from the bandage there are gaps anywhere in the shoulder area, fill those spaces with lime starch.
And then strain it firmly for a long while so that it does not move from its place, and monitor the ligaments each day.
And every time it swells, strain and make the bone equal if it is out of its place, and lift the patient on their side.
And the shoulder may be restored in 20 days or 25.
And when this number is fulfilled, release it gently and support it, for it is not the bone that repositions itself lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes but not from the skin, and it becomes swolebed, and there is inflammation, then follow what we have said in the treatment for an abscess to relieve discomfort quickly.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone
The flesh is never torn apart entirely, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken inside, if it leans to one side, the patient feels great pain, weakness, heat, and perhaps vomits blood, with fractures in the bones that have been shattered, and he feels very ill.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and you place I cushions between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and articulate the ribs with your hands using II methods as possible until the shape of the bone is correct.
Then place splints and plugs over the subtle bone of salt, or any other light material, and wrap it in a bandage so that nothing moves against the broken bone. and turn the ligature round to the back, adjust for comfort, and reward each hour of rest, and if it loosens, then tighten again.
and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, or pain or an abscess arises quickly, then untie it, remove the splint, and address whoever has come with methods of healing.
then replace the splint and tighten as necessary to ensure stability.
For a broken rib fracture
Acknowledge that rib fractures occur mainly on the outside after the back and within at the top, and they do not bend easily because they are brittle. And it feels well to the touch near the joints of the arms.
And the mending is such that you make the break equal as it should be. And then apply a cast, and use a splint if necessary.
And if rib fractures are descending inside, the patient feels intense pain and numbness, much like with suffocation, because the bone is exposed. and there are lumps, swelling, and excessive bleeding of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients have applied significant remedies.
And some say it is proper to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to push out the breach.
We do not make it so that abscesses are formed within if they have not come already. If it has occurred there, if the joint is healed.
And some say that one should apply cups on the outside to draw out fluids, and this seems reasonable; Nevertheless, there is doubt as to whether the bladder draws excess fluids to that place due to weakness in its positioning.
And they say of these that one should cover the area with moist linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to achieve equal pressure all around; then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicines.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from a bone protruding through the skin, and doubt occurs to them, then it is necessary to cut near where the broken rib is located, and it is appropriate to place an instrument there for protection.
And then one must cut the bone, and gently pull it slightly, and then sew the edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with emplasters until healed.
And if an abscess comes forth, then place a cloth soaked in rose oil on it and over the wound;
And care while the location is such that it requires an incision, and let them lie on their side with support under the spine where they should be stable.
and similarly to the spinal column of the back.
And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, watch carefully if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when pricked with a needle, do not feel them.
Say that they are dead in various positions, and if you move them and they feel well when restrained but not moved, know that the bone's joint is preserved, and the patient will be healed if treated accordingly.
And if similar things occur in the spinal column of the back, and you see to know whether it is stable or not, take care if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents that have taken place, and on the back swells with windiness and egestion without will.
And when it has swollen above its belly, if there is egression without will. And when it has been soved on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot. Know that they are deadly. If one does not labor at their healing.
If this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
And the care is that if there is an abscess hot, apply oil of rose or oil from goose yolk until it is soothed.
Then place on one of the comforting and drying plasters and bandage with a tie, and command the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is well.
And if any bone dislocates, then cover the area with a bandage; then extract the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if large, with a stitch, then treat with fragrant balm ointment until it is well.
If the head of the joint is broken, called "the knee's head", put your poultice from your left hand and place it even with your right hand at will, then apply the plaster and stake on top if needed.
Then bind it, and if there is bone exposed, treat above, below, and the wound until it is healed.
Of broken bone of the hip joint
Sometimes the hip bone breaks, and if this happens, there should be no slight reduction at all. Treat long and down to the pubic bone, causing pain in place, swelling, and bruising where broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above until it is over the breakage. And you say what the fracture and appearance of it is;
If the fracture is only at the head, make the fracture even, until it returns to its natural shape.
;ta are and and: If you c. And when you have made it even, place it on a board, then put a stake of wood or metal underneath, and hold the fracture so that it does not move.
And apply pressure from below the ribs until they are level. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
If pus comes out, do not touch it, until the discharge is calmed down, and put what we have mentioned before. And then return to restoration, and hold it as needed, if there has been no further accident.
Of a fracture of the shoulder
The adductors are those between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if they are injured, then it should be restored according to one of two methods.
which is that you take a piece of medium-sized bone in this form:
And cut two holes for the strings, and tie them at the top, then place the patient underneath.
then pour the patient's arm that is broken on the bone piece until it heals, and provide them with a wooden brace at one-half its length, then fasten it below any heavy object or extenders as needed.
then you must bind the fracture together with both hands at once, until the fracture heals properly.
; that theird; set sal the by; or d thembobint ou tue en lesse sulittelle est this is they.
And if you see that the extraction is further out, restrain the sinew below the break, and above the break, and stretch each muscle to its place.
And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, one must place a splint behind the socket and another on the other side, below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is on the other side, one must place a light splint without strain until the fracture is level with the socket and the bone.
Then align the fracture as needed, and stabilize it unless an abscess occurs.
And if an abscess occurs, do not bind it until seven days have passed and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil of roses to ease the abscess.
Then bind it and the way to do so is to place a plaster over the fracture, then join the arm above the shoulder, placing your hand on the shoulder or breast.
And put the sling on it, and hold above the shoulder, and along the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you suspect that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than others, and have between each splint an inch of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture by three inches from each side;
Then hold onto the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter on fractures, stronger and closer together.
And if you see the dislocation of the splints and the strain as we have said, during the hour when you return the fractured limb, and doubt that the wound is hot, let it be bound until the seventh day as we have said.
Then for three days observe the bandage, ensuring no itching or swelling occurs at the site, so that numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If necessary, as we have said.
And if none of these incidents occur, do not dislocate it for more than three days or longer, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands above their abdomen.
and place a linen bandage evenly on the shoulder socket, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the broken limb does not move or become softened by the ties.
if it improves due to the power of medicine, and give the patient the flesh that we have previously prepared, in a way that the meat is most subtle. And when it begins to resume, give it firm support.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in forty days altogether; And then one must dislocate them again and administer baths and poultices with oil to realign the limb correctly.
And if the stricture is ugly and swollen, it remains dislocated for days or months.
For a broken arm fracture
The arm is made of two bones called "phalanges," one being small and the other supporting the palm.
and the other is large, and that which extends forward from the smaller joint.
Sometimes only the large phalange is broken, or the small one; sometimes both are fractured together.
When the small phalanges are broken, the restoration and healing are easy;
And when the large [bone] is broken, so it is bad healing, with more pain than when they were broken together.
If it's only small vessels that are broken, then the treatment requires slight extension and balancing.
And if it's a fractured bone, then extraction must be done stronger;
And extend the hand near it, and tie up the sleeve higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other digits, and crosses of pain directly on him, and the bone in front of him raised higher, that the patient suffers no more trouble.
Then extend the minor ministers both arms to the area under his hand or at the wrist, and other ministers another above.
And then place the mirror evenly, according to its best shape.
And if in the break into pieces, place each one back to its position, and if any are dislocated that grip the bone, and you cannot restore it to its position, then strike above and cut the bone as we have said before.
And if with the fracture comes an open wound, I have spoken to each chapter separately; If you take this treatment.
And at the beginning of the restoration if an abscess arises, make a plaster from rose oil and white wax-based balm so that it is neither too hard nor too soft. and apply the plaster gently over the area until the abscesses are calmed.
And then remove the plaster, and put on a poultice with plenty of egg white, apply it where there are breaks, and make that patch wider and thicker than the others.
and mark where there should be six or more additional splints in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or two.
And is strained more towards the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less in approaching it, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; And make the stitches to which it is fastened of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And repair the limb and ligament after some days. And if any accident comes to the limb, as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itchiness is soothed.
and let the limb not rest too tightly.
And then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones set right, along with similar things, so it is.
And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a bit and let it rest for some time until the swelling subsides, then resume binding.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not loosen until X days.
or in between, then secure its hands to its neck, and let their collars be equal, and guard against movement and shifting, and sleep on his back.
And say that this fracture is healed in XYZ days or in XLV days, and sometimes in XX days, according to the composition and nature of the substances.
Of a hand fracture
He says that on the back of the hand and in our fingers, there are few fractures, but they bend many times.
And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, it must be that the patient sews crosswise, and lies flat in front of him evenly.
then places his hand under the extended table, and extends the physicians' fingers over the broken bones, and aligns them evenly until they are well joined.
and applies the plaster and poultices, if there is an abscess, then he puts in a splint according to the amount of the wound. and it should be wrapped in a piece of linen cloth.
And if the break is near the eyebrow within the belly of the sole, make a bandage from linen cloths and instruct the patient to fasten it at their injured arch. Then the strain of a long bandage is applied and it should be adjusted just as large as the palm's sole, and the strain is maintained appropriately.
And if the fracture is in the hind part, it's necessary to place a splint underneath and another above on the plantar side, so that the hand remains exposed and straight; then bind it entirely around the hand, ensuring the ligaments between the two are sealed.
And if the break comes to either of your ankles, if they are swollen, adjust them equally as necessary. and the strain with a sole is applied, and if you see that it requires a small straight splint to lift the fracture, do not move.
and if the break is like other ankles, in the index or one of the others, adjust them equally, and tie with the healthy toe that follows. When you bind them all together firmly, so they do not move, or place on a pillow as if sewn.
And take care in the treatment and positioning of an abscess head, and remove what comes out as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward;
And its treatment involves binding the limbs above the breakage, and otherwise below. The patient lies face downward, then each minister extends their link equally to their respective parts;
And this is when the breakage occurs within the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be towards the wrist and the other below the fracture.
And similarly if it's near the knee, then the links should be close to the knee and extensions below.
Then place the mirror on the bone, as evenly as in its natural shape with both hands, and then apply the bandage, and let it rest, if no abscess appears there.
And if an abscess is present, allow it to calm down first then return to your work and care; The ligature is made in the following manner.
It is necessary that you wrap it with two or three layers of doubled bandages and make allowance for excess material. Then bend the leg until the heel reaches the base of the calf, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the groin, and let the end of the string pass over.
Then turn to the leg and thigh with a bandage, then apply it to the fracture site, and place a splint on the leg bone.
Then wrap the length between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to evenly apply pressure, then begin binding firmly using three or four twists above the fracture. and as you move closer to the fracture site, less tighten it;
then extend the two ends of the thread between the leg and thigh, and tie three more above that, then return to untie at the head end until you reach near the foot.
If it doesn't move from its place while tightened, leave it as is; then if there are no signs of abscess or swelling appear. If it occurs, if a dislocation happens, and quickly address what is happening, as we have said many times.
And if there are bone fragments involved, then cutting may be necessary, which one can do. And if it cannot be done, then splitting the limb is required, and pulling out the iron. And heal as we have said until it becomes sound again.
And never is the thigh broken so that one places stakes inside, as in the shoulder and arm.
Yet, with such restoration performed, it does not harm the patient.
And know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, or a little more or less, depending on the variations of constitutions.
It is said that in the glen of the neck there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
And if broken, it is not so much a crack or piercing, but occurs in all wounds, and causes pain, and feels very unwell.
And the repair is that one aligns what was lost with its counterparts as much as possible, so they can move.
Then apply the plaster cast, and insert a round splint if necessary, and stabilize it as needed, then address all other breaks and injuries such as abscesses that are hot and similar issues. Then apply what is appropriate for each injury, ensuring they are well-tended.
Concerning the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one called the tibia and the other called the fibula.
and it experiences all types of fractures as they occur in the arm, so is the restoration just like that for the arm equally, and the procedures are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg on all sides.
And if the delicate bone is shattered, then turn to face forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and the wound is visible. And then turn away from there.
Then make an extension, adjust it evenly, and attach the splints equally;
However, if the breakage is severe, and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be smaller and lighter. and balance it according to your wisdom.
And when you have completed your work, take two staves of hardwood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, being double the length of the leg from knee to ankle.
then wrap it twice with bands above and below, securely tie them together, and at this band the leg will not lean to the right or left, which is well.
And none administer the bear's gall of the long leg bone, and if it is broken, and they set the leg to prevent movement, properly performing the splint in the break where there is injury.
And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident. If treated until it becomes healthy again.
Regarding the fracture of the bone of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot a break occurs sometimes and in the shinbone, and nothing happens to cause weakness or other conditions.
And if it occurs as a broken foot bone fracture and you see the bones protruding from each other, place such maladies underfoot on the ground, as if they would walk, then now put your own foot beneath theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places.
First place the plug and stop up above it, then put under the belly with two fingers a small tablet of hemp paste, then strain towards the abdomen immediately, then wrap all around with bandages and other things as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, for you will find that the bones are equal again, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken bones, repair them, as we have said about the hand's bones. Then insert a splint for the broken bone according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place underneath the abdomen that tablet I mentioned, and strain immediately.
And if there are two or three, or more broken bones, repair them and place a splint for each according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strain the tablet underneath the abdomen. And so it is when on top of the table near the head of the bed, that you should properly position him well.
And one must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, just as we have mentioned. and treat each accident as it is due.
Regarding the fracture of the hand bone
When the bone of womanhood is broken, she should be placed in an enlarged seat, then tilt to the part of her back and held behind.
then fill the bag with cotton from the patient's nature, and put as much in as it can hold.
then stand the woman up and lift her back little by little, and then push in the cotton until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and aligns the bone with its natural position.
And when it is about to urinate, wrap with cotton, and after having urinated, if it resets itself, thus make seven days or so. If it is healed, and if you see this, take a sheeps' bladder, tie cloth to the opening, and pour all the contents into nature. Then blow through the cloth until the inside of the bladder is empty. Nature will restore the fracture;
Then be filled with cotton and leave so for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm or woman's body is broken, restore it as we have said in the thigh bone.
And these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and effort to it; listen to my book.
For the fracture indicates various pathways for restoration in several cases. Then let us proceed.
In the rod, when it is broken, it takes an oatmeal shape and inserts the rod. Then wrap with a dressing around it, and leave for three days or as needed on it, and it will be healed quickly.
Of fracture with a wound
It is necessary for those who have a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, as long as the sinews we mentioned confirm this.
And if the wound is healed, and there remains lead poisoning, unless you have other things, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, as long as abscesses do not appear.
; they can. the same:
And if the broken bone is visible above the joint, it must be gently set into place with your hands, in slight extension.
And if the extension does not fit to make your hands equal, use this instrument of iron which is 7 or 8 inches long, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound. and therefore you will need your barber to grasp it 3 or 4 times, depending on what is needed for each breakage treatment.
and make it round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and leave some room at the front end.
And it is called "palanquin," so that the shoulder head must be placed under the visible part of the bone. And he must set it once so that it returns to its place, ensuring they are equal on either side. And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot properly take hold of the bone, then it must be cut off until the splints have power.
And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, use the handle of an appropriate instrument for this purpose, either cutting or sawing, to your ability.
then remove that which is embedded in the bone with a sharp and small scrapes.
And when the bone is returned to its place, if the patient feels great pain afterwards, believe that it is not in its natural position.
If you do so that it returns to its place, then wrap the wound in a fine black sticky pitch, and neatly if necessary. and do not put any salve or other substance on the wound that may contain oil, so as to prevent decay.
then apply dressings as you have restored the beone, and leave the wound exposed, bandage the covering completely, according to the size of the wound, and ensure well that the wound is not strained with the fracture.
And many times have foolish physicians done this to patients, causing them harm or death on numerous occasions. So it is the application less harsh and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large and you suspect no accident has occurred here as we have said, and there is pain at the location, then it does not require placing on a bed of eggshells. but wrap around it, in place of eggshells, with durable fabrics and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days that pus flows from the wound, remove what you have placed on it, and apply healing salve to the wounds, as with a four-part remedy and similar substances.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes relaxed and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be fitted with a splint so that the bow supports it lightly.
And if several days pass and it cannot be straightened but continues bent like this, for there are small bone fragments, you must clean the wound with gauze and remove all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
And if an abscess comes to the area, or another form of decay, it is necessary that you treat it, as described in this chapter before.
And when the bone is fractured and protrudes from the limb, as in the hip or shoulder, with other similar large limbs, do not attempt to pull it out, for many times this leads to death, but leave it until it heals.
By chance it may occur through him after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you know how.
and if you do not know how, leave it alone.
We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant thing to see is how the limb is shaped. and perhaps cannot perform its natural functions.
Thus beware if it feels fresh: if you administer medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, among others, then take any of these things individually or all together, and boil them with tonic wine, vinegar abundance, or vinegar essence. And the metal is inserted into the nostrils, and it is tightened well, and should not be loosened for days.
And the metal is inserted into the nostrils, and it is tightened well, and should not be loosened for days. Then dislocate it again, and repeat with another one until there are no more bone fragments.
or you strain over a well-made piece of wood; for the property of the wood is such that it draws out all swelling on top of limbs;
and if the bone fragment is as hard as stone and needs to be removed, do so with a saw, and create the excess visible. or you reduce it by any means necessary until it is removed, and heal as long as it remains clean.
A limb which is weak after healing
When the broken bone is restored, and follows after weak and delicate limbs for many reasons: Because one is too tightly bound, and was not loosened as it should be. Or because there were too many bindings, and could not come to relieve the limb; Or due to excessive bleeding; Or because of overly large movements, not at the right time; Or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
And the treatment should be that you feed the patient well and make the body tender until there is an increase in blood within him. And administer baths, and give joy and comfort to him.
Then apply poultices to the limb, such that it draws significant nourishment, and often raises its temperature with water compresses until proper nourishment reaches the limb. And returns to its natural position.
After injury has healed, the limb becomes twisted When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken openly, and the shape of the limb is unattractive, yet it still maintains its natural function.
If you do not trust the foolish who claim that the limb should be broken anew entirely, and many fools in our land have done so.
And these treatments are blamed, leading to great harm, and possibly death.
However, if the lumps and tortures are recent, it is necessary to treat them with hot water, or boiled softening herbs such as witch hazel leaves, roots, melilotus seeds, and similar things.
Et you apply the soothing paste like diachylon well made, and take the mucilage of wormwood, and mix it with fat from geese or oil of sesame, and make a poultice on top.
And you take the animal fats, and grind them with fine bran, and add certain medicines that reduce swelling.
And at no time is an inflamed bone treated by continuously rubbing with wet hands. And thus, adjust the position of each limb.
And if the tortuousness is old and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be pried open with iron, so that you must cover it completely with a slightly sharp scalpel. and apply compresses and pay attention during treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs, if necessary now reset without delay.
For if delayed, the eyes may become inflamed, and possibly it can be returned to place with difficulty.
For this is why it must not be moved when it has swelled. Many times, it brings about phlegm and other pains.
Also, when this occurs, have the patient drink wine, then let them rest until the swelling is calmed.
Then apply warm water and oil to the limb, then gently massage each part as treatment comes into place in its proper location.
.
Occasionally, the jawbones may be dislocated, and dislocations of both occur in two ways: or they are slightly out of place from their original positions, and soften a little. or they are entirely dislocated and tilt towards the painful side, causing drooling from the mouth that they cannot contain, nor can they close their mouth, which also wraps around their tongue with speech.
When dislocation is slight, it can return on its own in various positions.
If it is complete and well-formed, then one must quickly reset it without delay.
And in such a manner that the minister washes your head and inserts a small spoon into one of his hands at the root of the lower jaw's dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts. And let the other hand be ready to balance it out.
Instruct the patient to relax his jawbones and move them in all directions. And then put it inside of its place until they are balanced equally; and take your right beforehands:
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jawbones are together, use warm water and oil to gently move them.
Do not attempt the reset otherwise as we have said.
And when they are returned equally, and the patient's mouth closes well indicating softening sensation, then place on cloths soaked in a padded cover made of rose oil and wax, and lightly bind with loose ties.
and the patient sleeps on his back with his head between two pillows, ensuring he does not move to either side or strain to shift, but gently eats soft meat until the pains have subsided, and the jawbones are numbed.
and then provide him what he wants to eat easily, and do not work at opening the mouth for eating or drinking until his jawbones are well numbed and soothed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not returned to their original positions, fever and usual complaints may come, and perhaps abdominal issues, or possibly complete vomiting of bile alone.
And when you see this, then you know it is dislocation. and many times death occurs to those who experience it, within nine days.
The hernia cannot dislodge from within the ribcage and below, and it is never displaced once formed, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back with legs apart, and extends their arms. and then press firmly at its place with your hand, and it will return.
then apply the plaster and bandage, and strain (or tighten).
and the shoulder that is towards the armpit cannot dislocate. if not possible, and if it does dislocate at any time, then reset to its place as we have said.
then apply the plaster and bandage, and strain (or tighten), and advise the patient to rest until they are well again.
And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it has moved out of its place.
Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
by which one is that it dislocates to the bottom part of the upper arm; and the second is towards the lower part; and sometimes upwards, but this occurs rarely.
and it does not dislocate backwards from the shoulder, nor inward into the muscles.
and sometimes downwards towards the upper arm, especially in those who have little flesh, as it happens quickly to them.
but for those with ample flesh, it comes out scarcely, and returns slightly.
And sometimes there are individuals with blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess; they think it is dislocated due to this.
Indeed, you must test it, until you are certain. And then begin the treatment.
And dislocation is known when it moves towards the shoulder blade, and there is a noticeable difference between the affected and healthy shoulders, and you will find their various manifestations. and at the top of the shoulder, you will find a hollow, as if it were an eye socket. and the patient cannot return their hand to its normal position or move at all.
and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly observe it at the socket.
and this type of dislocation cannot be corrected unless it occurs anew or if the child is ill.
And the method is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upward, then place his hands under the shoulder, and firmly lift the dislocation back into position. And the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below. if done quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said on the following days, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water. and it should be treated with soothing and calming substances such as an infusion of valerian and fenugreek and honey in water, then treated.
then place a strip of linen equally not too soft nor too hard on the patient's back under the shoulder blade, then align their heel with the strip, and gently lift the head of the dislocated shoulder.
And other remedies apply to the patient's head, so it does not move downward. and when that shoulder returns now, you see if you reset according to this manner:
and ensure that a physician who is taller than the patient is present. and stand on the side of their chest, push up the shoulder from under the seat of the patient, lift the seat to the top, so that the patient hangs in the air. and other remedaders guide the hand of the patient downward toward their belly. If the patient is too lightweight, accompany them with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And the reset can also be done in another way.
and it is that you plant a long pole into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is aligned as with a spit, neither too thick nor too thin. Then it is to be put back under the patient, but that he has soft cloths over, and the patient lies long on his side.
Then extend his hand towards the other side gently, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not wish to return for all these reasons that we have mentioned, then do this remedy: Take a shing of two arms in length and four fingers wide, which has the head turned so that it can enter evenly from under the seat, as follows:
Then place soft cloths on top of his side so that it does not slip the patient, then put under the seat where the patient lies.
Extend his arm over the length of his side, and place the shoulder on top, with the hand at the head of the arm, then put the arm under an arbor of a wide stool, extend the hands downward, and let the body hang towards the other side. The joint has been dislocated for some time now.
And when it is set in place, however you do so, it must be that you put under the saddle a staff of woolen yarn, then apply a poultice of powdered medicine, with incense and ointment of frankincense on all around the shoulder, then tighten it away from the saddle quickly, and wrap the hand at its neck, leaving hands hanging thus.
And it is necessary that he rests little by little, until the limb is comfortable, because it will recover sooner.
and then rest more after 3 or 7 days and move it; and if it is firm and not weakened, then healed.
And if the joint is forced out due to moisture that caused it or another reason, you must apply three punctures with cautery as described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this and it dislocates again after e7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift any arm upwards, then understand that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is pinched or stretched or weakened. and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the worse and the muscles or back, it occurs due to impact and extension of hands, and by another method.
And care until it becomes healthy again.
And if after healing come tremors in the limb and later movements, the patient uses them many times until those tremors cease, returning to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the knee
Seams that the shoulder joint is dislocated to points, and returns to its point of dislocation.
And it is dislocated from all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, as one can see clearly and feel distinctly. And it is dislocated according to each type of displacement. And when joining the patient's joint properly with the healthy one, you should see it clearly. For the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it immediately as abscesses appear, for if they arise, the repositioning would be more difficult.
and perhaps cannot be realigned at all in some cases, especially when it is behind. if worse than other types of dislocation, causes more pain, and possibly leads to death.
And restoration is possible when it can be realigned, you extend your hands on both sides of the limb. and spread the arms wide, placing the hands around it as indicated by its circumference, above and below, and pushing the joint back together or at the base of the palm until it returns to its original position.
When dislocation is before, it returns when the hand doubles to itself and the root of the palm's edge that has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, perform strong straightening.
And there are two ministers who extend the arm and support it with their hands, so that it does not move during extension.
Then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a long and wide piece of cloth around it.
And when the wind reaches the joint at its connection to the hand, anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly until it heals.
And when it is in place, put on dry paste with egg yolk, then bind it firmly, and support the arm at the sore patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then unbind it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, then dislocate it again and leave it.
And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then repeat the manipulation and reposition it, leaving it so for a few days until it is firmly set. Then dislocate again.
And if it feels weak after the resetting of the joint and moves again, then bathe and rub well, pressing until it is eased. or you place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then reset it, and have the patient take a bath. and when it is sweaty, rub the joint gently, then replace the sheep's wool on top, and then have the patient bathe. And thus do so twice or three times until it is put back in place.
and if you see, then apply a warm wheat paste mixed with butter, and strain over it.
so it shall return to its proper place.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand's dislocation occurs, and its return is easier than other dislocations. Nevertheless, it must be quickly returned to its place at the same hour as it is dislocated, so that it may swell or an abscess may form hotly.
And the resettling is that you place the injured hand under a table, extend its fingers, and align the wrists equally so that it places its palm over the dislocation's appearance, and hold until it returns.
It is also necessary to check if it is properly positioned. Then instruct the patient to place their back on a table for extension and retraction. If the dislocation is on the back of the hand, make the patient place their hand's back against a table, and let the doctor position their hand under the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, apply the soothing touch of asterisked straps and let them rest until they start to ease again.
And if it cannot be tolerated, and you cannot place it back in position for several days, as the twisted joint persists.
and neither providing food nor water to the patient until their hands are sufficiently healed, and they can grip nothing at all. then tell that the nerves or the artery have been cut.
If there is no other remedy than to apply fire near the wound, and sometimes it serves no other purpose.
And when the hands are at rest, place them on the platform as we have said, then grasp and leave for 5 days, then release and let it be so.
And if they cannot move well, and there is no trembling, then apply warm water with millet, and rub until it feels fine.
Of dislocation of the hand's fingers
Dislocations never occur in both directions of the hand, neither to the back of the palm nor to the belly;
Then they are stuck in place, and the dislocation is returned to its pockets until it heals, then support the head of the hand and turn it towards the part where it is dislocated.
And leave it for two days, then set it straight again after that day;
and from there bind it as we have said, leaving the joint for a day, then making it move again, and rejoining the nut.
and do this often until it is narrowed, and do the same if dislocated to the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed.
And likewise do, when it is dislocated from another side.
For the dislocation of the spinal column in the back
When the spinal column or the neck is dislocated, if there are multiple occurrences and no remedy, it quickly kills the patient.
And the signs are such that the discharges jump up forcefully without willingness and cannot be held back, causing many times any limb to become weakened or affecting either both knees or one of the two arms or a single one.
And often it moves the spine into four parts;
That which moves to the rear is called "gilbo-itis":
The treatment is that you should beware if "gilbo-itis" arises from childhood: If there is no remedy or healing for the entirety of it.
And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things are the ancient methods of treatment with great words, where there is no benefit in all.
However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed remedies in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes upon the breast, there is neither remedy nor health;
and also those that arise directly in the ribs, and cannot be treated except for those precisely which come to the back, as I say;
and it is that the sick person be stretched over their face one place evenly, and have strain from them, so they do not writhe;
then apply a hot iron to the head in clay formed, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the neck of the sick person, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and ankles;
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the top and the other at the joints, among the two sharpened instruments.
And they should be well secured, and position the instrument as we have said, with his palms on the spine forming a straight line until it is properly aligned.
And if it does not return with this procedure, take a stick three arms long and sharpened from the front, and place the patient to one side, then set the head of the stick at the front above their pelvis, and then insert the middle part of the stick into the spine. And position the minister's hands on the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see it, make it with a turnkey that turns to the hand. And you should insert two wires through the head of the arm with great swelling, and toward other parts, and between each wire, there should be enough space.
And in each wire, the turnkey must fit correctly, and the wires should be firmly secured in place, so that they do not move.
And between each wire there should be an additional turning wire where the links can turn, and in these turns two small wires of enough length to rotate the turnkey.
And then secure the link among the elements on the turnkey toward the head, and the other link towards the extremities at the other turnkey, and each servant rotates their turnkey along the entire chain, and the master aligns the spine as we have said.
When they are aligned, place the drying plaster with plenty of wax, then the cotton, and then the splint from a tablet three fingers long to properly position the glenoid cavity and the healthy part of the spondyle, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and let the patient rest quietly until healed.
If no issue arises by the end of healing, administer softening and soothing medications with the splint we have mentioned previously. And never administer a piece of iron, and ensure that there is no appearance in the back part of the spinal column, and take care to avoid dislocations. And it is the bone that has opened up, which is why there must be no assumption. There might come death by chance.
Understand that the joints of the hip and shoulder only come from dislocation alone, not like other joints.
and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: into itself and outward, and front and back;
and more internally than externally, and rarely dislocates front and back.
And the recognition of an internal dislocation is such that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens up more joints for the injured than the healthy, and the injured cannot double its knee at fire; And it is the leg which is near an inflamed abscess due to the fact that the hip joint approaches there.
And the sign of those for whom it occurs is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And for those who suffer from it in front, they should keep their leg extended properly according to recovery. In any case, do not double the pain in the neck, and if you wish to make it move beforehand, it cannot be done, and retains its urine, and swells with anger, and as it moves forward, passes over the heel.
And the signs for those who suffer behind it are such that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, anger is alleviated, and the head of the hip to its place below the ribs.
The return of this type of dislocation is that you should reset it where the dislocation occurred first, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment. and it must not be assumed to have healed.
And in cases where the dislocation is recent, and it's one of the four types of dislocations, you should quickly return the joint, push down on it and pull upwards, and move it to the right and left. By chance if it returns, no further treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must select a strong minister and bind the leg firmly with two hands or one band around the knee. and another minister extends his hands over it in such a way that he places them below the kneecaps, then tightens a thin band around the thigh. and another cuts the head off the sling.
and all extend upwards and downwards at once so that the patient is lifted from the ground once and hangs suspended.
This method of extension is common for 4 types, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
If not, you must apply treatment to its kindred.
When dislocation is in the jawbone, you must support the patient on their sound side and then place a band around the base of the thigh, and the part that is below the groin, then extend the band upwards towards the groin and towards the hip.
Then gather other ministers of men by their arms, and embrace the large joint of the crooked thigh, extending it forward fully. If it returns to its place now;
And this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then one must bind the two feet of the crooked leg together with a strong flexible ligature above both heels and knees, and keep the affected leg extended further than the other.
Then hang it from the head of a staff, with two long arms outstretched on the ground;
Then command one minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and have other ministers hang alongside with the crooked leg, fully embracing the thigh, as now the joint quickly returns.
And when the dislocation is on its way out, you should place the patient as mentioned in those with gangrenous wounds, and properly separate the ligaments above the affected leg, and at the knee likewise.
Then apply two cauterizing agents: one on the head and one elsewhere on the body, then insert a cauterizing rod between the buttocks near the affected area. And have moistened bandages placed around it so that the patient does not move, then each minister moves towards him and he aligns his hand with the dislocation equally.
If it returns, that is well.
If not, place on a board and press as we have said with sprains, and touch the patient near the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be that you extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said. And place his hand on the painful side of the affected area, then press with the other hand and extend towards the groin.
If the dislocation is in its place, do not extend the patient's arm or lift it off the ground. Instead, let it lie as if the elbow were dislocated when it was set wrongly during sleep on both elbows, as we have said above. And let the ligament be stretched as we have described beforehand, and one must apply pressure to the joint against the board. And it will reach a point when the patient extends his legs, which will be equal. Then approach the buttocks and place the splint, and secure with a bandage so that the elbow does not move. And let it rest for three or four days, then release it, and place the splint again.
And if you see that they are equal, then strain as before, and let it be for three days.
Then release it gently, and allow the limb to heal completely, until the member is comforted.
Of shoulder dislocation
The joint dislocates in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward.
and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not return to the hip, understand that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back to his face, and put your foot under his.
Then take its thighs with your palms, and pull them apart between your thumbs, then bend the two shanks of the thigh firmly. and other ministers extend their foot, until the kneecap returns to its place, with signs that it bends well on its thigh slightly.
and apply the plaster over it, straighten the leg at the hip, with bandages firm for three or four days, then release.
and do not make the patient walk too soon until their limb is healed.
And if the limb is not much affected, it must be firmly supported strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the elbow, until it becomes well-aligned.
Regarding ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes numb, never fully dislocated, within and without.
And signs are such that the ankle is swollen, and try before reaching the part from where it dislocates.
The repositioning should be gentle, and he must stretch it lightly into his hands when barely touched.
When it is dislocated completely, one must make the patient sit upright directly and gently move the limb using a staff outside through the leg above the ankle.
Then raise the foot towards your right hand, and then towards the left two times, then extend it upwards, and place the foot firmly above.
And do this twice as we have said, bending and extending the foot;
If it returns, that is good.
If not, repeat the procedure since it returns.
If it cannot return this way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground and firmly press a staff between their thighs, with linens around them so they do not shake.
Then dye the minister's thigh, and another minister extends his foot with ropes or strips of cloth so that he ties them around the neck of the foot. Then each minister is extended equally, and the ties are pulled tight between their thighs to hold the patient steady as they stretch them.
Then place the mirror symmetrically for the dislocation at his hands, and another minister dyes the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return rapidly.
And when it reaches the point of no return, apply the poultice and plug thereon, strain firmly, tie the foot to the leg, and watch for the veins behind the ankle that the ties are not too tight.
Then let it rest for two or three days, and if he improves, bind it loosely.
Then remove the bandage on the fourth day or sooner, and forbid the patient from moving for four days. And if he improves before this time, it is not assured that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes there, one must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
From the shoulder dislocation and its treatment, let's discuss a few related matters: by;t what d. If:
And if the dislocation is in any of his shoulder or foot bones, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on a level surface or a table straight up, and place your foot under the joints affected, then press firmly with your foot until they return.
And when they are even, and nothing appears amiss, place two fingers of your foot under the sole and strain firmly, then let it rest for three days before removing. And make it rest until it is set right.
For both wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one sees that it needs to be restored, often happens that the patient dies:
If you are not overly confident in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow to judge;
And begin with soothing treatments for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of health. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscess may heal there.
And when the limb is in place, then apply soothing treatments for hot abscesses and care for the wound as needed with dry ointments.
And with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones will be displaced, and treat them as we have described in simple illnesses.
And be wary of succumbing to fear, as I have advised, for it is fitting according to your Maker and the wisdom of armament and body.
