Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus, the sentence begins with the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Therefore, my sons, since I have committed this book to you, which is the last in the science of medicine, by its completion it shall be completed through you, and by its explanations, and by its declarations, it is evident to me that I commit this treatise on surgery to you.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since surgery is almost completely abandoned in our region and in our times, it is greatly endangered by peril, and the science of it is lost; there remains only a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which are misunderstood and lead to error and confusion before their intentions and power are understood and their art is extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It appears to me that I will organize this treatise in the second way, through explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the shapes of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, along with the addition of the declaration, and the preparation of them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	However, the reason that a good craftsman is not found with his skill in our times, is because the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes understanding the joints and forms of the members; knowing the connection and separation of them; having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, their number, and their function; and the origin of blood vessels, quiet vessels, and pulsating ones; and the location of their emergence.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said, "A name is nothing, but in the work it is much, and especially in the art of the hand."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	However, we have already said this in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not acquainted with what we have said about anatomy, is not fit to avoid error and risk causing death for men, as I have seen many times, because some are uneducated in this science and abandon it without its knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in her neck, causing a large amount of blood to flow, which resulted in the woman dying among others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man's body that had been suffering from the disease for some time, and the stone was large; he came to him and removed the stone with a piece of the bladder, causing the man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I myself called for it to be opened, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a blacksmith who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, cut open the fracture with pulvines and pins with strong construction, but did not let the wound breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Approach the wound according to their wishes, and close it, and let it dry for several days and command that we unbind it; and this way it will be until the flesh and limb are healed, and it may lead to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	Then you should be called to it, and prepared to undo the bandage, and wait for peace and let him endure his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption was already confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread through the member until the patient is in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor found an abscess cancerous, and it became ulcerated near some days, until the evilness of it was magnified by its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancerous tumor is full of melancholic humor, so it may not spread to everything, but only to an area that suffers from it all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two divisions: one is the operation associated with health, and another is the work in which there is the greatest risk of danger.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already experienced this in all places of this book in which there is an operation in which there is error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and let go of it, so that the fools do not take a wrong path and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your weapons with solicitude and with the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Take the best path for God's grace to lose and attain salvation and laudable succession, and leave behind the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and withdraw your weapons from what terrifies you, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not mislead you: for more remains for your glory, and thus also in this world and forever to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulia then said in some of her monasteries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat evil illnesses, so that bad doctors are not named".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first section of the first division.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered for the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the ironwork of the cauteries, and about what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of cysts and perforations, and of abscesses, and of plagues, and of extraction of sacs and similar to those, all in one chapter and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third division.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is ordered for the restoration and dislocation, and cure of twists and similar to those; the chapter is divided into the foot, and forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and acute medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	It begins with the treatment of everything in the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary that I say the quality of the benefits and harms of this cautery, and in what kind of circumstances cautery should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I will say that the discussion of the benefit of cautery and its harm is a long, intricate, and subtle discourse, and secretly hidden; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they have disagreed with each other, and my words are among the few of theirs, fearing tediousness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery applies universally to all matter or substances, except for two cases, which are cases of caution without substance.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of dry and desiccated matter with substance, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for illnesses of quality and desiccation, because the nature of fire is of quality and desiccation, and it is appropriate that dry and desiccated matter that is cauterized should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say the opposite of that, that cautery is beneficial in all dry and desiccated illnesses that come into the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and the humidity in it to the nature of fire, you find that the body of a man is extinguished by fire.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through the discussion of this, that I have experienced this myself on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is not necessary that this comes to the one who has already been explained and practiced in the chapter of cautery in a previous exercise, and has come to know the diversity of the cases of men and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of these, and the accidents of them, and the time span of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other cases, there is no fear for you, and especially in cold and wet illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on these, and there is no disagreement about the benefit of cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Understand, sons, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it is above cautery as medicine burns, is because the fire is simple, its action does not extend to the member being cauterized except for minor harm to the adjacent member.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine spreads to the member adjacent to it, and strong heat brings the disease in the ill member to worsen and accelerate.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not accomplish this; it is already known to us through experiment and the long duration of study on the art concerning the truth of causes; and because it is not lawful for me to reveal my secret hidden in the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the body and its expulsion of diseases, philosophical demonstrative speech, which could sharpen your thoughts, I shall abstain.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Understand, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause in the best time of springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the harm caused by an accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what the cauterization achieves, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay, it is feared that the evil of those who come with malice, which is greater than minor harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not think in your thoughts, or sons, that this is not believed only by the common people and foolish doctors, because the remedy of that illness which is cured with cauterization does not work at all times, and they pause due to its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think, because cauterization is not simply a medicine that alters the complexion and dries the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauterization exceeds medicine by the desire for its value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of them due to the accumulation of superfluidities in them, and what is obtained for them through their diet and similar things; but that the illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluidities and moisture, such as cauterization of teeth for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but only something small may occur.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this is not the right one, as I understand it, because I believe that it is not healing which benefits from medicine or any other reason for caution.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is in opposition to this; and I understand that the saying "cauterization is the last resort of medicine" is not because we administer the methods of healing for some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer improvement, but rather when the end of the illness has been reached, cauterization is administered and improves it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here onwards, understand that cauterization is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the meaning which I understand by the common people and the flocks of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and its sublimity of substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cauterization does not make any difference, because this is not absolutely true, as I already have proven and discovered that it does not do anything except in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron as they said; but when you perform cauterization with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the amount of gold that you want according to its cost, and it prepares to receive friction; if you place it on fire some layers so that the artificer can work with it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cauterization with iron must be done more gently and more carefully in the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have organized this chapter on cauterization according to the chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I alleviate the demand for it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization for pain in the head due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is for the coldness and moisture in the head, which is the cause of the swelling and multiple abscesses called corissa, from the forehead to the hairline and flowing ears, and multiple sleeping, and toothache and headaches, and generally of all illness that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, sodium, apoplexy, and similar ones in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the illness and the age and habits of them.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Approach and command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a chair and place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then pause your hand at the base of your palm above the nose between your eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the place you mentioned is reached, mark it with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cautery which has this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place it on the marked spot and press down gently so that it descends, while your hand should be gently tightened around it, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, if you see any part of the bone exposed, as with grains of sand, raise your hand again, and if it does not turn back, use another tool, if it is frozen, until the bone that I told you about is visible.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place it over the burned area in bandages and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the location with a strong four-part medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	It has been said that when the wound remains open, the best thing to do is to apply honey, as it is better and more helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Some have said that the vertebra should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should be held in place until a piece of the spinal cord is burnt off.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then scrape away the part that is touching the bone and treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Some have said that when the cautery reaches the nerve, it should be pressed into the bone forcefully until the bone cracks, and this is the shape of the probe:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They believe that the vapors from the head will exit from that spot.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	The wound should be kept open for a long time and treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	However, in my opinion, these two types of cautery are not beneficial to everyone, but only to certain individuals out of fear; and you should discard it, because it is better for the patient's health when possible, as the head is more susceptible to damage from prolonged heat due to its constant exposure, especially if the patient has a frail constitution.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and from that point on, avoid this procedure for the sake of the patient's health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	On head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head of a patient, and it is treated with lancets, hooks, capirushers, ointments, plasters, guaze, needles, blisters, and similar remedies, especially if cauterization has already been attempted but did not improve the situation, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong or frail; if it is strong, do not hesitate to cauterize again with a different cautery tool.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Approach the cautery to that spot on his head and use it until the scalp is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Measure the amount that has been calculated and make an incision in the scalp to expose the bone at that location, which is called the "foramen" - this is the location where a ventous vein is usually found. Then use a cautery to burn and seal off the wound on the back of the head where the incision was made.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	Then release your hand from there, and do not expose the bone, as the patient will experience a great pain different from the pain caused by other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Tell the assistant to place this cautery in its location, as the cautery used for burning the corners and top of the head is more subtle than the one used for other locations on the head; this is the correct way to do it.
Capitol ters.	Title: Tightening
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Treatise on Modern Migration Cauterization
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is persistent pain in the scalp or spreading pain into the neck, medications that modify the head should be administered along with other treatments as I have described in the treatment of diseases; if this does not help, then cauterization should be done in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Take a salve of alum, scour it and remove the edges of both sides with a knife.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Approach the location of the pain on the temple with a thin lancet and make an incision until it penetrates deeply enough to create a small cavity, but ensure that it remains hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Place a piece of damp cloth over the area with strong compression and leave it for three hours; then remove the alum, let the wound heal for two or three days, and place a plaster over the moistened area until the spot turns black.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Cure that which is inflamed until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medications that I have written about in the second treatise on burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Cauterization with iron can be done in this manner: fire for the cauterizing tool, and here is the method for that.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called claus clavilhs (key nails), as the tip of it is shaped like a clove with some curvature, and in its middle part there is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Place your hand over the location of the pain, and hold it there - to prevent the archery that is about to come from being disturbed - and rotate the small iron tool slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity that is pressed by the scalp in this manner is too large and causes bleeding, raise your hand to ensure that the artery, which is nearby, is not pressed, preventing blood flow.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Approach a wound with salt water and cover it over the area, leave it for three days; then approach with a linen cloth stitched, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, cauterize the end of the swordsmith's finger according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery during this modern procedure.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Title: Ancient Cauterization of Hernia.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating a hernia with the remedy you have mentioned in the previous cure and in the section on diseases, and if that treatment does not help, and sometimes because of the illness that does not respond to the remedy you have mentioned for the first cautery or the cauterization with fire, then it is necessary that you heat the cauterizing iron until it becomes white-hot, because this signifies the spot of pain marked with a line of appropriate size, and if that cannot be done, hold it for a moment and then pierce the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jaw, which must remain healthy for chewing, and that the ligament is not adhered and the nerves that are near it, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut off, because in the cutting off of it there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not careful or experienced; leave the operation for a while at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find the regulations for dealing with blood flow from an accident of the artery according to its method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you see this illness that does not respond to the cautery and if you find the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have recorded, and heal the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on arterial constriction with cauterization using two knives, and this cauterization is more effective and appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Title: Cauterization of Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is cured by medicinal causes or other treatments as mentioned in the section on diseases, but the pain persists, then burn the cautery, which is called a point, and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Approach the point towards the burning, and place it around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circle of each example if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	With the cautery of the ear lance slowly, little by little, because you will feel the place where to stop.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If the cautery of many points is performed on the entire ear, and this is done, then heal the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Title: Cauterization of Torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and treated with cauterization is nothing but the species that come from the plague, as we have mentioned in the section on diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that enter by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When treating that species of torture with jars, poultices and liniments, and if your treatment does not work, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first one is the lancing of the ear, the second a small one at its temple, and the third the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Pause your cautery on the contrary side of the affected area, because softening does not occur except in the affected part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is to cauterize it on the right side of the affected area, placing a small piece of charcoal on top of its head and another on its temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger used, and stop your hand with the cautery until the amount of the substance of the burn has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, it belongs to the blacksmith, its shape is like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is very delicate, and care must be taken to avoid excessive roughness in it; cut the knife thinly in it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area until it has healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the ancient method of cauterization for apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and the patient's condition is stable and they do not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all on the corners of their head; also on the forehead and the sides of the head as described before; and on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of cauterization is as previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	It has already been cauterized on the stomach opening, and it is later; take care of it as prescribed by the doctor.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the method of cauterization for forgetfulness caused by a blow.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient large and round pills in the beginning, as they will soften them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And shave the entire head of the patient and stop at the neck, applying the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Wait for several days, because this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do as the doctor orders, which has already been mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if the patient recovers well in this manner, then stop the treatment; otherwise, perform three cauterizations on the lower part of their head, starting from the highest point on their head and moving down towards the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Wait between each cauterization for the duration of the finger used, and take care of the cautery as prescribed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	However, if you wish to increase the treatment and the patient is tolerant of it, cauterize in the middle part; otherwise, cauterize on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care of the treated area until it is healed; make sure that the olive oil-based cauteries are as described earlier.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the method of cauterization for relief and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You should perform the softening treatment on the patient's head with jars and as previously described; shave the head of the patient, cauterize in the middle part of their head with a cautery, cauterize around all the corners of the head, cauterize at the base of the neck, and apply three cauterizations to the cervical vertebrae.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary for the treatment of severe softening of the body and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize the affected area with four cauteries on the lumbar vertebrae, and then cauterize again until the burn has penetrated deeply, and raise the hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And apply care to that which is to be healed, and this should be olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	In the tenth chapter, it is written:
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the Cauterization of Epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epilepsy is not cauterized but rather that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is necessary to treat the brain of the patient at the beginning with oil and with the other treatment which has been said in the division when the patient is strong and tolerates the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer gruel and gruel-like foods that are easy to digest, with the intention of improving their diet for several days.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the method previously mentioned, and another cautery on the occiput of the patient, and over each ear cauterize as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which have been mentioned, achieving paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae in the neck and the vertebrae in the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil cauterization as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	In the eleventh chapter, it is written:
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the Cauterization of Melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which have been mentioned for achieving paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excess declining into melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain as has been previously mentioned in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, then make an incision in a circle around it, and then pause that incision in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be held securely on all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause with a lint dressing; it is also appropriate for use as an old sheep's balm.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that area over the fire at a suitable temperature, which the patient will tolerate when it is applied to them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then apply that over the middle of the head in a circle and leave it in place until it is soaked through.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Give that to the patient every week once, with the other treatment for their good health until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area making small points as much as possible, but always have a well-ordered cautery at hand: this is the specialty of cauteries which moisten the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause that area in a cloth or bandage made of woolen thread.
Capitol .xii.	In the twelfth chapter, it is written:
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the Cauterization of Water Dropping into the Ear
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have recognized the onset of water in the ear through the signs which I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Let them bathe in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then tell them to rinse their head and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on each temple if it is the onset of water in both ears, or one cautery if it is the onset of water in one ear.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make incisions with a cautery on all veins and arteries that have already been tied off; let the cauteries be in a line at the level of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, apply some medicine to stop the flow, which is within your ability.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Capitol .xiii.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Capitol .xiiii.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Capitol .xv.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid becomes softened due to disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery, specifically a crescent-shaped one called a lunar cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows a small crescent shape with two cauteries all around, and they should be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery correspond to the width of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but only as much as the third part of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the eyelid cautery when the hair is transformed into parts inside and pierce the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelid hair is transformed into parts inside and pierces the eye, cauterize them in two ways, for there are two types of cautery: one to burn or one to use medicine to cauterize.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is to burn, tell the patient to pull out their eyelashes as when they pluck them, but extend and curl them; if you pierce it (the eye), then you must cleanse its wound, and then cover the eyelids with a bandage until the hair grows back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when the eyelashes grow and curl back, place a cloth on the patient's head and apply pressure to the eyelid of the eye with the thumb, following the shape of a holly leaf, and start the pressure near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place cotton soaked in hog's fat or chicken oil on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And bring fire to the shape of the cautery.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize on the shape that was marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the skin resembling holly leaf is burned completely and appears properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the cure of this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye contracted and the hair on it raised due to the piercing of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so lift your hand and let it rest there for three days, and then cover the cotton with a bandage until the scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that (eye) with eye drops until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hair returns for some reason and the eyelid is softened again, then perform the cauterization once more in the same manner as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it so that it is raised to its natural position, curl up and that it does not pierce the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with medicine to burn is that you tell the patient to pull out their eyelashes until they grow and curl back, and make a paper of cloth in the shape of a holly leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take a known powder and fresh live juice (of some plant). that is, The text advises to mix the known powder and fresh juice (of some plant) with haste so that it is not spoiled; spread it over the cloth shaped like a holly leaf and apply it to one or both eyelids, and cover the affected eye with cotton soaked in hog's fat. The patient's head should be on your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	The text mentions that the patient should rest the affected area on the medication and press it gently without causing discomfort until the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, which is similar to being burned. In medieval medicine, this could be understood as allowing the medication to take effect and work its healing properties on the affected area. The comparison to a burn suggests that the medication may cause some degree of discomfort or pain, but it is tolerable for the patient.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient perceives the sensation of the medicine, they should remove it and rinse their eye with water. Then consider if the eyelid has been raised as it should be, either by burning or incision (surgery). If so, then the operation is successful; if not, apply more medication on the unaffected area without pressing too hard and allow the healing process to continue until the eyelid is raised.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	The text advises to cover the affected area with cotton and bandage until the scar from the burn or incision heals. Then cure it with eye drops or another method until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, you must keep your operation under vigilant diligence so that no remedy falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes swollen for some days due to the skin's inflammation in the eye, then apply your medicine on that location where the eyelid is swollen. And do as before, and return until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Here is the form of mistletoe.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You should know that men's eyes vary in size and amount, so accordingly you make your treatment.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	It shall not be hidden from the one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula as I have said in the division of diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to hold their head on your lap, and have someone keep the patient's head between your hands in such a way that they are neither harmed nor agitated by holding their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Place a warm cloth soaked in oil or mullein juice on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then apply the hot iron that is shaped like this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is concave, such as the shape of a reed or a feather quill, with one end from which the iron is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should be penetrating into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it come out in that way.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, a concave one (thing) is better for the surgery.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place your hand over the cautery, which should be well ignited, and hold the patient's nose with a small cloth at the edge of the nose to prevent your hand or the patient from being disturbed. Then press the cautery on the boil and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery enters the bone at the beginning, it is good; otherwise, you should make another pass or two, as necessary. Leave it like that for three days, and then apply a bandage over the area with a dry dressing until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if it has passed more than ten days and is not healed, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine over it to expose the bone as necessary in its respective chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of cauterizing a fistula that some early authors mentioned: Press on the location of the fistula and open it, then place your hand in the resulting fissure as thinly as possible (the form of it), which should be about an inch of lead melted; hold your hand with good retention, and do not harm the patient so that the molten lead does not enter his nose. Cover the patient's nostril with alum of oil or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the method of cauterization and cure mentioned above, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer trachea through the nose and reduce the fistula into the nose as it comes in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Often fissures occur in the labia, especially in the labia of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when treating those fissures with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment does not improve, then ignite a small surgical cautery in this form (shape):
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the concavity of it should be according to the thinness of the spatula.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place that instrument carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissure.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And heal it with a dressing until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess appears on the uvula or palate or tooth roots, and it breaks open, becomes hardened, and forms a fistula, and you treat it but your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary that you ignite a cautery in the amount received by the fistula. Place that ignited instrument into the fistula opening and enter it until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and at the end do this once or twice. Heal it with what we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the pus is drained and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and burn the rotten bone as necessary in its respective chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of abscesses.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When abscesses are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicines but do not achieve improvement, then place the patient's head in your lap, and ignite the cautery in the form that is suitable for this, so that you hold the handle on the tooth and enter the cautery ignited quickly into it. Hold your hand with a small cloth over the tooth until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And lift your hand and move the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And have the patient rinse his mouth with salty water for an hour, and then swallow it, because the damaged tooth is closed, the swollen gum is strengthened, and the corruption of moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or worms, or the treatment with medicine does not achieve improvement, then cauterize it in two ways: either cauterize with a cowhide strip or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with a cowhide strip is that you take a strip of cowhide and cut it in a cup shape, then place it on the end of the bladder, immerse it with the bulleted cowhide strip, and press it quickly over the painful tooth until it becomes inflamed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Approach that cavity several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or linen in the previously mentioned compound, place it on the painful tooth and on that heated iron until the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire must be done carefully to avoid any burn or injury to the patient and ensure that the heat of the fire does not harm their mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then prepare the heated iron in the desired shape, place it on the tooth and keep your hand over it until the cauterization is cooled; do this a few times as the pain may subside that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	It is necessary that the patient holds the heated iron gently in their mouth with good support and keep it there for an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize as needed to the extent that is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of ectropion (an eyelid condition).
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extropion is caused by coldness and humors and is not amenable to digestion by medicines and you wish to induce digestion gently, then heat the iron in the following shape:
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the cyst is small, pause the cauterization according to the size of the cyst, leave it for three days and apply it on the linen or woolen cloth soaked in oil until what the fire has burned is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Apply care to that area with ointments, poultices and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or cauterization tool should be as shown here.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of raw wound of throat and constriction of vein.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the trachea of the lung and especially when this is accompanied by compression, then the patient must be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and the affected area should be cauterized using the gallstone juice at the site of the pressure.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Be careful not to cauterize the gallstone nor burn the skin around it but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that with another cautery you should close the joint of the neck at the lower end of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery used should be clamped in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Place that with what was described before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to excessive moisture, the patient does not have a fever nor does he have phlegm, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauterizations on the collarbone at the sites of pressure points (lion's paws); and another cautery in the middle of the leg between the nipples; and let the cautery be clamped in the manner previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make your cauterization point with the cautery called punctum, whose form was previously described in the ear pain puncture.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Make points at these sites; place that with what was described before until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery should have three prongs because cauterization is performed with that: one day, you can perform three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of the head of the assistant (possibly a surgical instrument).
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant (possibly a surgical instrument) is dislocated due to excessive lubricating moisture and does not return to its original position during the time of its return, you must leave the dislocation until it returns by itself, as we have testified; in that case, it is necessary at first to reduce the dislocation, and place the patient on his back or on his side; and place your left hand under the neck of the instrument and lift the skin that is on the inside part of the instrument towards the outside parts with your right hand if the joint is dislocated inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And place fire under the cautery, which has two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And place the cautery on the skin, allowing it to enter from one side into the other; and the figure of the cauterization will come afterwards with four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that (the cautery) should be thin according to the amount of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for this reason there are eight cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Place the cautery on pause for 12 hours with salt, and place the patient in tranquility, and the affected member should not be harmed for any length of time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is above and in that case, do this, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or multiple cauterizations, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture remains and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When moisture and gas accumulate in the stomach and this problem worsens, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, extends his arms and legs, and place three cauterizations: one cautery below the ribs by the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two cauterizations below the ribs of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery comes out; elongate those that are not aligned to prevent scarring.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is twice the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery should be as follows without additions. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a circular-shaped cautery according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized at the site that is afraid of this cautery: and it is that you point on the stomach according to the amount you want with tension, and then cauterize at those points; and place that with the treatment that was previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the foot occurs due to cold, moisture, or wind entering its normal structure and causing superfluous exit, the patient is treated as previously mentioned without any complications. It is necessary that the patient lies on his back, and then three cauterizations are applied according to this form and quantity onto the foot, below the iliac crest, at the position of a man lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cauterization be according to its thickness, and let the cauterizations be according to the length of the body straight ahead.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard with the cauterization tool.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the quantity of the medicine applied is equal to the size of the wound, and it is not properly adjusted; if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then make him sit, who has already spread out his limbs, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you can perform these cauterizations with a surgical knife, when you have the ability and discretion in this art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo the cauterization process, and ensure that the wound is properly cauterized so as to affect the entire body and reach the intestines, for the wound here is delicate; remember this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of a foot abscess with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you wish to incise or drain an abscess in the foot and you want to know if this abscess is located in the flesh of the foot or in its sheath, then if it is located in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences increased gravity and unalleviated pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the sheath of the foot, the pain will be greatly alleviated and often the doctors become weary of treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed on his back; and the location of the abscess should be pointed out; and apply fire to the cauterization tool that resembles a brush, in the form previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Cauterize with the tool and penetrate it into the abscess until the entire wound is burned, until it reaches the cavity, until pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to this abscess until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	It is not necessary to use this cauterization method for all cases, only when prolonged study of the art of medicine indicates its effectiveness in treating various illnesses. However, it is advisable to conduct experiments on this operation from time to time, but in any case, you should follow what has been taught, and that is best.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of wounds.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients used cauteries for the wounds of arthritis in a similar way to burn wounds, and you can take one long, dry lancet from the lancing set of arthritis, and it should be of the appropriate thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse that lancet in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a tool at the location between the neck and the collar; and make two small cauteries below the beard line, one slightly declining to the side of the foot, and two others along the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly towards the back; and another on the lower leg; and another on the stomach, and three on the back; and one in the middle of the thigh, and two more on both sides of the foot, below the lancet between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it's not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather keep it in the open during the procedure.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient men used a cautery iron similar to a ray and ignited it in that place which is between the ribs, until we reach that area near the abscess and it is drained, as has been said about the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with the cautery, there is no fear, because death can occur immediately at the site of the fistula, where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the spleen as previously discussed in the section on treatment and diagnosis, do not confuse this with your treatment. If you decide to use cauterization, there are three methods for doing so, all of which are correct, one being that you make three or four stitches according to the length of the spleen as shown in the figures of the cauteries in the foot section, a figure that precedes this one.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Make the distance between each stitch about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and perform the cauterization in the same manner as described in the cauterization of the foot section.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not compress your hand with the cautery, and have the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, which was previously mentioned in the section on dislocation of muscles. Elevate the affected area, which is near the left side of the spleen, so that the patient lies on their right side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Make your elevation such that you raise the affected area according to the length of the body, so that the stitches can be made according to the size of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Bring the two prongs together, ignite the cautery, and insert it into the affected area where they penetrate the other side of the spleen.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Remove the cautery and thus four stitches are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize using a single-pronged cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And apply the cautery only if it has not been used for several days, because this is more effective than other causes previously discussed in the treatment section.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize hydrocele but rather incision properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating hydrocele using the methods of treatment as previously discussed in the section on diagnosis and not confusing your treatment, it is necessary to cauterize it with four stitches around the testicle, one on the stomach, another on the foot, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae in the back, one at the base of the penis, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the size of the affected area.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then place the cautery open for it to heat up for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery lest they be agitated, and hasten to aid them with assistance in recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is to be cauterized should be oval as per the previous example, and it is that one which is used for cauterizing the intestines as per its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cauterization of feet and joints.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet become swollen with gouty dropsy and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the ball of the foot between the big toe and the little toe, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; lift your hand upwards, but do not let go completely, for the stagnant water drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is as follows: Place two cauteries on the joints, and in each joint make a cauterization with the pointed end of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cautery as long as the joint: Let one end extend beyond and the other a bit below the joint; and on each joint two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat the causes that have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of the abdominal organs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the organs of the abdomen are affected by cold and moisture that softens the tissues, it is the digestive and retentive power, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with methods of treatment and not confounded, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization due to excessive moisture, in such cases cauterize that with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries in the small intestine's circumference, with the fine pointed cautery; and on the alcatin (a type of hernia) with a large cautery or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area on the penis and hernias, and firmly apply two cauteries to the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for which you should not deviate.
Capitol .xxxiv.	This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	This line appears to be a title in the treatise, possibly indicating the topic or subject matter that will be covered in the following text. The translation of this line is: "On the ancient treatment of hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When nature itself produces ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what has been said in the division but without conferring its cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the base of the buttocks, below the two small and triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel through two holes.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is wet and his food is not spoiled, and the face has an ulcer, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as specified; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a cautery nail, leave the cauteries open for some time, and care for him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the treatment of an abscess near an ulcer by cauterization.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut an ulcer, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place your hand on the ulcer that has been cut, and apply heat to it with a cautery until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do this once or twice, for if the ulcers are numerous, you cauterize each of them as described, and care for them with salves until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more effective in treatment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the treatment of fistulas that are naturally produced in the dividing parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by that, heal him with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and has been corrupted with pus and moisture, then that which is fitting for such a case is to try to cure it with subtle means, and carefully measure the quantity of its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Place this heated cautery in this fistula and according to the depth reached by the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Place the cautery repeatedly on those corrupt bodies until they are immediately burned once or twice, or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or the body of the hernia, be cautious at those places; and do not perform this action unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Care for the place until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the location is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and remains so for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not removed, you should know that it is penetrating or in the bone and corrupted, or this will cause a reminder of those causes in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the treatment of running sores (ulcers).
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in running sores due to cold or thick moisture, and the patient's leg is numb as a result, it is necessary to cauterize that area on the sores with a cautery on each sore and a cautery nail that precedes the reminder.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	Then heat the cauteries with a small second one, so that there will be three lined up cauteries, and therefore they will be more effective in treatment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the treatment of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, you should cauterize it in the lower part, above the bladder, where the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	The length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the wound; cauterize that area with a cautery in the lowest part of the foot or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the process being treated.
Capitol .xxxix.	Title. XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the hernia.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is inflammation and moistness in the hernia, it should be avoided, as the menstrual flow from the area becomes corrupted, and its production is delayed. Furthermore, pain may occur due to this condition. In such a case, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have mentioned in the cautery of the bladder; and also with a cautery on the lower part of the hernia or two cauteries, ensuring that they are long.
Capitol .xl.	Title. XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moistness seeps into the ankle joint and causes its swelling, it is a sign that the area is inflamed, and this condition is characterized by the joint extending beyond its normal position when compared to the other joints.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation can be found where there is a bulge.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, as you should test the circumference of the joint by rotating it, ensuring that the joint falls into its correct position within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned before follows the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, you should cauterize it with three cauteries and an olive-sized cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Make the cautery according to the size of the ulcer in its entirety; and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle region and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what has been said earlier and nothing more, and this remedy is ancient. Therefore, you must make the patient purge himself of thick humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: cauterization with burning medications or cauterization with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to the two learned methods, of which one is that you should cauterize it on the ankle region with three triangle-shaped cauteries according to this form; and do so at a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the size of the finger and if the cauteries are olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, however, the cautery should be on the middle of the calf of the leg where there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle shape prescribed for the cauterization of ankle dislocation, which should encompass and burn the entire ulcer.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	However, if it extends into the thigh, you should cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh at the site where the pain is located; and one cautery on the hip for about four fingers below the fleshy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is a surgical cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the size of the ulcer.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain is extended to the area near the feet, you should cauterize it here where the pain is located with a cautery at three or four points or as many as needed for that location.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain is behind the thigh, you should cauterize it here with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterizations that you do not burn nerves or large vessels with the cautery, for this harms the patient and causes contractions.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen and heard of others who have cauterized on the hip and burned too deep in the cauterization, causing the leg to swell up until the thigh reached the foot, burning it, perforating and rotting all the flesh.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And apply this method with great caution, for it is deadly.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two separate places, you should cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise say in the cauterization of ankle, that this is the method: make a circle of iron with a circumference the size of a palm; and let the distance between its perforations be according to the thickness of an almond or walnut.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Inside that circle there should be another third; and the distance between them should be the size of a knuckle; and those circles should be open in two places; and the length of those keys should be one or two knuckles, and make the margins of iron on the circles properly decorated; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Let it be ignited in the fire until it glows and emits sparks; and place it on the ankle region with the patient lying down.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Therefore, cauterize it with three rounded cauteries in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Let it rest for three days; apply ointment to it with a border and let the wound stay open for several days; and care for it with enema until it heals.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	According to Al-Zahrawi: my son, we have used this type of cautery sparingly due to the fear of observing it, and because few have been found who care for it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But among the good cauteries, it is those that alleviate the pain at its location.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	However, cauteries with medicines adhering to them are those that you make two circles with a perforated armored plate in which the guaffo of iron is placed; its height should be two knuckles or however many.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And let the space between each one be the size of a finger; and let them be open both above and below, and let them contain something in between according to this shape:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Place your hand on the ankle region with the patient lying down, and press your hand on the ankle region; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be gradually heated by the fire, and hold it for about an hour, and let the patient bear the biting and squeezing of it - for this alleviates the pain like fire - until the pain ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then lift your hand towards the instrument and remove the foul water from the entire anus with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then let it rest for three days and wait until the blackness of the wound recedes, and wash it for several days, and the pus will drain out; this is helpful in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with poultice until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the body or the chest, place it in a position that allows water to be introduced as in the anal douche.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of anal douche, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and the cause of inflammation in both the anus and stomach, grind them together, strain and let it stand in a new wave where one side is pierced with a small hole, according to the amount that goes into the eye.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Let the other side of the wave remain undisturbed, and pour over it warm water containing alive alkali and the cause, which rises through a finger, then compress them with your hand well to achieve good compression, and let the hole that issues from the sharp water in the undisturbed wave enter into the other wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all the water, and pour over it more fresh alive cause and renewed alkali, because at this point it will have a very strong acute nature, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterizing other members, because the operation works like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of these medications are caustic, such as pitch and honey combined with sulfur in the right proportion.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	The Greeks recount an operation and healing for the pain of the anus and sciatica, which is highly effective, and it says that no other treatment is necessary, and that it heals in one go as recommended, because strong heat and washing with soap already has its effect on it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It should be applied with a wormwood plaster, and if wormwood is not available, fig leaves should be used; it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the anus where the pain is, or in the body, or in the chest, and left to act.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	It should be left for three hours or until the patient agrees to the healing process.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse it in warm water and when the body of the patient is warm, apply it to the skin, because the pain stops and heals.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Know that the use of cautery with these medications is not necessary except for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	However, Hippocrates says that when a sheep's vein is stretched and cauterized, it improves much more; the cautery should be applied in this way: take wool and immerse it in old oil, and place it between the toes and between the soles.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry sheepskin and inflate it with fire until carbonized; then place it on the wool and let it expand.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the anus and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called "cauterization of cows."
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some times pain occurs in the back due to various causes such as falls or blows or excessive evacuation, and due to causes similar to these, by infusion of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	A cautery should not be used except in this specific case which is caused by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, evacuate the patient with pillows filled and similar to them that should be made on the back where there is pain three fingers widths according to its latitude, but test with each finger if cautery or more is needed, according to the amount coming from the tolerance of the patient and the potency of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	Make a cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a medium-sized needle in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Sometimes this illness strikes infants; and the sign of its beginning in infants is that it affects their structure, causing the rising and movement to decrease.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it gradually weakens in the lower part of the back and the neck, which begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And since when you see this and wish to stop it, you should cauterize that area with a circular cautery in the following manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Take the cautery over the entire area of the vertebrae tightly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you want to, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three fingers widths.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The points are close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Treat the area within which healing has been indicated.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Also, beware that a cautery is not administered in jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humours that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout is cured by cold remedies and the pain does not return, perform cauterization again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is that you cauterize around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive oil cautery has this shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain moves towards the nails or other joints and this happens frequently, then you cauterize that area around each nail with three or four cauteries using the olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries are needed for this cautery, you cauterize that area and do not press too much with the cautery beforehand, only surround the wound with the dressing.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain moves towards the nail and the back, then administer the cautery as previously mentioned in the same chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the nails and it is called pus, you should make a circular incision around the nail bed as it rotates, and make an incision in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the nails, you should make an incision around the nail bed on each side and at the base of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain moves towards the shoulders or muscles after some days, you should cauterize those areas with the help of assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good management and reception of medications, because if it is done with good management and this cautery is applied, they will be healed, God help them.
Capitol .xlv.	This seems to indicate that we have reached the forty-fifth section (or chapter) of a text or treatise. However, without knowing the original language and title of the text, I can't be certain. Here's a possible line translation:
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture is suspected in the groin and the intestines are pushed towards the abdomen, then it is necessary to command the patient to fast on that day and use gentle measures to prevent further widening of the rupture in their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then place the patient on your lap and command them to keep their body closed until the wound is healed or the intestines reappear or the hernia becomes visible.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return that person to your side and apply pressure on the affected area with your hands to test the rupture on the pelvis bone, using the tip of your fingers at the divided parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then heat the cautery in the following shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it glows and gives sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the heated cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cauterizer straight, and press it against the pelvic bone until you feel the bone in the middle of the pubis; and repeat this procedure if you have not succeeded in the first examination to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Be careful and observe the intestine during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn the intestine, so as not to bring harm or grave illness upon the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you have not reached the bone with the cauterizer, do not consider your treatment a success.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	It is necessary for the cauterizer of children to be small and appropriate according to their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area where the cautery was applied with bandages for three days until the scar from the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that place with other unguents (ointments) until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain on their back for forty days, until the wound and ulcer are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary to withhold food from the patient according to the length of their treatment time, and to prevent the intestines from coming out due to the efforts of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time to remove the bandages after forty days, administer appropriate treatment gently, and keep them for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let him rest from work and replenish his food and drink, and abstain from violent speech, because using this method of healing will heal him completely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen and at the beginning, when it is necessary not to stop, then cauterize the rupture with a rounded cautery according to its size, and it should be similar to the third part of it; and treat that place as I have said, and do not neglect it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Previously, some people said that ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in the following manner, using this method of testing:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is drawn perpendicular to the latitude through the rupture, and another line above it; then press your hand with one cauterizer, but the first cauterizer is lighter and more suitable.
Capitol .xlvi.	Fifty-sixth Chapter
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of a Twist (or Hernia).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a pain occurs in some limb by accident or injury, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medications, then it is necessary to cauterize it using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cauterizer should be appropriate for each member in terms of size and shape, as well as their nature, location of the twist or pain, and its severity.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it heals with the first cauterization, that is good; otherwise, continue to cauterize it; because such pains are usually points of one member near another, so it is necessary to reach those points with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Fifty-seventh Chapter
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy (or Skin Disease).
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy cases are often treated with cauterization, particularly the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, if you want to cauterize it (the affected area), consider whether the leprosy is common and can be cured with what has been said in the division and not denied, or it is present and spreading, and fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient's entire body and complexion. If this is the case, then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and another just below it, moving the front to the end of the hairs; and both on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, place your hand with the cautery a little into it (the affected area) so that a small indentation is made on the bone and the scabs are displaced, thus alleviating the expiration of thick vapors; and cauterize over the tumor as prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If the leprosy has already spread on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries as mentioned in the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over both shoulders, and two cauteries over two spines of the neck, and six cauteries over the spines of the back, and a large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the wrists and one on each wrist, and two on the elbows, and two on the knees, and two on the thighs, and two on the shins, and hold the tendons of its feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over every toe of its feet, and over the folds of its arms.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the toes.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Know that the more cauteries you apply, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as happens with animals, for this reason their body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Place the cautery with flour of burnt eggs mixed with honey and the other cure inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stunned or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that stunned member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Let your cautery penetrate into the flesh a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Cure that (the cauterized area) with mouthwash until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes stupefaction in the limbs and feet, and the spine of the back, and damage to the nerves that affect that member is cauterized, and the stupefaction is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume this unless he who knows the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the body moving is present.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization for tumors that are cancerous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the tumors are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal rinses, then you cauterize over it with a cautery prepared a little according to the depth of the flesh into which it should be removed, so that the whiteness and color of it is alleviated, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Cure that (the cauterized area) with flour of burnt eggs and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and the blood of a dove or a hen, each part separately and all mixed together, and let it be limited by a cloth and placed over it until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization for crabs.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then you cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circumference of it as it is rolled up.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I do not see this, for I fear that it is ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more appropriate that it should be cauterized in the circumference of it with a circular cautery, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of sores.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a sore fails to heal in due time, either because of an excess of exudate or the patient's state, being elderly and weakened, having little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the healing of the sore; then cauterize around it with a small cautery, puncturing it several times; and apply a dressing that will promote healing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you wish to perform perforation with a cautery, then heat the cautery, which has the following shape: and dip it in the appropriate place of the sore until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the sore is in a place that is below the joint of the arm, to relieve the body; then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Ulcer is corruption that moves through a member, which corrupts it in the same way as dry wood consumes by fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see an ulcer in a location that requires cauterization with fire, heat the cautery iron with small and large points as needed in the location where the ulcer is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And apply cauterization all around until you eradicate all the corruption and there remains no cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And apply the dressing for three days and press it three times a day with oil mixed in until all scabs are eradicated, and all the corruption is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Care for it with fresh meat-based remedies.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the meat grows healthy without corruption, that is good; otherwise, you must repeat the cauterization over the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Ulcer is sometimes treated with acute medicine because it lies between cauterization and medication.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cauterization with fire is lighter in the pus-filled area.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And it has already been said that the treatment of this with acute medicine is in the division, and therefore choose it when you have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of wounds and their counterparts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	When a malady occurs in the areas below the foot that is known as a wound, and it is large, open, causing pain to the foot; cauterization in these cases can be performed in two ways: by fire or by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	And cauterization by fire is that you heat the concave cautery in the shape of a stylus pen, made from iron according to the size required for the entire wound, and with thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then, apply the heated cautery to the wound and rotate your hand with the cautery around the wound until it reaches the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave the dressing on for three days until the wound begins to drain pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Apply a plaster made with crushed wild herbs mixed with salt, and apply the plaster on it for one night, as this will eradicate the pus from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Care for the area with fresh meat-based remedies until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If the condition does not improve and continues to appear on the surface of the body, particularly in the more sensitive areas such as the abdomen or feet; then you must administer cauterization with hot water, taking a lancet made of copper, glass, or bone, and pressing it onto the wound. Fill the lancet with a small amount of boiling water, and hold your hand firmly around it while compressing the wound with your entire hand, ensuring that the edge of the lancet is pressed against the wound. This will allow the hot water to enter the wound through the opening, and you should wait for about an hour until the patient feels the burning sensation from the hot water before removing it, as this will help eradicate the wound and its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do as they are directed, bringing them one after another into contact with all of their bodies within the chest.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat the sores that the rust of nails is expelled from with sulphur, which causes flesh to grow in them.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs due to cold in the nerves or because of a fever caused by cold, or for any other similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the spinal column, between each vertebrae there should be one cautery; and on the feet, and on the stomach, use olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling subsides and hastens the healing of the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for accidents to the body (or wounds).
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When a wound appears on the body and becomes pustules that are formed from corrupt matter; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it is necessary to cauterize the entire area around the opening with a subtle cautery soaked in myrtle juice, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long erystic rust; or with cautery lenticular.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And at times it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of its evacuation in this manner; and if not done, it bursts, making it worse, and heals from that.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done with proper evacuation using lancet.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 60.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization for bleeding of an accident by cutting with a bowstring.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Occasionally bleeding occurs from a bowstring wound, which should be treated by cutting the plague that causes it, or by making an incision of lancet or cauterizing the limb, and similarly, it is difficult to stop the bleeding in such cases.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such a thing happens to you, hold it with your hand over the opening of the bowstring wound and wait until the bleeding stops on its own, and do not let it come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And wait for the olive oil cauteries to cool slightly, so that they are not too hot when applied.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take a small or large piece of cloth and place it over the location and plague where the artery has been cut, and quickly press on that vein until you have stopped the bleeding, and then cauterize it before the bleeding resumes and restrains the blood flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remain still and extract the cautery, then take another cautery from among the prepared cauteries in the fire, and do not stop until the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And watch that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that another mischief comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with cautery as said before, or with extraction where it has not been extracted, since when the extremities are burned and restricted, the blood is restricted, or tying it with thread or ligament for strong structure, or that it is placed on medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be tightened with pulvinar or compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But the one who administers proper restriction of it with thread and strong structure with cloth or by causes that burn and similar ones, should not be trusted but rather watched carefully.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it is intended to open the artery of that vein as we have said, and it is necessary to make a large incision into it until the blood is stopped from the main part of the wound, and on the artery, do not apply pressure; and above the artery, spray with cold water for great cooling until the blood clots and thickens; and bind in the place where there is necessity of cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Here begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision, perforation, punctures and of lancing, wounds and their similar.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that cautery with fire is appropriate and medicine for burning, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary in them, as well as the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter according to that method in order to alleviate the suffering of the patient, then on what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before I begin this, thread, cord, know that in this chapter it is for terror of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because thread should be used with great caution, since in the operation which is in this chapter many things are observed that can cause evacuation of blood, which is life, and the spurting of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of the wound or extraction of a splinter or incision of stone and their similar.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these, fear and trembling and in the most extreme cases death should be feared.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I advise you that this should not happen to you in which there is doubt, because some things that must be handled by men must be handled with many different methods of sickness.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them is one who will depart with his illness and it should be easy for him death, due to the severity of what he finds from his illness, and due to the length of his illness, and because of the illness there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those [who] give you money and orders, you hope for his recovery, but his sickness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, you should not consent to that one who comes to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than greed and avarice; and do not presume any cause concerning it unless you have certain knowledge of it which proves what is required of you, and to whom it applies through a suitable course.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your patients predictions and indications of where healing is converted, for in that there is help to you with acquisition of fame, memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding, do not abandon guidance and protection for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And this chapter is divided into sections as previously indicated in the chapter on cautery, the treatment of the head to the feet, so that you are relieved of what you seek and for which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often manifests itself in infants and that it should be treated with infant milk, and when the nurse tightens the baby's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it manifests itself because of a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not see this disease except in infants; and all those whom I have seen, I have considered them worthy of death, and so I consider their work to be unfortunate.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and his head was so swollen inside that it could not stop growing due to the great size of his head, and moreover, the humidity increased until he died from suffocation.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the skull and the bone or it is added behind the bone near the cranium.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in this case if the humidity is between the skull and bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision at the midpoint of the head with a slit along its length, and the width of the slit should be about two inches, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions made in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is behind the bone, it is a sign that you see the joints of the head opened on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press them with your hand at the inner parts and not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary to make three incisions at the midpoint of the head in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	extract all the humidity and tighten the incisions with gauze and feathers; bind it up from above with vinegar and oil for five days, remove the dressing and care for the wound with compresses and salves, tie the head with equal lengths; and feed the patient with dry food containing little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision, consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput or the front, right, left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repletion of water appear, and make the incision accordingly.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	Observe that you do not cut the artery and allow a flow of blood to escape, which will kill the patient due to the outflow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	This appears to be the start of a new section or chapter in the text. The Roman numeral "ii" suggests this is the second capital or main heading, following an introductory or first part ("Capitol .i."). Here's the translation:
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries, which are near the ears and called auricles, these are to be ligated (or cauterized).
Capitol segon.	This appears to be the start of a new section in the text, possibly a second subsection within a larger capital (Capitol .ii.). Here's the translation:
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an ulcer or abscess appears on the nails or feet, and it is an old one and does not respond to medicine treatment, then the last recourse in this case is to incise those two arteries (presumably the ones near the affected area).
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore, when you wish to incise those arteries where the patient's head is located, first prepare the area with coarse cloth to expose the arteries, and firmly hold the patient's neck with some cloth. Consider which vein pulses there; and press on the locations of each one near those areas that are close to the ears, and they should be hidden from sight except in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then make an incision on the artery and probe it carefully to ensure that you have reached the bone (the incision should extend into the bone) during the procedure on the patient's head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the probe beneath the artery and break it at the incisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be adjusted to two fingerbreadths because when a vein is incised, blood will flow out with pulsating exits, which may cause frequent spurting (bleeding).
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the incision point, it is necessary to measure the space from the ear, and then probe carefully to enter the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the quantity of blood that should be drained is one ounce (of blood). And take care not to drain too much or too little, and the amount depends on the severity of the patient's condition and the fullness of the artery in question.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of infection on the bone, incise it to prevent the formation of an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Strengthen the wound with feathers and linen cloth, and care for it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	This appears to be the start of a new section or chapter in the text (Capitol .iii.). Here's the translation:
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples. (This appears to be a subsection within Capitol .iii.)
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or severe illness migrates to the temples due to acidic moisture and poor quality of the joints in the temples, or a sudden, violent condition that resembles such illnesses, and it does not respond to medical treatment, we are compelled to resort to extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization as demonstrated previously.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those arteries is to shave the scalp where they are located; and understand that the artery appears on the temple as it is shown by its pulsation, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the intensity of coldness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If the artery is hidden, then firmly hold the patient's neck with some cloth, and prepare the area with coarse cloth or moisten it with warm water until the artery appears manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge whose shape is:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you approach the sheath of which this is the shape:
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you cover it with the tip of the finger and make an incision on that part according to the length by which the extremities are extended and contracted, and no bleeding will occur, because if not incised, blood will not flow out from all parts.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then evacuate the blood of the vein. Go inside three (fingerbreadths).
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the arch is large, then you need to tie it with double-strength silk or thread of considerable length and not let it become rotten before the wound heals and cause bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut off the excess tissue that is between two ligaments; do so at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron to the bone with a cautery knife until the edges are incised, and leave that area in this condition.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to wait if the patient has fever or is in a complex hot state; because cauterization is of those causes that help to dissipate moisture, and therefore it is better to wait in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary to approach the extraction of the arteries that open in ancient times, and they should be placed with decent powder, and it should be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh heal and with hot compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If during another examination bleeding occurs from the artery, then you must try to stop the blood, either with a cauterizing instrument or by applying pressure, and tighten your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If any of these reasons are not present, then you must wait for the blood to clot over the area until the bleeding subsides and bind it with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and tighten it as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The easiest method for extracting the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery made of two knives, since you have tested both ends and waited, more or less, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it can be elongated between the extremities, because it will not be consolidated from all sides with this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The sharpness of both knives should be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if one knife is sharper than the other, it is better, because if they are as sharp as each other, they may not cut through the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since in those cases there is some swelling, it is important to heat the fire in those places and remove the flesh easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This procedure is better than any other and easier as well.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	The space between the two knives should be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of corpse with sharp and acid tears from wounds.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acid and the body has these veins that are above the forehead of the head, and no cause of cure from medication is provided for this, and at times the patient's face becomes swollen and he feels as if he were bitten by ants on his forehead, and the wounds of that person become thin, moist to such an extent that the skin of them becomes known, and the eyebrows are scaled due to the acidity of the tears, ancient practitioners used this method in treating those conditions with this procedure, and I name this cure as spasm.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the patient to raise the eyebrows that are on his forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead at equal intervals according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small finger of the movement of the eyelids, which are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the distance between each incision is equal to three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or cotton wrapped in dry fabric with which you can extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Insert the sharp end of the sponge into two opposite sides, and this is the shape for incising it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	from the side of the temple to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove the entire sheath that is between the two incisions, and do this from the smaller incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then straighten the sponge and enter it into the first incision with another tool called a knife, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Pause the incision on that sharp place, attach the connected flesh with sutures, and the laceration of the bone should be left open, and push it in where it will reach the minor fissure, and abscess all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Let it be continuous with the incision until it meets the minor fissure on the other side.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	When blood clots at the wound's edges, press the areas with gauze to stop the bleeding.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place a dressing over each old wound that requires it, and dress the blisters filled with pus using vinegar and oil, making sure it does not turn into an infected abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the linen and administer hot infusion of watered down camomile or thyme tea, and treat with basil oil and other oils until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of abscesses through cupping and on the heels that descend from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When an abscess appears and continues to grow, and the patient's heels are exhausted and weakened, and their eyes are ulcerated with swollen eyelids, and there is sharp pain in the forehead and concomitant extension, then it is clear from these symptoms that the material and abscess do not come from any other veins except those of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one width-wise (and begin from the left temple to the right temple; and the incision should go through the bone; extend your hand from the temples, which are swollen due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and fill the space between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or dry linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And apply fresh dressing over the blisters filled with pus using vinegar and oil to prevent an infected abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone starting from where there is no more flesh, and treat it with a drying regimen that promotes healing, such as taking equal parts of wheat flour and colophony and mixing them into a plaster and administering it to the affected areas near the native skin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of abscesses in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of abscesses in the ears is one of four types: it can be a mineral stone or something resembling a stone like iron and glass, or it can be a plant such as nettle or beans, or it can be a fluid like water and vinegar and their likes, or any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone or some other similar cause enters the ear that does not fit in the ear, stop the ear with a plug, and if you see the stone, distill any of the oils such as oil of violets or sage into it, and administer the extract, and make the patient sneeze using condiments, and open the nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear open at the top, as many observed cases are forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forgotten, administer the extract using the instrument called epicyclic forceps, whose form is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If the procedure is forgotten, that's good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it by using a subtle amount of double pressure.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if the procedure is not forgotten, insert a cannula made of metal and place the tip of the cannula into the ear canal and close the environment around the cannula with wax and softened oil to prevent it from being open except for the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract the pus with strong traction, as it is observed that this often relieves it.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this method is not forgotten, then take alum or vinegar prepared with which the birds are given a small quantity, and place it on the affected area and wrap it around the area properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and remove the wax from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if this method is not forgotten regarding all the causes that were mentioned earlier, then you should seek to cut off the part that becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting that area is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to its properties, and then place a cushion between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the edge of the ear and drain the pus from it in the most pressured location.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The incision should be in the shape of the moon and reach the bone, and if the bone is swollen, remove it with appropriate instruments if possible; and sew up the incision at that time with speed, and cure it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that has grown and become inflamed, administer its cure and extraction; but if you do not immediately take care of it, then you should take sugar candy (or something similar) in this manner:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the abscess removal of that fat which is located in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not perform this procedure when you believe that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on a cushion or some other soft surface, and carefully extract it from there with scissors or by using the method described earlier (abscess removal), as the extraction of it is relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning and fill their ear with something old, and rub over the affected ear where the water is present, and if this is forgotten, it's fine; otherwise, take many small pebbles or stones according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and make the patient insert one of those into their ear canal and jump on one foot from that side and strike another stone against the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	Then take paper or cotton. And place one end of it in the fire-tongue (bellows) and stretch out the other end into the fire until it burns completely.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And repeat the process until all the water is drained out, and then straighten it with a cannula as described in the previous section regarding the trocar.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, during the extraction of an animal, if it is a small object, proceed with caution and be careful, treat it as described in the previous section; but if it is a large object that protrudes from the abdomen, immediately perform an extraction using tweezers and remove it without delay. The reason for this is that it is easier to deal with than all the other causes that may occur in the bellows.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But when extracting worms generated in the bellows and you follow the procedure and distillation treatment as described in the previous section and do not find relief, then you must observe the bellows at sunset.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, extract it with tweezers or thin forceps, but if no cause is apparent, take a cannula that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in shape.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow end of the cannula into the bellows as much as the patient's condition allows; then suck it out with force, and repeat this process until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if the patient's condition worsens, you should plug and seal the end of the cannula with wax as described; then administer distillation treatments that have been proven effective in treating worms, and observe the outcome in the treatment of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your infusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the bellows using this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole in it, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so make it in such a way that it fits into the concavity of the continuous cannula where it is needed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it around the appropriate part of it carefully, then pour oil or juice from a herb, or any medicine of your choice into the concavity of the cannula (which is in the bellows), and place your hand around the wrapped reed and apply pressure on it with a moderate compression until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the cannula and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever substance is to be infused in the bellows should be heated slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you are distilling in the bellows is not too hot, because the bellows cannot tolerate such heat.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstruction of the bellows.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children suffer from obstructions in their mothers' bellows that have not been perforated, and this also occurs in some men, obstruction in the meat of the bellows due to a wound or rotten flesh in that area; and sometimes this obstruction is made at the junction of the bellows opening that cannot pass gas, and sometimes it is in parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	The obstruction at the junction of the bellows opening that cannot pass gas is the most difficult to cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you achieve a gas passage in the bellows, it is necessary to place the patient's bellows at sunset and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obstruction, open it with a thin spatula whose shape is as follows:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the obstruction is at the narrow part of the bellows where one side is pointed and the other is not, the spatula should be double-edged to avoid damaging the bellows.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	If the obstruction is due to rotten flesh in the bellows or its surrounding meat, immediately use thin forceps and remove all the rotten tissue as quickly as possible.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the obstruction is at the junction of the bellows opening, take a thin reed, heat it slightly with fire, and then insert it into the meat of the bellows.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you sense obstruction with what the patient complains about due to difficulty breathing, relieve the compression as quickly as possible; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the bellows.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then pause in the bellows with linen cloth according to the size of the hole you wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other suitable material and soak it in water and pulverize it, then use it according to the instructions given; and if you see that the bellows has already been sutured, you must carefully remove the old suture and replace it with a new one wrapped in a wax coating that has been made with olive oil, until the abscess is cauterized. Then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If blood flow occurs, immerse sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the artery, then use another treatment to stop the blood flow, which is called distillation in the treatise of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Here comes the next sentence:
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of athlete's foot that affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athlete's foot that affects the eyelids of some people is sometimes moist, while it is dry for others.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you must have those with hairs or without hairs, and cut the affected area with a scalpel, then place it on a dry, clean cloth.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with blood flow occurs, cauterize the affected area with a thin cautery (cauteril).
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to make incisions and burn any remaining cause of the inflammation with fire; once they are cauterized with fire, the inflammation does not return.
Capitol .ix.	Here comes the next sentence:
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of swelling that affects the eyelids of some people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Sometimes swelling that affects the eyelids of some people is accompanied by a cause similar in strength and durability to true swelling, and for this reason it is called "swelling."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation is to examine whether the swelling is coming from something that appears on the eyelid and is present everywhere; if this is the case, the cause is likely light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore make an incision along the width of it, then remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and suspend it with a string and cut off the affected area.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are unable to make the incision, do not force it to enter the eyelid with repeated incisions, as this may cause blindness in some cases.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, adjust it using stitches; care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from it, as the heat of the affected area restores and nourishes it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is gradually decreasing towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should trim the affected area inside the eyelid, remove the swelling with a string, perform an incision if necessary, and press all around it; but if the eyelid is elongated due to repeated incisions, do not force it in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, wash the wound with salt water; care for the affected area with something that nourishes it until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Here comes the next sentence:
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment applied to the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Blinking is the action that is generated in the upper eyelid, especially among children, and worsens their eyesight and causes them to develop cataracts more; they cannot tolerate bright light due to tears forming at the eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore you often find them with tears constantly on their faces, even when they sleep; and the underside of their eyelids is moist, which is covered by inflammation, and the imminence of conjunctivitis is apparent in the eye; and whenever you press on the affected area with your fingers, you feel a swelling inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One method of operation is to have the patient hold their head between your knees, place a cloth and warm water on them, make a circle with it according to the size that contains arteries from all sides, and place it over the affected area and press around it so that swelling is created in the middle of the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture along the width, but the incision should not be larger than the incision made during lithotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the case of severe conjunctivitis, it is necessary that you cut the cordon completely through to the artery, as in more severe cases, conjunctivitis is treated by incision according to the shape of white pus.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore you extract it with cloths that you have wrapped around your fingers at the front and sides, then turn it between your left and right hands until it is completely removed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Keep watch that you do not press in the opening to prevent sputum from reaching the wound and causing contamination there.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not enter the opening at first, but press into the opening to make a small space for sputum before processing it; and then extract that easily as we have said; submerge cloths in warm water and vinegar, place them on it and apply strong pressure with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And mix salt and let it rest there in the depression of the incision to remove any remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then care for that to ensure it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If there is an abscess in the cauterized area, then care for it with caustic plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of examining the throat.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the tonsils are formed by pressing of natural hair and become hardened, they are referred to as throat examination, and various methods for diseases such as persistent tearing and softening of the eyelids and swelling inside the mouth until it causes destruction of the throat, which is called "throat touch", and treatment may be in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned in the Cauterization chapter; or through touch and suturing; or by cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you must hold the patient's head with one hand; turn the eyelid of the eye towards your left hand, if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into that which is swollen beyond the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through it, and this should be - just below the edge of the eyelid where the hair growth starts - beneath the hairs, and pull the needle thread above the eyelid with your palm, and turn it towards the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And make an incision in the corner of the eyelid below the hair growth towards the lacrimal duct into the smaller lacrimal sac; and extract the needle thread and place it beneath the eyelid with fine powder or cloth, and then apply pressure on the eyelid as if it were a fig leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is important to note that the shape should be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because this varies among men, as some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the degree of swelling, depending on how much the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And make an incision with the scalpel along both lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal sac towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near natural hairs such as the king's thicket.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the hook on one of the angles of the incision, and excise that entire area, and adjust both lips with surgical thread or fine wool yarn and absorb the blood, and make any superfluous hairs adhere to two eyebrows with some sticking agents if you wish to do so, but if not, do not care for it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And remove the stitches of the hairs within three or four days and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, leave the wound unsutured and care for it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of it; but suturing is better, and therefore the ancients recommend this method.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in any case, consult the patient, and it is good practice, and there is no reason for concern.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Another method in examination is to mark the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and lift the eyelid with three separate and gathered incisions according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, take incisions, and if they are not straight, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle near the larger lacrimal sac, and insert the third needle near the smaller lacrimal sac, and adjust the needles evenly between your fingers, and then lift your hand with the elevation of the thumb, lift the entire eyelid over which the mark is made as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs in your incision or wound, it must be drained with a lancet and similar instruments, and with mouthwash.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the eyelid converts its hairs into itself, then you should use on it what I said about incision; but stitching in some cases is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Bandaging with reeds is done like this:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And if the eyelid is turned inward and its shape is folded as I have described, then place two thin reeds or two small sticks under it, the length of which should be the same as the length of the eyelid, and their width slightly less than the width of the eyelid opening.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have made incisions at each end of each divided part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then moisten each one with a gentle solution under the eyelid that is swollen, and tie the reeds of each divided part tightly, and leave it like this for several days, because the swelling will die from the tightening and be rejected, and it will fall off on its own without the need to remove it manually.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it takes too long, then break the thread and treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When the eyelid is swollen, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not stick out.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two sticks in this manner:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	The quantity of length and width should neither exceed nor be less. (In this context, "la" refers to "the," "quantitat" means "quantity," "longitud" means "length," "latitud" means "width.")
Capitol .xii.	This looks like the Roman numeral for XII (twelve), possibly referring to a specific section or chapter of the text. Without more context, it's difficult to determine its exact meaning in this passage.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For puncturing thick skins with a needle when the skin is hard. (In this context, "de" means "of," "elevacio" refers to "raising," "pels" means "skins," "pungentz" means "punctured," "huel" means "the," "am" is used as a conjunction here, "agula" means "needle," and "quan" means "when.")
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skins are unnatural, hard, rough and prick the heel with a sharp needle, then perform the operation on it by taking a fine needle and inserting it into that tender spot of soft leather, and make sure you adjust the extremities carefully without causing any unnecessary movement. (Here, "Quan" means "when," "son" is the third person plural verb form for "to be," "pels" means "skins," "nonaturals" means "unnatural," "durs e aspres" means "hard and rough," "pungentz les huels" means "prick the heels," "lahoras" is the third person plural verb form for "you perform," "agula subtil" means "fine needle," "aquisitats de lu" means "adjust the extremities," "nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil" means "make sure you do not cause any unnecessary movement.")
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the field should be equal to the size of one palm. (Here, "E" means "and," "sia" is used as a conjunction meaning "should be," "la" refers to "the," "longitut" means "length," "de" means "of," "fiels" means "field," and "una palma" means "one palm.")
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then make another fine field nearby in brief, and cut the ends of that one if you wish. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "tu" refers to "you," "compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu" means "make another fine field nearby in brief," "nuza las extremitatz de aquel" means "cut the ends of that one," and "si tu·t vols" means "if you wish.")
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head on your lap and position it facing the sun so that your work is visible, as this is a delicate and minor operation. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "pause" means "place," "le malaute" refers to "the patient," "le sieu cap" means "his head," "en le tieu se" means "on your lap," "e" means "and," "si prop del solelh" means "facing the sun," "per que la tua obra sia declarada" means "so that your work is visible," "quar" means "as," and "operacio subtil e menuda" means "delicate and minor operation.")
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the incision of the prepared skin that requires skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid hastily but carefully until you extract it above the natural skin. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "intromet" is the third person singular verb form for "to insert," "la agulha" means "the needle," "en la razit del pel" means "in the incision of the prepared skin," "ajustat" means "prepared," "quale ha necessitat de engen" means "that requires skill," "fay" is the third person singular verb form for "you make," "aquela" refers to "it," "penetrar" means "penetrate," "entro" means "into," "que" means "that," "extraguas" is the third person singular verb form for "to extract," and "desus le pel natural" means "above the natural skin.")
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the skin over it and insert the needle into it, and make sure there are one, two or three layers of skin at most. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "tire" is the third person singular verb form for "to pull," "le pel" refers to "the skin," "entro desus" means "over it," "intromet aquel en alixati" means "insert that one into the incision," "e" means "and," "sian" means "make sure," "pels" means "skins," "un o dos o tres" means "one, two or three," and "no mays" means "not more.")
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull your hand toward it until the skin is everted with the incision in the eyelid and the natural skin. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "tira" is the third person singular verb form for "to pull," "la tua ma am" means "your hand towards it," "entro" means "into," "que·l pel sia fora-gitat" means "until the skin is everted," "am alixolati en la palpebra" means "with the incision in the eyelid," and "le pel natural" means "the natural skin.")
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the incision is not everted and the skin is drawn in, you should pull it toward the sides near the field that you have made and the needle, until the incision of the upper edge is everted. (Here, "Mais" means "but," "si" is used as a conjunction meaning "if," "es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel" means "the incision is not everted and the skin is drawn in," "atiraras" is the third person singular verb form for "you will pull," "alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela" means "toward the sides near the field that you have made and the needle," "entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira" means "until the incision of the upper edge is everted.")
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will see it with the eye, as then you will evert the incision and the field, and grind each stone and claw of the heel, and leave the claws for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows over that area well. (Here, "E" means "and," "vegas aquela am la visio del huel" means "you will see it with the eye," "lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel" means "then you will evert the incision and the field," "grotan quascu e clautz le huel" means "grind each stone and claw of the heel," "laysse le claus per dos dias o tres" means "leave the claws for two or three days," "entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn" means "until the skin adheres to its place and grows over that area well.")
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the skin is too short, you should take a longer natural skin and raise it with that one, or else wait until it grows to an appropriate size, and then you should raise that one. (Here, "E" means "and," "si" means "if," "es mays breu le pel" means "if the skin is too short," "lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals" means "you should take a longer natural skin and raise it with that one," "e" means "or else," "o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi" means "else wait until it grows to an appropriate size," "lehoras tu eleva aquel" means "then you should raise that one.")
Capitol .xiii.	This looks like the Roman numeral for XIII (thirteen), possibly referring to a specific section or chapter of the text. Without more context, it's difficult to determine its exact meaning in this passage.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of eyelid herniation that occurs above. (Here, "De" means "on," "la cura" means "the treatment," "de ehacratir" refers to "of eyelid herniation," "la qual ve en la palpebra desus" means "that occurs above.")
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When eyelid herniation occurs, and it is the contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn toward above, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization, and it is called leprosy, and this herniation can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization, or similar to their misdiagnosis. (Here, "Quan" means "when," "ve" means "occurs," "e" means "and," "es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus" means "the contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn toward above," "o a dextra o a sinistra partida" means "either on the right or left side," "per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri" means "due to poor consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization," "e" means "and," "aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental" means "this herniation can be natural or accidental," "es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz" means "it is caused by consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization, or similar to their misdiagnosis.")
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The operation method is to cut through that hardened area and separate the lips of it, place stitches where there is a hole of cloth-like substance, and tie them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	It is necessary that you use caution in the causes that dry up, constrict; for if you do this, it will return to a worse state than before and will not heal at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for that cause which softens, for example fennel, wrap it with the water in which it is steeped and seeds of it, or gum resin, liquidify one of the oils, immerse the cloth in it and heal with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your healing is that you penetrate through everything that is not hardened in the way it was at first.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we mentioned is not any kind of correction of hernia that does not restore the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the cure of hernia that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia that is made in the eyelid, which is called truly hernia; and it is of a nature that is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental is made by ulceration, cut, burning, or similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and pierce it into the flesh, making it pass from the tear duct on the left to the tear duct on the right until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin at the edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and make an incision with a large spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns as required, it is good; and if not, take the ray and place it in the slit figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and make two cuts along the edge of the left eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of both cuts are at two angles of the incision that you made until they meet, and form an angle between them until when they gather together the figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter L: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the skin in that amount equal to the length of the sharp part on the left side of the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread, and heal them with what we have said about softening agents and ointments until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if hernia enters through a fissure or suture or burning, then it is necessary that you make an incision with a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with ointment between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, the cure of hernia whether above or below, in operation, is prepared according to the form of hernia, and this is in the shape of various motes (lumps).
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skillful craftsman always prepares tools for every method that is possible to return the figure to its natural form or as close as possible, and this patient according to what is necessary for the operation and tools in the best arrangement.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men who have the eyelid fused with the white part of the eye and is restricted in movement and its natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you insert the end of the finger below the eyelid, lift it up or stretch it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp like an incision, having a blunt end so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be as shallow as possible until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And place salt water in the eye and wash it with that, or distill in a vessel dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And separate the eyelid from the eye with ointment, and on the eye place wool soaked in egg yolk, and after three days use consolidating agents until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of nail and the prominence of skin of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is of two types: either it is nerve-like and similar to hard dry substance; or it is not nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched by you or punctured, takes onion juice, is separated and the onion juice is not inserted in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types begin only from the major tear duct and gradually cover the eye, prevent light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in the incision is that the patient rests his head on your shoulder, and you open his eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with onion juice and stretch it to the edges above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the toe of an animal (such as horse, bull, cow, or similar), strong enough or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate with the needle through the nail, holding the nail; then pull it to the sides above, and peel off the skin from under the nail which contains the pupilla.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow the skin into the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you incise the remaining part of the nasal cavity with a sharp knife or small scissors, and open the natural nasal passage so that by incising it, continuous flow of tears is not caused.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Sometimes the nail with its root extended or thickened, as has been said, should be excised with lion-shaped spatula, which is the shape of it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make an incision in the nail with a little bit of powdered salt or vinegar and let it heal over the next day, and care for it until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and cannot be pierced with a needle or is not embedded in the root, it should be treated with this type of nail medicine, cured as described, and healed accordingly as recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, first open the patient's nail and take a fine lion-shaped spatula of sharp angle according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with a sharp angle.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And when it is rarefied and congealed and you find it blocked in the nail, then distill your oil of vinegar or rosewater or saltwater into the nail, and let it heal over the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And apply the operation to it repeatedly until all that is in it has been removed, unless the counter-abscess has appeared on the nail, then you let it heal, and care for the abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The evacuation of the nasal cavity flesh, if noticed in the nail because of great harm, should be suspended with a nail; and incise it from one side, and do not extend the incision to prevent continuous flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And apply rosewater or vinegar in the nasal cavity until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of a corn and what is born from flesh attached to the nail.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the nails of algae, red flesh is born and becomes inflamed until it covers the pupil or approaches or protrudes above the eyelids, and compresses the eyelids at the sides and resembles a rose bush with balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	However, the operation is that the patient rests their head on your lap; and open the nails of that person and collect all that flesh with appropriate tweezers or forceps, and you with one hand hold it; and begin to incise the flesh at the start until it is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to cut the nail during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be made with which you incise them or with the spatula that we have recommended in the nail incision, or with small scissors according to the form that will come according to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, fill the nail with salt, or distill into it red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and let it heal over the nail away from heat until the counter-abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there remains any cause of algae and the wound becomes cauterized with blood, and you fear counter-abscess, let the nail heal and care for the abscess with what cures it, and apply the operation to it repeatedly until it is healed, similarly to the flesh that occurs in nails of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be careful to avoid all healing of the nail naturally or accidentally, work with fire, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the nail.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus are red and sticky on the nail and prevent the use of clothing in its operation, and uncover the nail for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the nail in which pus is strong and there is no other disease than pus, then collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and suspend those veins with a nail or two according to your discretion; and let that nail be of double-edged sublimation in this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	two scissors moving gradually through a body in this way:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	then collect those veins with forceps subtle and delicately, drain the blood gradually until you see them re-filled with air and relaxed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	watch that you do not pierce the intestine at the extremities of the sponge; and if your operation is during the daytime, and you are firm in your action so as not to injure anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill the intestine's head with green or red vinegar to dissolve whatever has been re-filled with pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then fill it with whatever alleviates the pain, and leave it for some days until the pain subsides and the abscess is securely healed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the process as needed until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing an arytenoid cartilage in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat an arytenoid cartilage with cautery or sharp medicine as described earlier and it does not heal, do not be hasty but make a deep incision over the abscess to expose its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus, and let the bone be exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And since the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called an instrument with a sharp head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be round as if you were holding a ball that has been pierced by a small hole or alum pierced by a subtle hole (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that instrument over the corrupt part of the bone, and gently rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand slowly until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Allow it to heal for some time, and then restore the area using drying and stiffening agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and good tissue grows over it, if the body rejects the sinus and remains for 40 days without being renewed or abscessed, and there is no accident in the area, then you will know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then it is not in the ingenuity (skill or art), but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and as follows: and it is said that you discover according to how sharp your knife or medicine is, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three such:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the handle of the tool be triangular, and the shaft first be extended to the tip as often seen in such cases.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Place that one on the bone, and let that one be from the lacrimal (eye); then extend your thumb a little more, and press your hand against the three with your fingers inside until it penetrates all the bone, and let the patient feel it when it comes out.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you restore the area with dry medicines that are astringent as they have been prescribed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	As the flesh and area hardens, you return the substance that flows from the wound to the nose, so it is easier for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the swelling on the thumb.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the thumb swells completely without any harm or reduction, it is necessary to loosen the patient, and then to support him, and place poultices on his neck without scarification and use good sucking; and place liniment on the thumb which is made of aloes, opium, balm and saffron, and apply a plaster strongly on the thumb with lots of powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method for powder is to take lions' hair cloth, and each piece should be folded four times; and make the powder from these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place one on top of the other according to the amount that the thumb requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And apply strongly on these with hard cloth and tight bandage; and repeat the poultices without scarification and use good sucking; and remove the poultices and leave the thumb tied tightly for a day and a night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it is necessary to be tightened more.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And remove the ligament after a day and a night as previously said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the thumb has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then you repeat the plaster with powders and bandage and poultices until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the swelling of the eyelid tunica (epithelium).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the eyelid tunica (epithelium) and it is swollen and protruding as if with a grain of sand, and its shape resembles that of man, and you wish to incise it, then the operation should be done as previously recommended, that you enter the needle into the wound from the lower part of the eyelid to the upper part, and place another needle at the lacrimal fold double line, and make it penetrate and release the first needle according to its position; and incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the wound edge in the circle of the needle, and tighten that area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And extract the needle and place wool dipped in egg white on the wound, and press it until the thread comes out with the yolk.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And heal the wound with something that strengthens it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And add some bandages to all the sides of the wound in a circle around the swollen area, and perforate it with a thin spatula that touches the edge of the eyelid, let the white fluid (humid) run out, and press down on the swelling and enter immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And tighten until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On cauterization (burning).
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called "alconati" is not the same as the one that resembles water blisters, it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the method of working on it is that you make the patient sit on a stool covered with a cloth and upright, and take his head in your two hands from both sides and push him towards the wound so that the pus comes out from the bottom part, and let it dry and not descend, and let light come in, and let the patient see the causes as he saw before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend (go down), you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the pus is not prepared to descend with what has been said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the eyelid that surrounds a little the continuation of the conjunctiva and cornea in the crown (into the location used), until the pus is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is expelled, you distill water (condense) in the wound which you have mixed with oil or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And heal it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the care of water coming out of the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which one should be pierced with a serum as declared, then do that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must tie the patient's hands together on a chair and bind their feet as well, pulling them tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the patient's left eye (if it is the left eye with water), or your right hand if it is the right eye (if it is the right eye).
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take the left-handed person's right hand (if it is the left eye), or the right-handed person's left hand (if it is the right eye).
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place your left thumb near the corner of the eye (from the side with more water) for the swelling caused by the large vein in the eyelid of the smaller lacrimal duct, and apply pressure with your left hand on that spot.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then make an incision in the eyelid (the area above the swollen part) and ensure that your thumb has reached it due to the swelling.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	It is necessary to measure the distance from your thumb (almagda) to the eyebrow along the line of the eye, and that measurement is from the pupil to the end of the black part (corona), which you will see with the pupil's vision through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Place your thumb near the watery area (the eye with more water) and apply pressure on it several times until the water subsides. If the water goes down quickly, you will notice that the patient regains their sight in that eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Rest for a little while; if the water has subsided, then wait a bit more before releasing your thumb from that eye.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	If the water does not subside, extract your thumb with ease and gently massage the eye several times, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt in water and rinse the affected area with it; then stop or place warm compresses infused in rose oil and honey over the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	However, we of our time apply a warm compress with honey to that closed (or stuck) eye.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If your thumb is difficult to insert into the eye due to its toughness (as some men have hard eyes), then it is necessary that you take the spatula called alberid, which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore, make a hole in that conjunctiva (the membrane connecting the eyelids), but do not press too hard, and it is not necessary to use a sharp instrument. Instead, use your thumb carefully on a subtle spot.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Place your thumb where we said previously (in the hole made).
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must ensure that the patient is comfortable with their sleeping arrangements, made in a low room where they can sleep on their back in a dark house, and be forbidden from all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Rest the affected side of the patient's body (the one with the issue) in a natural position and do not move their head to either the left or right side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Keep the patient lying down for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Place the patient in that dark room and expose their healthy eye (the one without the issue), have them look at various objects, and return them to bed on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	It is not necessary to do this procedure during the healing or recovery period or immediately before infusion (application of medicine).
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid this procedure because water can easily pass through the eye due to its great and violent pain.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	However, if an abscess forms, you must remove the eye bandage on the seventh day and apply a remedy that will cause the abscess to subside.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Remove the eye covering and have the patient rest with their face down for several days in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Gradually bring the patient out of the darkness (slowly open the curtains) and have them talk about their concerns on the eighth day.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that not being able to see for a few days is not an excuse for the student when it comes to this operation (surgery). Be bold in your approach.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	One of us who is an artist has said that he made fire with his thumb in the eye socket, and when this was done, the water was released.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Nevertheless, we have not seen such a procedure performed in our land, nor is it found in any of the old books; it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the ways to perform the operations with the thumb, for someone who is not familiar with them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They can be made of ivory or iron (metal) and have this triangular tip, with the sharp end being shaped like this:
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the healing of flesh, nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various fleshes grow in the nose, some of which is caused by a disease resembling scorpion stings or polyps on the feet; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there is cancerous flesh, malignant, of dark color; and it is that which is called lion's flesh, not dark-colored.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, one must make the patient lie down with their face upwards and lift their nose hair, and prick it where those fleshes are found.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And return that to the outer parts of the face, and incise what you have grasped with a sharp, subtle spatula from one side into which you know all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason that abscission is possible, then you remove what remains with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no reason remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if the lord bleeds or develops an abscess wound, pause there and cover it; or if it is a malignant abscess, you must cauterize it until it is abscised and all the cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And apply warm mustard or egg white near the incision for healing and alleviation.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and moisture enters into the palate, you will know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if moisture does not penetrate as required, you will know that within it is flesh in the joints or bones of the nose to which no abscission has been achieved.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, enter a thin, sharp instrument into him where there is some thickness, and press it gently, and pause between each nut between the quantity of the finger or month, and guide the patient and insert one end of the instrument into the nose with the ray or any other means that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that has been done, draw the patient's scent into the channels of the nose and let it emit from their head, for many watched children in schools do this action, and it is an easy cause to those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And pause the two ends of the instrument, one end that protrudes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a surgical tool for cutting flesh with the forceps that are in the instrument, and do it until you know that the flesh is at the tips of the forceps.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And remove the instrument and pause in the nose near the withdrawal of blood with a lint, and do it for three days or more until the wound heals completely from the rotten parts of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if there is no healing, use that remedy.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge maker" with which oils and medications are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, similar to a small open pot or cup, like a small funnel, and the metal should be similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a cane, and the cannula of the capipurge maker should be flat, open; with which you will have when you evacuate oil or any substance that you want from the juices and causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These capipurgi are valuable: the recipe for castoreum, white balm, ginger, styrax, long pepper, asafetida, and cedarwood oil. You compress with the juice of leeks and cabbage, and make pills, and let one pill be prepared with tepid water, and give it to the patient to drink facing you.
Capitol .xxv.	Here is a translation for the given line:
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the growths at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	These growths are called tela in the extremities of the nose, and they grow larger and become swollen on certain days before the regulation of the menses arrives.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Therefore, it is necessary to excise that at the beginning of its appearance, and to excavate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a compress or burning medicine on the site.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its excision is delayed until it becomes swollen, consider whether it is hard, blackish in color and with little sensation, do not touch it with iron as this is a cancerous abscess; for the growths that are excised in such a manner can cause great harm to the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	But if the abscess is touched by a lion and is not blackish in color, and it can be excised completely, then evacuate the patient and excise it without fear, and heal the site with whatever ointment expels pus and contracts it until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose and lips and auricle when continuity is dissolved by ulcer or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that the operation of repairing one of these cartilages when continuity is dissolved should be done sparingly, only in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if the cause of this is an ulcer with fresh blood, then consider whether the wound has been cleansed and cauterized, and then adjust the lips over the ulcer with suture, and treat it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips that have lost continuity are already separated and each is healthy, it is necessary to excise each portion of its common border while there is still blood flow.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the lips with suture and tighten them, sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and triturate it over the sutured area, place a dressing of emollient linseed oil or any other consolidating plaster on top, leave it for two or three days, remove it and replace it with another linen dressing until the flesh heals by itself, and treat it with mouthwash until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suturing is that you restore continuity using suture threads as recommended in abdominal suturing, or restore continuity with stitches as I have already told you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of causes that appear in the inner parts of the lips.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Growths that appear in the inner parts of the lips in some men are hard abscesses resembling butterfly wings, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips and folds on both sides of the abscess hardness, and then drain the area with sage triturated oil until the blood flow is restricted, and wash it with vinegar and treat it with an astringent ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the attached flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A hard growth often appears on the attached flesh of the gum, which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary to suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it appropriately, and allow the blood to flow or drain the pus.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place a dressing of sage triturated oil or other astringent and healing powders on the site.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, incise it again, and cauterize it as the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for tooth pain with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When rough hard spots are present on the surfaces of the inner teeth and those in the socket, some of which are black and are made citric or greenish before corruption spreads to the gum and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, it is necessary to hold the patient by the hand and support his head on your lap, and grind the teeth on which these rough spots appear, removing all causes of them, and remove the blackness and citrinity and other impurities until they are cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If the pain persists from the beginning of the toothache, that is good; if not, you must repeat the procedure on the following day and on the second day and on the third until it reaches the final stage at which you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth require various resorptions of different shapes and forms according to the type of operation you perform.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Therefore, since the resorption of the tooth from the inner part is different from the resorption between the teeth in other forms, these types of resorptions must be prepared as you will soon see.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You must treat the tooth pain thoroughly and patiently in its entire removal, for it is not a good reason to delay the healing of the wound when the tooth is removed, because there is a sublime substance entering that acts as an excuse during the extraction of the tooth.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is ready to have that painful tooth removed, you must be certain of which tooth is causing the pain, for many a time the patient deceives himself and believes it is a healthy tooth, and you remove the wrong one, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have often seen in the practice of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain of which tooth is causing the pain, and if you know this, then you should make an incision around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it until the tooth is dissolved from the gum all around; then pull it out using forceps or fine forceps, gradually increasing the size until you have extracted it completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Bring some strong pliers with you, and hold the patient's head between large forceps that will speak well or have good structure, so that they do not move; and place the tooth in position according to correct procedure without breaking it or causing the patient any additional pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And thus, if you remember this, then take one of the instruments mentioned and remove the tooth easily and effortlessly as it was described at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, you must wrap it in cloth and tighten it at the root with a fine wire to prevent it from being crushed during your application of forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	You must work carefully with incisions around the entire gum and use great care to avoid breaking or splitting it further; then return to the patient, as the subsequent pain may be greater than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Be aware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers often do in their surgery and audacity during the removal of teeth, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great ailments that are difficult to heal, and all or some of these remain, or that the tooth is extracted with bones from the jawbone as has happened many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And when removing the tooth, wash the mouth with water and salt to clean it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs during this procedure, as has happened many times, take some wine and sprinkle it on the wound; if the wine does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine forceps with which you will remove the tooth at the beginning should be long in length, short in width, and thick; this way they are not bent when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	They should be as thick in the handles as necessary to avoid bending when gripping them, and have short lengths.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of steel from India and straight in shape, with teeth on the ends that grip each other tightly and exert strong pressure when closing; sometimes the ends of these forceps have the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia, which has a strong grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the eradication of a root-trapped tooth is required due to some cause, then it is necessary for you to place pressure on the affected area with a bandage for a day or two until the area becomes softened; and introduce forceps that resemble the beak of a ciconia or stork, the shape of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of them are made like files or tweezers.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these forceps or tweezers, then it is necessary that you be careful and remove all the flesh around the root and introduce the tool called an alatal (a small lever with this shape):
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Let it have a short and thick handle, and not be blunt so that it is not trapped (or stuck).
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the root is lost (or forgotten), that's good; and if not, help yourself with these other tools whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first tool is a triangular tip with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second tool is thin and triangular.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are already helped by this tool that has two arms of the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments that I will mention for the cutting of teeth; because in addition to this tool which is similar to a large scythe, there is another shape as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The shape of the other instrument is a curved or short triangular tip that has some thickness and is not blunt (or dull) so it does not get trapped (or stuck).
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for teeth are the same as the other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	However, the skillful and subtle artificers find themselves by themselves according to what is significant to them regarding the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases for which the ancients neither named nor stopped using specific instruments due to their shapes of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are trapped (or stuck), or if they are broken, then place a weight on that part in its location with what is suitable for it among the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with the gesture whose shape is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it is to be made gradually smaller, and held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak out until all the bone is lost; and then restore the place with appropriate medications for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	However, if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that part of the fracture and its blackness and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth protruding above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude not according to their natural form due to which the shape is illegal, and especially in women, and especially in pious virgins; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is neither possible to suture nor apply liniment to it, then root that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose shape is as follows; it resembles a pig's snout, and made of Indian steel with a very sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Make the incision to cut that tooth in several days due to the hardness of the tooth and do not touch any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the protruding tooth is worn down by grinding (or wearing), then file it with a steel file whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of Indian steel and the margin equally; and it should have many small points like a file with which needles are made, and the tooth should be filed little by little in several days with ease, so that no other tooth is touched and damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw a line at the end, and remove that part with another razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth has a fractured part that touches the tongue, then it is necessary for you to file that part until the tip of that fracture is removed and closed (or sealed), and filled so that the tongue does not hurt nor the speech be distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Title .xxxiii. (This indicates that we are reading or referring to chapter thirty-three.)
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the repair of damaged teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth have been damaged due to impact and extraction by hitting or hunting, and the patient cannot chew food properly, and you have cured it with medicinal stoppers but your treatment has not worked, then it is appropriate to fill them with gold fillings, not silver, because silver can turn green and deteriorate in a few days, while gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The fillings should be of the appropriate fineness and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the shape is that you take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and let it grow twisted between two damaged teeth or one or more, until it reaches the gum of the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Approach the wound in the area where the treatment begins, and perform your task with ease and wisdom until it is not damaged anymore.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Your incision that holds the fillings should be as thin as possible to avoid infection of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut the excessive parts of the filling with forceps or a scalpel, and add them to each location as needed, and fold and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Cut it with the same narrow width as a Roman stitch.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is separated or torn, repair it or them with the other filling at all times in this manner.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the filling for two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown below:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When a tooth or teeth are returned to their socket following extraction and they heal as recommended, and grow back.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This should only be done by skilled and wise craftsmen.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes a cow's bone is used for the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth has fallen out, and it is held in place as described earlier, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Title .xxxiv. (This indicates that we are reading or referring to chapter thirty-four.)
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament that appears on the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that appears below the tongue sometimes is natural and cannot be removed, or it is accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient, your head facing his or hers; raise their tongue, and then make an incision in the nerve-filled ligament below it, as wide as necessary to free the tongue from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or swelling, and it is due to a wound that has healed, then you should apply oil and cut it as wide as necessary to incise the ligament and remove the swelling.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be careful not to make a tear in the skin near the edge and ensure that you do not cut the arch and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the wounds of the incision with warm water or vinegar or water rinse; and then hold down the tongue with a lichen; this is the mulle that should keep the patient's tongue down each night to prevent it from becoming consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is bleeding, place a piece of vitriol on the spot; if the bleeding stops, then cauterize the spot with a light cautery which is suitable for that.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And apply this cure for the other causes until it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a Ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes under the tongue, an apostemata similar to a small mol is found, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function and swells inside the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure for that is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun, examine the apostemata.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If it appears dark or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in that spot, then do not touch the cancerous growth.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is whitish with humidity, then you put onions in that spot and cut it off gently with a fine spatula and cut it from all sides; if bleeding occurs during your operation, place the above-mentioned vitriol on it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work when you have brought it out with the assistance of a servant, until it is washed with vinegar and salt, and treat it with the other remedy until it heals.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of an apostemata on both ears and that which is not in the auricle, and other apostemas.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the auricle, they are glands that are similar to a boil, which appear outside and are called double ears; when you treat them with what has been said above and it is not healed, then consider if the apostemata is hard, dark-colored, with little sensation, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is red-colored and the pus is thick, do not touch it with iron due to bleeding; leave it there until it ripens, and either you may squeeze it out or it may burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is white-colored, soft and the pus is thin, then that one must be cut out.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure for that is to determine if the apostemata has rested due to cautery and healing, or if it has decreased with any reduction; then place the patient in front of the sun, hold their head with your left hand, open their mouth wide, and the servant holds the tongue of the patient from below with a noble instrument having this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It is made of silver or brass and is thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Thus when you press the tongue with it and the apostemata is shown to you, cut above it with your instrument, take an onion and place it in the opening, and pull it out from the sides as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another remedy for pulling the membrane is to cut it with an instrument having this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is similar to forceps, but the extensions of it are curved, so that the opening of each of these is opposite to the other, sharp, which should be made of iron and copper.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If that instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula having this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after cutting one membrane, cut the other according to this method of incision, and then rinse the wound with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If bleeding occurs, rinse with decoction of coriander or meadowsweet leaves similar to that of styptic causes until the bleeding stops; then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes on the auricle other apostemas appear besides those two ear-like ones; cut them according to what I have said about the incision of two membranes.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have already treated a woman who had an apostemata that originated in her auricle; the apostemata was dark-colored, with little sensation, which had already closed her auricle; the woman was breathing heavily and had already prohibited food and drinking water for herself; she would have died within a day or two if it continued to last.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The apostemata had already grown so much that it burst after two days through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I cauterize it fistularly and place an onion in one of the holes, pull it out, and place a large piece of onion in the hole from where I took it; then I will cut the other hole, hold its mouth open, compress its tongue, and place an onion in the apostemata.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I make a large incision in it, and there is only a little bleeding from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the boil of that woman is absolutely healed, and she should immediately start drinking water, and press vegetables, so as not to continue to inflate the abscess many times over a long period, and an abscess appears in its place, which will heal before it prolongs the original one.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should lance the boil and cauterize it accordingly; and then walk around and not know what God has given to that place in advance.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The text is titled Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the lancing of a cyst when it becomes an abscess.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the cyst becomes a catarrh and is abscessed and prolonged, it is called pendulous; and if it is in the large and round area, it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is healed as we have said in the division, and does not conform to your treatment, and sometimes the cauterized abscess has subsided and is subtle, you must lance the one that is round; and if it is long and bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not centimeters apart, you must be careful with the incision, for fear of the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method I have described for its whiteness and length, you should seize the patient's thigh and press their tongue with an instrument used for its shape and place the thumb on the new, then pull it down and lance it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of two boils.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	You must lance it only where it is appropriate along the natural boundary without addition, for if you lance it more, you will harm its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two boils and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, you must use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of the cautery in it is not anything other than sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, press their tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take from the sharp water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and immerse the living part with it, stopping it neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The outer edge of the concavity in which the medicine has been placed should be as deep as a spoon handle, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient coughs over their side so that saliva or nasal secretions from the mouth reach the internal medicine, so that neither one of these causes harm to the boil of it and that it heals.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the uvula for about an hour until you see it become darkened and soothed by the bitterness of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, immerse the cotton in the medicine, insert the ray into a tube so that the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off approximately three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and clean the cauterization around the uvula with a cotton-covered borer, clean the area around it with the liquid that is in its circuit, wash it with warm water, heal it outside with an embrocation, and protect it with ointments until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than lancing and cauterizing with fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is healed with something subtle that cauterizes and lances, which is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, scicadopsis arabica, camomile, crushed, and similar to these herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; let the pot be well stirred with a wooden spoon, and there should be a hole in the pot on which an instrument is placed according to this method; make it of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the patient's mouth up to where the steam reaches the uvula over the tongue, until the uvula is obscured by this method.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this method several times until it dries, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of abscess development, for it would aggravate the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather make the declaration of cauterized abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	However, if this instrument is not available to you, take a tube and plug it at the end so that the patient's mouth is compressed, for the cork of oil prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of thorns and that which sticks in the throat, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Swallowed motes or a thorn or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must remove whatever is evident from among them (motas or thorn), looking closely at it, since you press the tongue with an instrument only to reveal what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	What remains hidden and is concealed in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food in the stomach has been digested, because the annexed cause of the throat will be forgotten by vomiting; or you give the patient a piece of bread or salt rye or dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and hold it firmly, then make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and swallow it whole, tied if necessary, and then let it be removed from the inside through a sieve; or take a pestle and grind it (the thorn) into a powder and then strain it through a cloth.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the previous causes are not resolved, then use an instrument of lead in this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	It should be translated as follows: "Even if it is large like a pea, and there is a concavity in the area that you should enter with ease into its mouth."
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And lift the head upwards, and be careful that you touch the bone of the neck so that it aligns with the bone of the jaw, to fix the bone or the spine, or for the doctor to hold it."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"However, the patient should enter it more, because of their knowledge of the place of the cause and by pressing downwards, they pull their hand upwards with the instrument, according to the amount that has been prepared before it is forgotten."
Capitol .xxxix.	I'm not able to see any additional lines for translation in your message. However, the line "Capitol .xxxix" suggests that this may be a numbered section of a larger text or treatise. If there are more lines available for translation, please provide them and I will do my best to continue translating.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"Extraction of bloodstones attached to the throat."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When bloodstones are treated with what has been mentioned in the section on cure and medication and do not improve, consider that it is located at the throat of the patient alone, as you have compressed the tongue of the person with an instrument that you have recommended."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"Therefore, if you see a bloodstone, remove it gently or with subtle movements as appropriate."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible to remove it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and hold in the concavity of the cannula a hot iron, doing this as many times (until the bloodstone dies and separates from the throat) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"Then take a syringe full of water and open the mouth of the person with it, and rinse their mouth with that; do not let any cause leak out of it, and after an hour change the water with your hand, because the bloodstone will quickly catch the water."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"However, if it has not been forgotten as recommended, then fumigate the patient's mouth with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument recommended for fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"Do this, and let it fall [the bloodstone]."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"Another method of operation in fumigation of that is to take a bowl containing ignited charcoal and covered on the side with a cover having a hole, and compose the tip of the instrument in that hole; then hold it over the fumigation; and have the patient keep their mouth open at the end of the cannula and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodstone, because the bloodstone will quickly fall."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	"If it does not fall, you should repeat the fumigation several times and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and alcohol, and do not drink water. It is necessary that this treatment be forgotten."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	"And this is the shape of the instrument used to treat bloodstones in the throat when they are visible; and it resembles forceps like this, except that it has some curvature:"
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	"The part of it that should be in the throat is shaped like the beak of a stork, with a handle, which is polished with a file, so that when you press anything, it does not slip."
Capitol .xl.	I'm not able to see any additional lines for translation in your message. However, the line "Capitol .xl" suggests that this may be a numbered section of a larger text or treatise. If there are more lines available for translation, please provide them and I will do my best to continue translating.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	"Here is the summary of the sermon on the opening and section on abscesses."
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"Abscesses are many species, of many kinds, according to the memory of them in this book."
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"They are diverse in perforation and section of them by two methods, one of which is for the species of abscesses that open themselves; and by the compression of humors."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"The second method is for the locations where accidents occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from an abscess that occurs in the anus; and an abscess that occurs in a soft location is different from an abscess that occurs in a joint; and there is a treatment for each of them."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"However, some abscesses must not be perforated except for the maturation of pus or completion of them."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"Other abscesses must be drained when they are hard, and are not matured according to their completion, such as abscesses that occur near joints, because an abscess that occurs near a joint, the pain in it is prolonged until the surrounding area is purified and its ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or an abscess that occurs in a major limb, if you delay the perforation of it until it has matured, it will spread to the main limb; or one that occurs near the anus, then do not drain the hard one without complete digestion, but the one that is proper to the anus, so that the anus does not expand and extend into the rectum and become a fistula, or that it is made at the edge of it which is not healed."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You must know the time of the abscess's perforation, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is matured when the pain subsides and the fever stops, and there is a decrease in swelling and pulse, and an increase in the sharpness of the abscess's head and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the perforation should be made in the place below the abscess and where pus is flowing from the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The perforation should always be through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the groin or the legs, and in places of the ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where it is not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to wait for its perforation until its digestion is confirmed according to the rules we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus and motion is prolonged and the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the body depending on necessity, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide or many small incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are abscesses in which the cavity should be concave and incised, when it is done this way it is called lancing and lancing is in terms that it should stay, such as when it happens in the form of double boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of these is the one in which it is incised like a myrtle leaf figure, such as the abscesses of gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And from them are those in which a round section and crescent-shaped section is administered, and similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that which is not like that, such as surface abscesses of lions, you must perforate with a superficial or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you must perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, you should return the abscess into it over another day, and you should extract a larger part, and make many pus observations according to gradation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	In addition, if the patient is frail, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because animal spirit can often be resolved with the exit of pus, and strong liquor kills the patient, you should avoid these.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this chapter and consider the quality of the wound when you perform the perforation on these abscesses; if the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then you should administer some of it or old remedies; but if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause every three hours until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cavity is separated or you have concaved it in the circumference, then you must seal it with old wool or thread made from cloth of it, such as when you treat bread or razors, without humidity; and strengthen that for three days; and process and care for it with remedies for sores until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs at the time of your operation, then you administer warm water and red wine in which a piece of cloth of it is steeped, and pause that over the place of the bleeding for many observations.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding continues, then you must administer a regimen and cure and sprinkle powders that I have recommended in many places of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must cover powders in wine and oil of caution, and pause those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer and the locations are fleshy, then you must pause powders steeped in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that should be warm until the third day as we have said, and then you must remove the abscess and avoid it and administer in its cure whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have said before for each type of abscess in particular and its cure by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From section of abscesses that come on the neck of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, there are small abscesses that are made up of nodules containing tunics which are formed from them; and these nodules are moving.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from those there are blisters, and from those containing moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those are ones that contain moisture like flour and resemble them; and there are some hard, stone-like ones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the excision of all, there is no fear, since the extraction of those does not interfere with archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in excision of those is that you use an instrument shaped like this, which is called entremes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it contains moisture, then cut it along its length with a surface section in this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin the incision along line B to line G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, remove that part containing the moisture, but do not leave any cause of it, for too much observed returns if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, or water and salt; fill the wound with this, and leave it for another day, as it will corrode everything that remains of the skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment to the wound second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause for the skin; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If an abscess contains fatty nodes, then make an incision in this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The incision has a cross shape, and cut it between the two lips of the incision and remove that from all sides, forcing your effort in the extraction of the tunics containing it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if this interferes with archery, do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Do as I told you for the hardened abscess, with sectioning and treatment; the section over a hardened abscess is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Sometimes they are hard bumps on these abscesses that are located in the head in men with whom there is no moisture; this occurs because I make an incision over an abscess in an old woman's head, as if it were a stone deaf ear, rough and white, which could not be drained, and if someone struck it, it would become infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other cases of abscesses in the head that are not part of this topic, such as abscesses that occur in children's heads and require removal of the eyelashes, the incision for all of these should be a surface section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the excision of those from the lowest parts of them to alleviate the body of pain in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moving pimples are found deeply in these abscesses in the neck and eyelashes and in the angles; and some move on other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are scrofulas, and moving pimples that are generated between them; and every scrofula of these is primarily its own tunica, just as in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofulas are pimples, for some of them are hard, and there are some that contain moisture; and the malicious ones which should not be treated.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the case of a good disposition in the treatment, which is similar to the color of the neck and is detrimental to the entire body, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to archery, and it does not require any intervention, you should incise that with a superficial section from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body along line G to line B, remove all of it, split the two lips of the neck with a knife or pointed knives if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract that small by small.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	The spatula should not be sharp, it should not fit in the incision, or cause anxiety for the patient, and incise only what is necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then stop the wound with quicklime plaster or other powders that produce bleeding, let it rest, and leave it until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft and begins to be purulent.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then ask your assistant if there is any other small scrofula that may have been overlooked, and excise and clean those as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is the vein that is the source of the large scrofula, then do not excise the scrofula from its origin.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful to fold it firmly and let it fall inside without harming it.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the old wound with lint that you have previously soaked in Egyptian ointment, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you excise the entire scrofula, then you must suture the two edges of the wound and stitch it as soon as possible without leaving any excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	However, if you see that there is excess due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you must excise the source of it, remove it and administer stitching and whatever is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	That scrofula which contains humidity, you should pierce it with a superficial perforation at the place of maturation of the lesion, and stop the perforation with the ointment from the bottom of the body, as has been said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the perforation, warm with oil and similar to those, so that it consumes what has been removed from the rotting part.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see the wound is cleaned, take care of it with ointment for healing flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Title xliv.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the abscess of the hernia in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this incision in the groin, and I have not seen anyone do it in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the saying of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	However, in men with hernia, it should be avoided to extract the hernia, because it is not helpful and may harm the patient since all the veins and larger ones are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	However, in those who have abscesses or hernias in the mouth, or two ears, when the illness is not in the canal, it should be cautious to perform the incision of the hernia to avoid the danger caused by compression.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when it is necessary to excise the hernia, it should be done around three circles of the hernia or four with a small incision along the width in the one that is between two circles according to size, and the incision should be made in the cavity, not in the cartilage. This location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels are located there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then extend the cord of the groin incision one fingerbreadth, and make an incision along the cord to reach the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any reason for them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And make an incision in the scrotum according to what has been recommended, and it refers to the incision of the canal through the cord which is located at its exit and at the abscess of the testicle.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Let the wound remain open for a certain amount of time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Since the hour for perforation is feared, gather two edges of the cord of the wound and stitch it without the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And administer medications that promote healing of the flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the conclusion of the saying that we have recommended, is only a warning to those who already have opened the groin of the patient and the patient has died, and the intestines are cut open, and some want to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound for some breathing, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to let the wound remain open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed; it is the malignancy for three days; and thus I command to close the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen in my life, is that a servant took a knife and placed it in his groin and incised one part of the lung canal, and I was called to treat him, and he died in a manner similar to the dying, and I discovered the wound and stopped the blood which had come from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you were confessed that it had not incised a vein or guideline, and the wound was bleeding, and you cured it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant should not return if it is not necessary in the testicle, and take some days to recover from his illness.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the incision of the hernia.
Capitol .xliv.	Title xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On incision on an abscess that happens in the groin outside and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two methods, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the natural case, it is not necessary to treat.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental case is according to two methods of which the one resembles fatty nodes, and the other method resembles an abscess, which is made by the swelling of an artery, and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	It is not necessary to make a presumptive incision on it unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should then probe it and investigate it with the mentioned instrument, and if it resembles fatty nodes and is not suspended from any of the veins, you should then incise it in the same way as you would a node and extract it with water that contains salt and boric acid; otherwise, you should carefully examine its entire being, and apply care to the area with a solution required for healing until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter xlv. (Chapter forty-fifth)
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of incision of the types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes have many different types, and I have already mentioned all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	It is necessary to distinguish between a node and an abscess when there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that with an abscess there is heat, fever and strong pain until the boiling of the superfluidity subsides; it is a complete putrefaction which now stops the fever, the pain and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that lion's head which is at the root.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, and it begins like a head and is made like an egg, whether large or small, and there are two types, either fatty with moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when treating a node, it is necessary to expose it and investigate it at the beginning with a probe that is called intromes, according to its shape, as described in the relevant chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of investigation of abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this probe and insert it into the area with the most moisture where there is an abscess, and you turn your thumbs slowly into it until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand on it according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the probe and consider what comes out from it as evidence.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the moisture is discharged, no matter what its color, you should then incise it with a superficial incision as described in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture from the probe, you will know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry over it with a cross-shaped incision in this manner:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have learned, lift it up with the incision, peel off the capsule from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sac if possible, over it and extract the pus with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract the pus, and you should carefully watch for any discharge, and then extract it into pieces until no further cause remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if any cause remains, either a little or a lot, the node will return in the same manner.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any small part remains, fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, then place a cautery over it where there is an abscess, and care for the rest of it with other healing until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, you should then stitch the two lips of it and care for it with what is appropriate.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or not pulsating, you should tie it and fill the area with vinegar that has been impregnated with lime (slaked lime) and hold it tightly for two to three days until the wound can be opened again and the bleeding stops; then return to incise what has been ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter xlvi (Chapter forty-six).
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	And of the forms of probes, there are three types, one large, medium, and small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small incisions is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are the instruments for making small incisions: scissors, a lancet, sharp blades properly arranged, in order to make the incision in abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experienced people, and they are called lancets, and one of them is called a lance.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it consists of three parts, for of which one is large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced person is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experienced person is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced person is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is necessary that these lancets are used for abscesses and eruptions, fissures, and boils, as they are among bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And it is made with round, thick, and lion-shaped needles similar to large needles with which the skin is sewn, and they are made of ivory or metal, or silver, or silver; the best ones are those that are made of ivory.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	The experienced persons make them with black feathers, which are arranged so that fissures in the cavities may be opened so as to allow reflections of these into their hollows.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And it consists of three parts, for some of them are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fissure and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large experienced person made with black feathers is as follows:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the medium-sized experienced person made with black feathers is as follows:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small experienced person made with black feathers is as follows:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of scissors are of several types, for some of them are simple with only a curve, and there are three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there are pointed scissors, and they have three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among the pointed scissors, there are those with two curves, and there are three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them, there are those with three curves, and there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple scissors is as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a medium-sized simple scissors is as follows:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple scissors is as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large pointed scissors is as follows:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized pointed scissors is as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small pointed scissors is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large scissors with two curves is as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of the unguis (nail) has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The correct translation for "Forma de unci" is "Shape of the nail". So, it should be:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The correct translation for "Forma de unci" is "Shape of the nail". So, it should be:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The correct translation for "Forma de unci" is "Shape of the nail". So, it should be:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The correct translation for "Forma de unci" is "Shape of the nail". So, it should be:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of scalpels with which they are cut and scraped off the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The correct translation for "Forma de scapel" is "Shape of the scalpel". So, it should be:
Forma del scapel migier:	The correct translation for "Forma de scapel" is "Shape of the scalpel". So, it should be:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The correct translation for "Forma de scapel" is "Shape of the scalpel". So, it should be:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The external edges of those with which incision is made are sharp, and the other external edges are not sharp, and they are not incised in such a manner, but rather, are made in conjunction with the scraping of nodes to avoid incising a vein or nerve. This is for the benefit of the patient, bringing about a little relief through the cautery, which is necessary for the treatment of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The correct translation for "La forma de" is "The shape of". So, it should be:
Forma de magda migier:	The correct translation for "La forma de" is "The shape of". So, it should be:
Forma de magda pauc:	The correct translation for "La forma de" is "The shape of". So, it should be:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble a ray, like that which is used for alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And on the pointed edge, which is hidden in the handle, and in it go to the partitions inside and out, as you see fit, like when you use it.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and are not felt by the patient, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes of those [things]:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of the ventouses with which blood flow is separated, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small. The shapes of them [ventouses]:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of iron and round with some length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that you have these types of ventouses: large, medium-sized, and small, so that with them blood flow can be separated quickly in case of need, and when at first there is no medicine available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to draw blood from any part of the body, but only in fleshy areas such as the armpits, thighs, arms, breasts, stomach and groin, and similar to these, moist fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some vessels are made of these other small instruments similar to fish scalers, according to this form; through which the blood is separated when it is performed with leeching or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some vessels are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter xlvii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of male breasts, which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some vessels are inflated with the breasts of certain men when they begin to become hairy, and the breasts are swollen, and resemble women's breasts, and abscesses occur, pusules.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who has this, it is necessary to incise it with a crescent-shaped cut according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and remove all the pus, apply a layer of carnated medication, and bring the two lips of the wound together with stitching, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	However, if the breast droops towards the groin and is softened by its size, like in women, then it should be cut in two pieces with two incisions resembling a crescent shape, each one contained within the other according to this form, from the line B to the line G. And remove the coagulation that is between the two lips of the wound, and cleanse the pus, and administer what was said above about suturing and powders until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be incised due to the patient's agitation and bleeding, then it is necessary that you compress the wound with gauze submerged in corrosive ointment, allowing it to enter so that it may rot away what is rotten from the flesh, and apply care to the area until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	I apologize for the mistake. Here's the corrected line:
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforations of abscesses that come from the groin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the groin belong to the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus-filled sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision as shown in the figure: from line G to line B. And when all is evacuated from the abscess, you then suture it with thick cotton and let it heal on its own the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then keep the wound clean and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess belongs to the species of lymph nodes or scrofula, then you shall cut it in the manner as described in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound extends into pus-filled matter, then administer cautery as described earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	Capital .xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On incision of abscesses that occur due to arrow wounds or vein injections.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the string is consolidated above it, an abscess may occur, and signs that indicate inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or a vein: since when abscess is due to an arrow, it is usually prolonged in the front part of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a grating sensation.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is due to a vein is round and more noticeable in the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Incision on this abscess is a mistake, especially in the armpits, angles, neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very large, so its healing with iron should be avoided, and those that are in the external areas or head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	On the other hand, in case of abscess due to arrow-inflicted inflammation on the wound site, cut the string incision lengthwise; and separate the incision with sutures, and separate the arrow, releasing it from the sheath until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then hold the needle and make it penetrate through to the other side, and tighten the arrow with double force in two places - which causes the arrowhead to be extracted from two arrows that are in the temple region.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And press on the location between the ligaments with a sponge to extract all the blood that is in it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And apply care to the area where pus is formed until the ligaments are dissolved, and treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to an incision in a vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and the surrounding area, and insert the needle into the location that you have been holding with your hand; make it penetrate until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as described in the uva4 ligament section.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread may break, insert the needle through the entire abscess and make the first incision with the needle; then tighten the four sutures.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then cut the abscess at its midpoint until all the contents are expelled from it; then incise the surrounding tissue, leaving what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place a poultice made of wine and oil over the pus, and apply care using hot compresses and appropriate ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital on abscess due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess occurs in an arrow wound or vein injection, and similarly an abscess may occur in nerves when they are struck or subjected to excessive strain, and so on.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is made worse in the joint locations of the ankles or feet, or any location where the joints are diseased.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	The abscess is severe and resembles the color of the other body parts; it occurs in larger areas that are swollen and when tightened with violence, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	The abscess is not prolonged in the front part of the body; it is surrounded by a sheath and is diseased all over and does not go towards the sides (front or back).
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is not necessary for those in joints to be wrapped in iron, as a strong pressure would lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Moreover, one treats the head or forehead with spittle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then you should lance and remove that of its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, you should suspend it with an hook and excise that, then stitch the wound closed, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter .li (50 in Roman numerals).
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Examine in many men the bellies and other parts of the bodies of those who are called funguals because they resemble fungi; for their root is subtle and its head is large, and their labia (lips) are turned over, some of which are small, and others have been greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his belly were two things that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them as to color or fine root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those (funguals) were turned over and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then you should incise and remove one of them, taking care not to go beyond eighteen inches. And the other, which is one inch.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation in incising them is that you consider whether the patient is humid and if the color of the abscess is white, humid, and fine-rooted; then you should incise it with a lance, and in your presence there must be cauterization in the fire, because many women are observed to expel pus from the cut if you don't burn it; and if blood comes out, you should cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is poor and afraid, be careful not to incise with iron; but rather take a leaden amulet, strengthen it with the abscess, in the manner described earlier; and let him wear that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust it in the constriction of leaden thread; therefore, you should not cease to strengthen the lead until it is excised and falls away by itself without work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the abscess is of large root, then there should be some cause for fear and concern, especially in one that is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you will incise its size (the abscess), and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then heal the wound until the abscess is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise an abscess that is dark colored, has little sensation, and lacks regulation, because it is a cancerous abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will remind you of the crab (cancer) in connection with this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii (51 in Roman numerals).
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of protrusion of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Protrusion of the navel is caused by many reasons; either by fissures of the navel that are above the belly and from which the tissue or intestine emerges as in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the navel and the exit of the tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; there is no pain, and it appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the exit of the intestine, then you should place its location in that area according to what has been recounted earlier, with much greater variation, and when you press it with your hands, it is hidden and returns; and strong pressure is required there, and it is greatly inflamed, so it must be introduced into hot water and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when pressed with the hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to blood, then you should use these signs to identify the abscess as darkening.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is flesh (affected), then it becomes a severe, large and hard abscess, and it is filled according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is windiness, then touch it with the lion (sponge soaked in vinegar or some other strong acid).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation is that you consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery, a vein or windiness; then it must be noted that you are forbidden to treat it, because in this case there is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter about abscesses caused by an artery and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or membrane, then you must command the patient to lie down on their back, and approach with a needle at the circumference of the entire navel, and command them to stay facing upwards between your hands, and surround the navel with a spatula in the circumference of the navel around the area that you have pointed out with the needle; then stretch out the abscess towards the armpits on one side and tie it with a strong thread or a cord, and use the appropriate method for tying it.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then you cut the middle of the stretched-out abscess on the ligament and insert the needle there to pierce it, and if you have not found or protected it with the ligament, then you extract the pus and press the intestine towards the inside of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take it with one hand; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is opposed to your artery or vein, then surround that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them firmly into the circuit around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then stretch out the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the stretched-out flesh to fall on its own; or cut where it is thin and can be pulled out, and then treat that with water until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the protrusion of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then you must compress the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture, which you catch in it, and then treat that with water until it heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division that there are various types of ulcers and what method is suitable for their treatment with medicines, and that it is inappropriate to treat them with iron because they will become ulcerated; and we have also mentioned that ulcers are formed due to carelessness and negligence in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that in some cases ulcers can be eradicated in places where they can be excised, such as with an ulcer on the head or near the genitals and their equivalents on other parts of the body, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it becomes old and large, it is not necessary to treat it because it cannot be cured by anyone or I have not seen it being cured, nor has it been achieved.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation is as we have said, that you precede and wash the patient and purge them of black bile several times, and then cleanse that area if there is a clear repletion found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with preparations suitable for surgery, and warn them about the dangers of the operation; then bend your knee deep into the abdomen until there is no remaining cause for the ulcer.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Allow the blood to flow, do not open it lightly, and press on the areas, and remove all the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you can handle among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is difficult for you to cut thick blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops and treat it with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 40.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of edema.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the types of edema caused by water and the signs of each type, and their treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type of edema that is cured with iron is only the one caused by altitude alone, and it should not be approached with iron for the types of edema of tympany or hypostasis, because that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of edema caused by tympany with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient is already weakened or has another type of edema such as in the throat or belly and similar, then do not treat them with iron because there is fear over it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the patient with excessive virtue (meaning strength or health), and it is not another illness but only edema, neither an infant nor an elderly person, then the method of operation on them is that you raise the patient between your hands, and provide them with a way to express their belly with their own hand, collect water at the junction below the navel, and take a sticky cotton swab in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp points, long and pointed like a cotton swab; however, it should be in some small brevity, so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine and cause damage to it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Then consider if the edema generation is from the intestines, for then you must be away from the navel by about three fingers below, on its right side near the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the edema generation is due to kidney disease, then your incision should be on its left side from the navel by about three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if it is due to the liver, then your incision should be on its right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is necessary that your incision is over the ribs where the patient wants to lie, so that the exudations do not flow towards that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate the entire skin with the instrument and enter that incision, raise your hand with the swab between the skin and fat, and excise it; if there is a quantity of one nail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the fat until the swab reaches the location of water. This is where the water will be collected.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that and insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it resembles a thin silver cannula; made of silver or copper or leather at its lower end with a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is beveled like a feather, as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the upper part of it is a band, because when the instrument reaches the water, immediately loosen it over the instrument, so that the water evacuates in the best possible quantity, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient will soon die from resolution of their animal spirit, or it may lead to convulsions which are near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate according to the strength of the patient and according to the signs that indicate to you the vitality of their pulse and their general well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument, and retain the water that is causing it, which must be immediately retained by the skin which retains the hole in the fat from where you perforated.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water, do so for a few days in fear, and be careful not to leave too much water but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear the patient, and allow too much water to flow out, then care for them with burial in hot sand, rub them with soap, and on the sunshine wait for a long time; and treat them with drying medications until they are cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Burn the stomach and liver-kidney area near the extraction of water, as I have already recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 40.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose urinary tracts are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of the mixture is not perforated (or it is narrow or it is in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform circumcision immediately after birth using a thin cotton swab in this way:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And pause in the hole a thin lead nail and tie it, and wait for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it wants to urinate and urinate, return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine that flows over the location does not close the wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the hole is narrow, it should be treated with a lead nail, as I have said, for several days until it is expanded.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	However, in those in which the hole is not in its place, it should be corrected, as this is caused by those who are born with their trauces, the head of the urethra being improperly positioned so that they cannot urinate at the junction inside, until they raise the urethra with their hand at the junction above; and it is not a birth defect, for the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly in this case, and it is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The procedure for the operation is that the patient should be laid on their back, and hold the base of the tumor with your left hand firmly and pull it out strongly, and cut the head of the tumor at its root with a sharp scalpel or like feather incision, or whichever method you find suitable, so that the mass of it resembles the head of the tumor and is pulled out to fall into the same location as required.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	In the case of bleeding during surgery, this often happens; stop it with what you have at hand and clean the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 61
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the circumcision that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and inflammation, swelling, darkening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this condition occurs in the penis and is a tumor or growth of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it should be suspended with a fine thread and removed entirely; then apply Egyptian ointment over the sunken area; and apply daily finely ground Egyptian ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the circumcision is malignant and discolored, then it should be cauterized near the incision and removed.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the circumcision is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the growth is inside the foreskin and the other is outside, it should be removed from the beginning until it is consolidated; then take care of the outside, because when you treat the foreskin at the same time, there is no guarantee that it will not be damaged.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it often happens in the genitals and foreskin that they become blackened and corrupted; therefore, everything that has already been corrupted or is about to corrupt or has already corrupted should be hollowed out; then line up the edges of this with a solution made with powdered scorzonera root and three times-boiled walnut husks and crushed walnuts.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if bleeding occurs, then apply cauterization as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because the cauterizing instrument is of two types simultaneously, one for bleeding and the other for treating wounds that are infected.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed in that moment, it should be necessary to insert a lead tube into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskins are healthy, and there is no need for circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to an ulcer or an abscess), it should be necessary to excise with a blunt scalpel until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely separated.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excise that area precisely, it should be necessary to excise the head of the penis and the foreskin with any suitable cause; this is because the foreskin, when thin, is easily penetrated by its own thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin blade that has been coated in boiling water to prevent them from sticking together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then treat it with vio-stibacum until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 62
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to ongoing problems like other diseases: however, since it is part of our operation and theirs is specifically in infants, it is necessary that we assign the best possible procedure and method for this so as not to lose their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, but rather acquired it through experimentation; the cause being that I have found that most artisans and barbers perform circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they use lint with olive oil and incise with a nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already prohibited all these methods and not seek further modification with tweezers, lamentably that in modification like the nail, many times the code has escaped above, because the code of the foreskin is two layers, and remains below, and it is often forced into another opening and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the modification which is performed by circumcision, and is digital, which is used by cobblers, is not secure for the incision of the tip of the male member, because it often enters the groove of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, strong iron and corrode your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it grows in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the modification that is made with tweezers and lamentably with iron, I have found to be harmful, because tweezers are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is as the sharpness that is below; and since you press your hand proportionally two sharp points, it cuts accordingly according to a comparison in time; and it causes compression of the foreskin with a figure containing the foreskin from all sides, with which no error occurs of everything.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you make the child remain more if it is one of those who understand a little, but do not do so if you only lift the foreskin onto its sheath and leave it there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make him happy in all that way which is possible according to what he understands.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make him sit between your hands and not be afraid; and hide the tweezers in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see it nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the child's sheath and blow on the foreskin, and pull it in so that its head exits the sheath, and then modify that which is attached to it due to soot.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then mark the spot with iron and tie it down with a small ligature, and I tell you to press and tighten the knot below with good tension, and cut between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the foreskin slightly and stretch the tip of the glans, then let a small amount of blood flow little by little, because it is better; pause powder on top and on the powder pause linen in which is spread mustard oil known as ointment for burns recently made; and leave it there until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the tweezers for modification, this is its shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	One of the arms should not be sharp and the other should be sharp, so that the nail does not break off, and the length of the two points should be as the length of two handles together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in modification is that strong iron often escapes the internal foreskin completely or you have to make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should stretch it at your time with your nail before the incision of the area and make the incision accordingly.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove it with scissors and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the sheath, you should remove it when it is softened by cauterization and remove the swelling easily, then make the incision according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful with the tip of the glans, because it will not come out.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat it with that which the plaster consolidates of the powders that I recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the foreskin is incised according to measure and you apply it to the sides above, it will not come out.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with that which I have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or clotted blood, or by stone or tumor, similar to those mentioned in the section on treatments.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and the retention of it is due to stones that are in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be placed in a squatting position.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on his buttocks and extend his abdomen from the part above his buttocks, and the patient should bend as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, you should squeeze the neck of the bladder to expel the stone from behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what has been said, and the cause is severe in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction from him with an instrument called syringe, of which this is its shape: It should be made of silver and be narrow conical, as a cannula for bird pen with the fineness of a long ray about the size of a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method for treating urine emission is to fold the foreskin back and place it on the outside of the wool or cloth for good drainage; then insert the fingers into the area below the scrotum, and cut with scissors if necessary any excess wool, but insert the fingers into the cannula with force. Then move the scrotum aside and apply thread and glue.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Bandage the patient's testicle and enclose the bladder and penis with wet oil, olive oil, and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the catheter gently until it reaches the base of the penis; then bend the penis upward at the root; then push the catheter into that; then push it into the bladder until the patient is relieved of the cause, but not in this order, rather follow the direction of the urethra.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then extend the foreskin little by little, because the urine saturates the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove that and treat it for urine, using a catheter; continue to do this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 19.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of clysters for the bladder with clamps and similar instruments suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration, boil or clotted blood in the bladder, or a hard stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then make use of the instrument called a clamp, which has this form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Unless it is silent on the outside, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three openings in that: two from one side, as often happens.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a concave place where it is inserted, as much as its quantity allows, without excess, until any cause is drawn out by the humors, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, it is collected, and when it is expelled long, as a clamp made with naphta in sea battles does.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to introduce humors into the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humidity, and draw out with it the water that is pushed upwards, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamp into the penis as recommended in the catheter; and then push the humidity with what you are pushing because that humidity will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will find relief.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of a subtle clyster for bladder irrigation, which is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with a cap that is shaped like a small feather and has a channel inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder in motion, stop it where you want to irrigate the bladder with water, and tie it tightly with a double thread around the neck, and heat the water.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the clyster into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with the water and structure until the patient feels that the water has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate it completely around its circumference; and insert a strong thread into those holes so that it is turned; then add the circle as is customary in an astrolabe, with the water and oils collected at the point where you want to remove humors.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie it in the instrument and use it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand into the instrument until the water reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 20.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division that there are different types of stones and treatments for them with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also said that the stone can be removed with manual operation and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder is the one that is lodged in the bladder itself.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And we tell it in an obvious and concise manner.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, the stone formed in the bladder mostly affects children; its symptoms are that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears like sand; the patient often scratches his penis, moves it frequently, and it is inflamed; and with this, he frequently voids feces.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	Child healing is easier until they reach the age of 14; healing in old people is difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	It is more easily healed in the young, than among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	In the case where the stone (gallstone) is larger and the healing is easier; if it is less, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when treating that condition, it is necessary at the beginning to clean the patient with a scrubber which extracts all the wound that exists within their intestines; for that wound sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone (gallstone), you should search for it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then place the patient with their feet together and make them crouch so that the stone (gallstone) descends to the opening of the bladder or jumps from the area sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then have that person sit with their back against it (the tool), and the other's hands should be placed on the sides of them, so that the bladder is completely opened downwards.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then make an incision in that place and open it completely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in that place, then make a cut on it immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If the touch does not reach the entire area, then you must anoint it with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child, or with flour if the patient is an adolescent or adult, and insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Enter the stone that was placed below your feet.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Gradually turn it upward into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press against it with your hand and expel it outward through the parturition channel from the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the servant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another servant with his right hand to extend the legs apart, and with his other hand draw down the linen cloth that is below the legs, at the place where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert the spatula, which is the shape of...
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Cut through what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, along the left side; make the incision over the stone and the hand should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the amount of the stone that can be cut out, but not more, because too much pressure on the stone could crush it and forget about it with difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You should know that some stones have an edge and corners, so removing them is difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	That stone looks like a peeled nut, is round, and is easily removed.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it has edges and corners, place it in the slit.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If it is not forgotten, then you should grip or apply pressure to it in a proper way, the end of which should be like a file on which you apply pressure to the stone, and do not let go of it; or you insert beneath it a subtle instrument with a curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot grip it, then enlarge the hole a little, and if you see blood flow, burn it with heated glass.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, at first you should push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and insert it; then press a little against it; and proceed in this way for as many stones as there are.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, then ignorance is that you insert it with a large incision, because the patient may suffer from one of two causes: death or chronic urine discharge, because the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer an evacuation of what is forgotten inside, or grip it in the fracture with the forceps and pull it out piece by piece.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and burn it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Then place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, over it, so that the cauterized wound may heal.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then turn the patient on his side and do not remove the liniment for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, immerse the area in warm water and oil, and care for it with an antiseptic and an antibacterial ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if there is cauterized and corrosive pus in the wound, similar to blood in the bladder that is frozen, and therefore urine is forbidden (and this is known as hematuria), then insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood, because if it remains it causes the bladder to rot and decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar, warm water, and salt, and use an antiseptic against all kinds of infection, with what is appropriate for healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the entire course of treatment, you should always place your hands and adjust the medications that are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and is embedded in the scrotum and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I have recommended before you perform an incision, because excessive observation during this treatment is accused of incision; and I have already told you about this, and it is that you take a pointed iron rod, which has the shape of...
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a pointed triangular tip, inserted into the shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take hold of the testicle and move it away from the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron rod into the scrotum and perforate it with ease until the rod reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the rod gently in the stone, gradually performing the perforation until the other part penetrates it; because the urine is released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Approach your hand onto that which is broken from the stone of the hernia at the side of the buttock, since it is strangled and forgotten by the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not suitable for any reason that prevents it from being done, then leave a faithful man by the stone and another man above the stone. (This seems to suggest that there should be two people present in case one is unable to complete the procedure.)
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then approach and cut through the stone in that buttock between two incisions (or cuts).
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the ligaments and clean off the clotted blood, which is made in the wound (or incision).
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	A faithful man is not necessary to hold the stone by the bladder (or urinary system), but only so that it does not return to the bladder and cause infection; and another man should be there only if the ligament holding the stone in place is loosened, because when the man holding the stone lets go, the wound will heal.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	Therefore, it is necessary for you when you let go of the man holding the stone, that you raise the wound above the incision, or else it will not heal properly and the infection will return.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed (or encountered).
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone occurs in any of those (female patients), the cure is difficult and forbidden by many (practitioners).
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that the woman is very weak and a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you will not find women who are well acquainted with (or open to) revealing themselves to a doctor when they are virgins or married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you will not find women who know this art (or procedure) better than men.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring a long incision and causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity demands it from you, then you must take a woman who is well acquainted with (or skilled in) this art and is not closed off (or resistant).
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that (skilled female patient), then search for a clever and subtle woman, or present a mature woman experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has been trained in this art by a skilled practitioner.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore present her and command her to do everything you tell her to do from the beginning of the examination on the stone; because her purpose is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case she should put her mouth on the woman's buttocks and seek out the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if she finds it (the stone), remove her from by its mouth and command her to incise on that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, command the mature woman to put her mouth on the patient's anus and seek out the stone, since she holds her left hand over the bladder (or urinary system), and compress it with good judgment.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if she finds it (the stone), it is necessary that you gently guide her out of the urinary system to the incision below with the help of her virtue until she reaches the knowledge of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then make an incision on the area of the opening of the anus with the knowledge of the matter from any place it is convenient for you to approach and center the stone in that incision, so that the mouth of the patient does not remain closed over the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And make the incision small at first; and then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the size that you know the stone will be extracted through.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are motes (or small hard masses): since some are small and large, lion-shaped and sharp, and long and round, and some have holes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many types there are for this purpose, according to what you have previously indicated.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see bleeding, adjust in the location of the cauterized glass and keep it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your procedure once the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Prepare the instruments that you will need for stone removal in men, so that they may assist you in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see blood flow, and know that the evacuation of blood is from an artery incised, then stop powder on the spot and apply it with pulverizing and narrowing means, but do not continue; leave the stone alone and do not remove it, because the patient will likely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	As the acuity of the blood subsides after several days and the wound dries up, then you return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On hernia excision.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An achoozed hernia is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white belt which contains the bladder, and it is called the bladder.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes the peritoneum, which is naturally prepared in the separation of the bladder, until it becomes another bladder; and this is the bladder between the white belt that we have mentioned, but it is not that.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakness which often occurs in the bladder, so that fluid is accumulated there; and sometimes it occurs as a result of striking the bladder.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this fluid has various colors, since its color may be declining towards yellowish or reddish, purple, black and putrid, or white, and it is this one that is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is are as follows: if it is in the white belt that we have mentioned, then the abscess is rounded and slightly elongated like a bladder figure, and the bladder appears, since the fluid contains it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the fluid is in the proper peritoneum, then the abscess is rounded and divided by the bladder, and it is estimated that it is another bladder.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the fluid is between the bladder and the white belt, you make a catheter of the cisterna.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To learn the color of the fluid, you extract the fluid from the abscess with a cannula that has a cross-sectional shape preceding it; and according to what is obtained in the examination of the contents, judge what it contains inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of him with bloodletting, it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie on his back on some occasion due to another cause, and place several cloths underneath him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And place yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow the right side of him, who will extend his leg to the bladder and the parting of the abdominal cavity.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And take a broad spatula and cut through the bladder from its middle to near the umbilicus.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision according to the guideline equidistant from the line that should be the public hair, until it reaches the white belt encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise it, observe and keep in mind not to incise it; and your excision with which you excise it by dividing should show that it is suspended more and finely examined compared to the excision according to the amount possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Approach the bladder full of water with a wide opening and drain all the water out of it.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Approach between the labia of the section with scissors and separate it, extend the bladder at the dividing points above; do not touch the lower part where the genitals are located, and cut open the bladder in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Cut it completely or in pieces and especially its thin side, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound is processed from outside its lower part during the operation, then when you have completed the section of the bladder, return it inside, and place the two labia of the genital cavity with stitches, and care for it as other wounds, until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you remove the instruments used for suspension and extract the pus, and care for it as we said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water is collected in two places, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise the affected area as you did with the other one; and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And place a linen cloth soaked in oil or olive oil on the incisions and cover it with another piece of linen soaked in vinegar and oil. Spread that over two thighs and the abdomen, and place it on top of folded and powdered cloths and lint, and place these on top as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And prepare two cloths and soak them with carminated wool according to this likeness; tie their ends with string or wet linen, and attach them to the underwear of the patient, one end at the buttocks, and the other at the groin, and two ties on each thigh and another two on each ankle. Tie all the ties in the underwear of the patient.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of section with an iron; and it is that you take a fine cautery knife and incise the genital cavity, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white bladder containing water is discovered. Then you take cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is like Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Approach the bladder and set fire to it until all moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Approach the bladder with scissors and make an incision, excoriate it with scissors, and cauterize it with a fine-pointed cautery that has been ignited; and cut into it as possible until you have removed all of it; and beware of the pus that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You should know that this operation is both safe and lengthy without blood flow, and it is better than an operation with an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it is contrary to the abscess when performing an incision or cauterization, or bleeding occurs, you must then take care of the problem that arises due to this, with treatment that is appropriate for the situation as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its dreadfulness, then perform perforation as I recommend; and this is when it is certain that you, based on what has been said about signs, that the hernia is malignant.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You must then have the patient lie on some raised cushion, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a hollow lance, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place over that area and hold it in place, so that the water remains in place.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the opening until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if it is contrary to the discharge of water at that time, you pierce it: this should not be done unless the white pus in the wound opening prevents and prohibits the discharge of water, then you must put a hot iron or instrument into the wound from which the water is extracted through an opening formed for this purpose; or adjust in the wound opening a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You should know that the water returns, and it is retained for about two months or more; and when it is gathered, then it should be pierced again according to that method of treatment, as the patient will thus pass through their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On surgical incision for fleshy hernia and treatment of it.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in the incision on this hernia there is great danger of loss, so I recommend the abandonment of it and being saved by another method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation for that and the characteristics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So it is said that abscesses originate in the bodies whose genitals are joined and are caused by several factors: either by acute aggravated fluid which is poured into the genitals, or by trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The abscess color depends on the body color and it is not found in pain, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A flatulence abscess is serious, the color of which is dark, and it does not cause pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Sometimes it is made by nodulation of the arteries and inflammation of those same places, which as has been mentioned, can be recognized by the memory of them, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But when it is inflammation of the arteries, it is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not require touching.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But when it is inflammation of the vein, it is not dispersed by any cause due to pressing with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that surgical incision may be made on this type and other flesh; and you should make an incision in the genitals, and hold the abscess open with your hands above, and extract the pus white, and deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them and make an incision again on the lower part of the urethra.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the urethra has already become consolidated with the surrounding flesh, then you must extract the urethra and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion for any reason of the urethra or between the vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a new growth of flesh at the site of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise everything that is there and extract the urethra as has been said before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and then care for it with other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that is of the bladder.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The bladder is an abscess enclosed by some envelope similar to a scrotum with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to which memory is required.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	Operation should be described according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	The operation must be performed on the patient on an elevated couch; and then loosen the support of the testicles to the sides; and approach the codpiece of the genitalia with a cloth dampened with vinegar that is proven effective for the anus; and let another servant hold it, and stretch it out with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then insert the pointed scalpel through a crosswise incision into the right side of the vessels that are still covered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then remove all the fatty tissue from both sides as you have said in the removal of the arcubacteria, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert a double-pointed needle in that place where you saw the pus, and let one end of it be in the first part of the vessels where the pus occurs, and let the other end of it be seen in the deeper part.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make an incision in the middle of that place with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and remove what has been accumulated from the putrefied and corrupted fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the ulcer with remedies for other ulcers that you want to be healed so that the vessels that connect one or both genitals are not affected, as it is not harmful for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However, if all the testicles are affected, then it is necessary that they be removed or that one or both of the testicles become blocked by the vessels, so that nourishment can be cut off through the incision of the vessels and that they are stopped up or closed so that they do not help with that.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision that penetrates the abdomen extended across the hip from the groin of the stomach, which causes a rupture in one or more of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be of the abdomen or from its expansion, and this happens due to these two species for many reasons: blows, falls, shocks, shouting, elevation due to a serious cause, or similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this kind of rupture, when it is due to the expansion of the abdomen, is that it happens little by little over a long period of time, and it does not occur suddenly, and it becomes an abscess inside the abdomen because the abdomen presses on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it is due to an incision of the abdomen, as at first it causes a sudden, vehement pain; and it becomes an abscess that appears distant from the natural opening, which is indeed of the intestine, and the body of it is on the sides outside the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the intestine is forgotten and this hernia is called entestinal hernia zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is done with haste, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, and it is held there, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of illnesses with iron tools, there is fear, so it is necessary to avoid hunting in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for that is to order the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the interior of its cavity if it has obeyed your command, and let it be wrapped around their waist, and lift the legs upwards.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then tie the codpiece that secures the codpiece of the testicles to the sides, and make an incision through the entire codpiece; and then insert two fingers in the lips of the incision as necessary to cut the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is according to the amount that you can safely remove from it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then remove all the fatty tissue that is under the codpiece of the testicles up to where the white, hard abdomen is exposed on both sides.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the space that secures the testicle, between the white abdomen that is under the codpiece and the abdomen itself, and free it from the adhesion that is in the area behind the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then move the codpiece of the testicles to the sides, and stretch the white abdomen with your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the abdomen up to the incision area; and order the servant to stretch out the scrotum on one side and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look for your fingers if there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white, hard abdomen.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	However, if you find any cause for it, then you place it on the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a thick-gauged needle with ten threads, and insert it deeply into the abdomen, which is below the codpiece, where the incision is; and then cut off the extremities that protrude from the thread up to four threads, and place some of them on some figure in the manner of a cross; and let him press the abdomen that was mentioned as being under the codpiece with great force from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Approach the extremities of the feet and wrap them tightly until any vessels that are affected cannot transmit any further cause to prevent an abscess from forming.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Wait a while again, tightly as before, for three days; and between these two wrappings place the clysma, which is the loincloth of the testicles, in an amount equal to the size of the finger, and incise the remaining part evenly, and leave it open.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Approach the division of the loincloth below the testicles and cut through it, from which blood and pus will flow as we have recommended in what we have said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; then cover it with lint that we have recommended (and in some cases the white cloth is cauterized, which we mentioned to prevent blood flow from the incision, as this often occurs); leave the lint in place until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the wound does not heal quickly, then embrocate heated water and place it on top of it until it falls off as we have said before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Care for the wound with another cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On hernia of the intestines.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, no one has ever been cured by surgery.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And in the beginning, they said that it should be treated like we have recommended for hernia of the intestine: that is, to press the vessels near the incision with ease; and to cut in the middle of the abscess with water or some other liquid that opens it, until the vessels come out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Treat the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the hernia that occurs in the inguinal region (inguinal hernia).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes the rupture occurs in the inguinal region as we have said before, and then it should be opened.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Do not allow any cause of hernia in the genitals; and if it does occur, it is rare; and it should always be returned to its place.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If it lasts for a long time without improvement, the hernia is closed in the loincloth until the hernia returns into the loincloth; this can occur due to the extension of the loincloth in the inguinal region, as we have said before, which causes the loincloth to be stretched, softened, and an abscess to form and rupture.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment is with cauterization, as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is cured by surgery in the following manner: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and the location of the abscess rupture is cut open with an incision of about three fingers' width.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then tighten the white cloth that is below the loincloth until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the iron and place it over the prominent part of the loincloth and press it on the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then sew together the two prominent parts at the ends of the iron rod of the loincloth.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then extract the end of the iron rod and do not incise the loincloth from all sides or extend the opening, nor do anything else as you know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And take care of that [area] with the treatment of sores, and when you incise [the sore], clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for it contracts and the prominence of the break is not aligned.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	A pointed cautery is better in this place, for it is more near to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	If the scrotum of the testicles is swollen in some men, it becomes softened due to the fact that the flesh between [the scrotum] is softened, and its care must be attended to.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for him who is treating [the condition] to have the patient lie down according to his sides, and incise the entire scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum, and then adjust two lips with stitching.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and make a firm stitching.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then incise between the stitches, and take care of other sores until they are healed and the inflammation subsides.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but it is appropriate to remind me of it in this book; and the reminder is necessary only in two cases, one of which is when the physician is asked about it because he knows the cure for such [conditions], and the other case is when we have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit as with horses, cows, pigs, etc., and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation, or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the method done by strangulation, the procedure is that we strangle the animal in warm water until its testicles become softened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear again.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the scrotum of [the testicles] with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then pull back the scrotal sac, and incise each tube with one section until two tubes are exposed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those [tubes] so that they can be removed.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause of the inflammation on those [testicles], but rather the subtle inflammation that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration done by strangulation is better because strangulation weakens the testicles so that the animal desires coit less.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the care of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when a space appears in the scrotum between the testicles, in which case a female-like figure with genitals is formed.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And occasionally urine flow occurs from the scrotum containing the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is of a different type: and it is that the female vagina, at its base, resembles two testicles of a man, only slightly smaller than those and near the external opening, like the penis of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three types: one for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary that you incise the flesh and adjust it so that the pain of [the hermaphrodite] subsides, and then treat it with care for other sores.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men in which urine flows from the scrotum containing the testicles, there is neither cure nor treatment for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On looseness and protruding flesh in women due to causes of the female sex.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Looseness is adjusted according to natural causes until it is tightened and care must be taken; but in some women it is exaggerated to such an extent that it spreads like in men, and enters the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore you must remove the excess looseness of the looseness with your hand or scissors and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not over-incise, especially at the root of the incision, to avoid bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Take care of that [area] with care for other sores until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Born flesh is the flesh that comes out of the mother's vagina until it fills up [the vagina], and looseness is protruded at the opening of the vagina like a cyst (and for this reason some earlier writers called it "disease of the anus"); therefore, we incise it in the same way as we incise looseness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Title .lxxii. (Title in Roman numerals, Latin word for title is Caput or Capitulum, so this could be translated as Chapter LXXII.)
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when a woman's bladder is not punctured or if it is only slightly injured.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is the illness that has occurred previously, and it is caused by improperly fitted meat or sharp or coarse substances.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Accidental is caused either during childbirth, in the mother's ribs, on the skin above or below it, or in the urine, and it is forbidden to eat, engage in sexual activities, and engage in fertility treatments, and strongly prohibited menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of this illness is made by examining the mother, if the opening is obvious, it should be cauterized; however, if it is not apparent, then you must seek it out with the fingers or with a ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	However, if the opening is due to a subtle sharp object near the two labiae, you should grasp it and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	It is to press on both the labiae with a soft cloth, and then place your fingers indicating the affected area more precisely.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be on her back, with her legs extended and the two labiae should be spread apart using force until that sharp object is broken and the opening is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take some wool, soak it in oil and apply it to the area, and let it stay for a day so that the wound does not become hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the boil is large and swollen, then you must insert a lance or a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If it is an abscess in the flesh, then you should hang it with oil and lance it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you should use the medications that stop bleeding without cutting, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and gum guaiacum, bound with albumen of egg whites.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a large lead cannula to prevent the wound from being easily closed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and apply hot compresses.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Let it be healed with the other healing methods of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes there occur cases of other flesh during the greatest nativity, and then it is necessary to lance them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is an abscess cancerous, do not oppose the abscess cancerous in any way with iron.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of diarrhea and dysentery and red swelling that sometimes occur in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Diarrhea is recognized as the flow of blood from the veins' openings until a continuous amount of blood flows; and when diarrhea is chronic and it becomes bloody.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of these and the signs of these, and I will say those that receive healing and those that do not receive healing.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that diarrhea and dysentery when in the intestine and not perceived by sensation, there should be no healing with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the openings of the womb where sensation is felt, these are healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must place the woman in a hot bath and stretch her limbs out with an elongator or a sharp cloth and lance them with the blades.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And you should apply the powder of the blood of one of the incisive powders without cutting, such as hellebore and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And you should wrap her feet in cloth for an hour and then place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then you should seize it in a decoction of sumac and of mustard seeds and of cumin and of similar ones.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And you should take barley flour, mix it with honey and wine and vinegar and make a plaster with water over it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, that's good; if not, cause it to adhere with two leeches and scarify the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you should take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or the juice of angelica or the juice of wormwood in vinegar and apply it to the area; and cure the area with mouthwash until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But an elongator that is sharp-eyed, it is necessary that you lance what appears to you from this according to what I have said in the previous section.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Heal that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an accidental incision in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The various species of abscesses that sometimes occur in the womb, such as cancerous, ulcers, boils, sores, ulcers, blisters, gangrenous, putrid, rotten, corrupted and suppurative ones.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these diseases and the species of these and the signs of these, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about cautery of the abscess which appears in the womb when it is one of the abscesses that are healed, and if you want to know in what way the operation with iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with percussion and flank and fever, and sometimes it becomes swollen and if you feel sensation over it, then do not pierce it, but heal it with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must make the woman lie down on a bed with two beds; and recline on her back and place her feet at the edge of the bed far from the stomach, and her thighs should be spread apart, and her arms should rest on each side of her neck, and each one should hold it as appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows the doctor's instructions and brings the instruments to open the opening of the womb, whose shape will come in those cases that will be appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument that you position yourself near the head of the womb of the woman, and what enters the womb from the instrument should not be more than the width of the opening of the womb and touch the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then it is necessary that you apply powder on the texture of the opening of the womb to prevent any instrument from entering the opening of the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you hold the ligature that runs on the instrument of the labor pains, and the attendant should have the instrument and roll the ligature inside until the openings of the mother are unobstructed.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the membrane appears and is touched with the hand and lanced and moistened, it is then necessary that you cut it off at its head with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, it is then necessary that you make an incision in the area and insert a plaster soaked in rose oil or other oil containing some styptic agent; and place the cloth on the incision of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the mother with a woolen cloth soaked in water in which wormwood is boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Let her be cured for about two days with an enema, which it is appropriate to administer until she is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Sometimes the mother and wound are washed with water and salt, and with water in which rosemary or long-aster root is boiled, and it returns to the enema.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the mother and swollen, it is then necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, for its care should be performed as was described in the section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner they should be treated when the membranes issue abnormally according to figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognise in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth through signs, and it is known that when you see the woman expelling at the parturition and desires to smell the air, and above her is lifted by what is from the part, and hastens the expulsion of the membranes, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and its expulsion is on top of its head, and the second one with it suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is then necessary that the belly of her be compressed to make the membranes descend gently, for when they come out on top of its head, they should deliver it, and it is washed from those superfluidities with good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if the birth is abnormal and unnatural, for when the membranes are expelled on her feet and the body of it is expelled before its head and its feet, and one hand or the foot of it. or if the head of it is expelled and her hand or the foot of it, or on the stomach of it, and it is turned forcefully onto its neck, resembling the figures of those unnatural births.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in all those matters, and to avoid errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And we will show you every figure of them, and what method is in each one, so that it may be understood and established upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is expelled on top of its head due to natural labor, and it is strong upon the woman and difficult to deliver, and sometimes the strength of it has been weakened, then you should use the following remedy: or what women have, and evaporate the concoction of it with fenugreek oil and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife should introduce her small spatula between its membranes and cut it with that, or cut it with her fingernail until the fluid inside it flows out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until the child is born.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, it is then necessary that the woman be rinsed with egg white and fenugreek juice with a spatula.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And command it to be cleaned, have it pressed, and make it vomit with a mixture; open its mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will soon forget this.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, it is then necessary that you reduce them gently little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not enter easily, the woman should lie on a cushion and raise her feet, and the cushion should be pushed against the ground; and the woman should be held so as not to fall backward.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child dies, you should cut them open and remove the skin of the child or pull its chest to its hand with a cloth and remove it equally, because that will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The expulsion of the membranes on her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is expelled on her feet, it is then necessary that you push those legs upwards, and have the child turned little by little, and wrap it around, and take hold of one foot and stretch it gently.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is inside the thighs, you should command it to expel itself and have it turn around with a mixture, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten by what we have recommended, then you should return the child little by little according to natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with a gentle expulsion.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to all that has been recommended, then take alum and dissolved gum, grind everything well in the mortar with good striking, and apply a line of the mixture to the woman's cervix, at the bottom of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then dip that sponge in warm water until it softens and reaches the hypogastric region.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the birth passages are softened, then perform a subfumigation of myrtle and rest her on it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the subfumigation has lasted for an hour, then you should dip a sponge in warm water again and make her sneeze, then let it out, press lightly on the lower part of her abdomen near the birth passage to help her forget the pain quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Place her hands on her stomach.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When she has passed the pain in this way, then you gradually move her hands little by little into a container; and the woman should be leaning over her neck, her feet hanging down, with the container under them, and complete the position.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press gently on her abdomen little by little, and extract whatever is coming out from between her toes until she is prepared for the birth passage.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If she does not forget the pain, then take her feet and move them vigorously, and press gently on the hips towards the hypogastric region until the birth passage can be reached.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert your hands gently and gradually, and tell the woman to push until the pain is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Place one of her hands hanging down.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If the hand cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If she cannot walk, then make her lie down and strike her hips vigorously, and administer pain relief medications which I recommend and advise to use mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	When the childbirth has begun, then dip a sponge in warm water, study the reduction of the hand, insert it naturally, make her sneeze and tell her to press herself until she forgets the pain.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Place her hands on the pillow beneath her neck, with the opening of the birth passage at her mother's waist.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the hand of the baby and gently rotate it, making it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is fully delivered, pause over the cervix with a recommended oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command her to push gently little by little, and when she does, dip the sponge again in warm water, then make her lean forward slightly, and command her to press; make her sneeze with conditioning.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The baby is prepared on the left side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the afterbirth comes out of the mother according to this method, consider it, and you should cut the second navel string with your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the baby's head and neck are hanging down, you should cut the umbilical cord to prevent it from being retained and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And gently push the baby into the birth passage until it comes out as it should, and tell the woman to press herself a few times, and it will be forgotten quickly, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Birth of twins or multiple babies.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that twins and multiple births occur occasionally, sometimes even three or four, but it is strange and dangerous, although there are natural causes, not human.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if there are multiple navel strings, separate each one by cutting through the ligament in the umbilical cord of each. Sometimes they are forgotten naturally, as it often happens with a single birth, and sometimes they are not deliverable, as I have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver or they reach the stages I mentioned of unnatural births, you should treat them as I have advised.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and skilled in facilitating, speeding up or slowing down, and in all figures according to what she has been prepared for by using appropriate means leading to safety.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recall that it is formed in the womb from embryos, and it aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes the number of pregnancies is one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten, and it is important to note that a woman may abort at any time after one pregnancy, and another woman may have all her pregnancies miscarried, which was caused by the measurement of the wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this requires the knowledge of midwifery because a light load has this appearance, and therefore open it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what was said in the division of medicine and it has not been born prematurely, and you are compelled to use an operation on the woman, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman is of good character and not one of those for whom there is a danger of harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her back with her head lowered and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should hold the woman's feet or tie them to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with oils, aloe vera and fenugreek, and seeds of linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mucilagins, enter her hand into the mother's body with ease, and find the place in which you insert the fingers in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Consider the proper places for this: then you determine whether the fetus is positioned correctly on its head, and then you insert your fingers into the neck, mouth, palate, below the beard, in the collarbone, near the ribs, or below the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if it is presented transversely, then in the pelvic brim or midriff.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	It is necessary that you hold the fingers with the right hand, curve them in the place between the left hand's fingers, and enter your hand with ease until you reach the cause of the blockage.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and insert another finger or the third one if necessary to attract it and not extend it only along its length.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	The pain should be treated throughout, so that the swelling is alleviated in the same way as teeth decay requires removal of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	The affected area should be treated so that the swelling spreads out; and if any part of it is retained, then it must be cut off with a surgeon's knife, and the oil of some herbs applied to the wound, and it should be dressed carefully until it heals.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the wound is neglected, then the edges should be sewn together as close to the flesh as possible and this should be done until the entire wound is healed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the wound is opened on one side and cannot be closed by compression, then cloth should be wrapped around it; and it should be taken out little by little until it heals, and incised either at the edge of the wound or at the junction.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And in the same way, incise the other side and both feet as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the wound's head is large or it cannot be compressed in the swelling, or water collects at the opening of the wound, then a bladder should be inserted between the wounds and the head of the wound should be pierced and the water drained, or it should be cut with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will resemble the shapes of other instruments as described in the appropriate chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Do the same if the wound is naturally large: and then it must be incised with scissors or cut with an alundat as previously mentioned, and the bones should be removed with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and compressed by a splint, it must be incised until the moisture that is in the feet is drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there are no complications or obesity causing swelling, you should incise the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdomen is protruding or edematous, you must puncture it until the moisture within it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the wound is on one's feet, the pulling of it should be gentle and its direction towards the mother's mouth should be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed in the abdomen and feet, you must remove it with cloth that has been wrapped around your hand, and cut open both the abdomen and feet until moisture comes out from them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are closed and the head is turned, the hand should be inserted into the left side; but if the mother's mouth is blocked, the hand should enter through the anus, search for the head, pull it with the hands towards the mother's mouth, and insert a finger or two fingers to help pull it out.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is compressed by an abscess that comes from the anus, it must not be tampered with; rather, warm and oily liquids should be administered.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and let the patient drink waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on one's side, it should be punctured as much as possible; and warm and oily liquids as previously mentioned should be administered in a living creature.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, it must be incised in pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	It must not leave any cause for the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, administer the remedies for healing abscesses that come from the mother as previously mentioned.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, it should be stopped with styptic waters and the other remedy for healing should be administered.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman in the belly of whom death had occurred, and near her corpse another was observed, which also died soon after.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A man had an abscess in his navel for a long time, which inflated until it burst and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to treat him, and for a long time I treated the wound, but it did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed heavy plasters on it for some reasons, and extracted an bone from it, and after several days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly surprised, because there should not be bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the deceased man.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I sewed up the wound, extracted many bones from it, and the woman who was in her seventh month of pregnancy survived in this manner for a long time, but eventually died of a little fever.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not hesitate to be strange, but rather that in such cases there is knowledge and help for the doctor who treats with his hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of instruments required for extracting the wound.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the birthing rod, which is used to open the mother's vagina:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strangulation where the legs are compressed, in which compression there are two advantages at both ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this advantage should be as subtle as possible with a narrow constrictor, and it can be made of yew or hazel stick.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each stick should be two fingers and the width of both should be one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of the two sticks there are adjustments for that stick which are already fixed, the length of which is slightly more than one palm, and the width of each is slightly less than two fingers.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with those when you rotate the prescribed advantages.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, thinner and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Made of yew or hazel stick similar in shape to forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two adjustments similar to this, and the length of those adjustments is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those (instruments), then you press down on the woman's loins so that her feet hang down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And place your hand over the (opening) instrument similar to a forceps, as you do with forceps, according to the size that you perceive the mouth of the mother's womb requires for the placenta to pass through.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of impetus with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of amisida with which the large head is crushed
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, like sometimes, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, like sometimes, with teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it is cut and crushed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of premature birth:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of an uncus having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of an uncus having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps with shears at the end, with which the head of the fetus is crushed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spatula with two ends, with which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are practiced, and when more of them are multiplied and their types are prepared, the craftsman should be lighter in his operation and fewer in number for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not make any work with those instruments whatsoever, because the necessity of them is not to be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Extraction of the afterbirth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the patient to hold in their own excrement, and then make them vomit with conditioning, and tightly press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if this is outside the body, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, you must take a cloth and perforate the covering with a hole, and pour in there herbs such as camphor, mint, anise, chamomile, and sweet marjoram, and cassia wood and santolina.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are to be soaked in water in the cloth and placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the steam comes into the cavity of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Approach that vomiting as we have said, and the second one should be forgotten quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment remains and is not expelled, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sassafras or camomile tea, and introduce it into the cavity and seek out the second one, and when you find it, take it out little by little. If it sticks to the midwife's palm, introduce your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second one, extract it little by little so that the midwife does not catch it violently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It must be pressed on the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Approach it in the amount of pressure, for it will obey and escape from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the midwife is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with vomiting and with oil of water and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it is not expelled by all the causes that we have recommended, then you must be careful not to press too much on it in the process of extraction, but whatever has been expelled from it to the mouth of the midwife should be kept in a container of lime and tetra-pharmacon; for this will make it rot in about 5 days and dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, the bad humor is raised to the head and stomach, and the patient suffers from this; therefore, it must be administered with fumigation and suitable medicines.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But among the ancients, it was already spoken of the fumigation of garlic and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated should be for the retention of menstruation and of the second thing:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It can be made of glass or ivory.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The thin end should be placed in the cavity and the wide end on the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	It should have a space where the fumigation is consumed and another one is added.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment for an unperforated child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn babies and the anuses of them are not perforated, they should be treated with gentleness and oil.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife should perforate that anus with the aforementioned instrument, and if not, perforate it with a sharp probe, and take care not to touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and treat it with an ointment inside until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may become inflamed, then place a catheter for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it often happens that the anus becomes inflamed due to piles or fistula; therefore, that inflammation should be incised, and it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment for fistulas that occur afterwards.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur after delivery should be treated with soft and thick ointments, which are applied near the anus or in the space of the vaginal separation.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that nodule is old and turns into a white or subtle putridity, some abscesses may penetrate from it.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	These penetrations are recognized by what is expelled from them through the exit and by swelling; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation, and often worms come out of these.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these abscesses penetrate into the bladder or muscle of the penis, and penetrate through the junction of the vagina or into the neck of the uterus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is known as fistula penetrating the anus and not penetrating, is that you insert your aforementioned finger into the anus, and then introduce a thin probe of ivory or metal into the fistula when it is not too tight.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that there is a narrow passage, then enter the subtle probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair in your mouth.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel it or do not proceed with any cause of obstruction, diarrhea, worms, or flatulence, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and you should seek another cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the meat of the scrotum, its meaning is clearly that it is urine from that area and you should avoid using that place for medicine until it has been consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and pain occurs in its vicinity, the sign of that is that the probe passes through it only if there is not a narrow passage into the bone, and pain in the vicinity of the fracture; and that pus often appears from it; and that it has no value in that medicine and is not consolidated with poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all such fistulas healing is not achieved, and the healing of those is the effort and vanity of foolish doctors on which they insist.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recommend to you and have proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his legs so that the hips are inclined towards his stomach, and you enter the probe of lead or iron if it is in the fistula there is a narrow passage, until you know where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger into his neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrating your finger, or if you feel something soft or flesh between your finger and it, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and do not work on it, because there is no healing in it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it heals in some men temporarily.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which healing is hoped for, it is that you ignite a cautery thinly according to the size of the fistula, as described earlier, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and place a dressing over it twice or thrice until you know that all the tissues adjacent to the fistula are adjusted have been heated and shrunken like feathers on a bird's wing.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And cover that with calves wrapped in linen until all the tissues that are heated and shrunken have healed, and cover it with medicine that generates and consolidates flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, you should not be healed in a certain time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe is within and does not penetrate into the anus that is covered with a layer of flesh or cyst, and the fistula is in the area where the coccyx is moistened, then dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula, and watch it dry along with the probe, until the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe passes, and by means of the probe, it is freed and caught.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And clean those fistulated tissues that are similar to feathers of a bird's pen and do not remain from them any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flow often occurs between you and your operation when incising those tissues, you should use an instrument that milks the pus and cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire heals well: it shrinks those heated tissues and abscesses the blood by drying the moistness.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And cover that with calves wrapped in linen or with gauze until the wound is healed, and then treat the wound with hard flesh-generating and consolidating poultices.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines that have astringent and drying properties: when it is restored, it is healed and there is no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum of the anus and is extended on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you find that the probe and it is covered with flesh or cyst, and is close to penetration, then there is no operation in it except by faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or make an incision into it until you achieve the hollowing out of it so that it is possible for you to enter it and heal it properly; and do not proceed with incision without first achieving a hollow, because you risk injuring the rectum, which can cause diarrhea involuntarily in the patient; and cover it with what we have said earlier, as it will heal quickly. Or prolong that membrane and clean the pus that is dried up close to the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another sharp instrument, and clean those fistulated tissues in the incision where you can do percrustation; and make a complete restoration of the wound by sewing it together, and if the abscess pus does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the division of the anus, it will be easier for the patient to suffer from it.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it is around the edge of the buttock near the surface of the body with a cord, then take a probe for perforating extremities, which is similar to an awl for puncturing as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert a probe wrapped in five cords or around the probe with five cords into the fistula until it reaches its hollow.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if you penetrate the edge of the buttock from inside out, then you extract the cord from that wound by inserting your finger into the anus; and remove the tip of the cord and tie its ends together, tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when the cord is deeper in the flesh, tighten it further until those parts that are between the cord's tips and that fit are incised.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you prepare, as long as it does not tear the skin, because it is not your intention to do so without healing; and place a dressing over it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of using a spined spatula to divide the fistula: its shape is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not tear unnecessarily as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing of hemorrhoids where there is bleeding at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways, for they can be like coal cakes or as fat as a radish.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they can be small or large, and sometimes there is bleeding from them all at once, and they are mobile, and outside the anus, and in their openings.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the anus occur during months of little moisture, where there is yellow water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and to squeeze it until the anus becomes dry, and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then cut them with scissors or whatever you have available, and make an incision in their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the scissors are not available for cutting them due to their moisture and softness, then take them with coarse cloth or cotton or woolen thread, extract them using your fingers, and make an incision in them and sprinkle some cautery powders near the incision to prevent bleeding; or cauterize them according to the method described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And treat those with other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not release on its own, then you should crush the patient's anus with a small crust and wash it with water that will cause it to release gently when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause should be treated lightly, and you should take them with your finger or scissors and incise them, and treat them with the remedy mentioned earlier until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for an incision, it is necessary to administer suturing of them in this manner: take a probe wrapped in cord and insert it into the fistula; then extract the hemorrhoids at their openings, and make the probe penetrate the other side of the fistula with the needle, and wrap the ends of the cord around the part further away from the needle transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid strongly, and tie off the cord and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one open and not stitching it, for the excess blood will run from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus and cover it; place that one on the anus and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that one in place until it is healed; and when it is healed, treat those with enema or other remedies until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Occasionally, fistulas occur due to dryness of a wound or constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and not worth this medicine, it is necessary that you cauterize those with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they become moistened and stop the discharge from above, which prevents consolidation; and treat those until they have been consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	You should stop those with a very sharp reason until the first bleeding stops and they are excoriated; and treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of anal fistula, it is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that paleness, which is crucial, is not always indicative of redness as the body's color may appear like a pale head of clove, and it occurs throughout the body but more noticeably in the parts below the feet and in the hands, and through these areas you must follow the pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it must be incised what is in the circle of the nail, and kept with tweezers or oil, and be removed from its root; and care for that place.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, cauterize what follows in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Moreover, a verruca is a small, rough, fistula-like elevation on the surface of the body, and warts are observed more often in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment is to stretch and incise it, or to compress it with a linen cloth that fits.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this, as I said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	All warts have been removed, both forward and backward ones, using the tool that I will mention.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Moreover, a formica is a small, furrowed or thick fistula on the surface of the body, which ants often bite when it is touched, and when it is scratched, it becomes inflamed like an ant bite, and spreads around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment is to take a hollow needle or a sharp needle, and hold it over the formica so that its circle contains the part of it; then turn your hand with the needle around the formica, and press it into the skin where you have incised what is in the circuit of the formica, and remove the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a hollow needle or iron needle in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The opening is asking for the removal of the area above the incision to be done delicately, as it is not pierced (meaning non-perforated), wrapped and therefore the learning of the procedure should be based on that and the rotation of the said part. In English: "The removal of the area above the incision should be done delicately, since it is not perforated, wrapped, and therefore the procedure should be learned from this and the rotation of the said part."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish to cauterize the bugleworm as described in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries." In English: "If you want to cauterize the bugleworm, as described in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"In terms of the shape of the instruments that are administered for stitching." In English: "Regarding the shape of the instruments used for stitching."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes stitching is done with silver or lead or melted or hammered; and sometimes it is done with small and large instruments depending on the ones administered, as the one used in treating children should be small; and the stitches for those with friable or painful buttocks should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The large and few number of stitches:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the incision above where the bag is tied should be wide, as described in this manner; and it should be noted that the bag is tied there like sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the end below, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened), carefully; on one of its sides two cuts are made, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should match the thickness of the rays and the larger one should be smaller." In English: "And the end below, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened), carefully; on one of its sides two cuts are made, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should match the thickness of the rays and the larger one should be smaller."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And the bag where the urinary medicine of animal bladder or sheep's wool is placed, and its size should be a span." In English: "And the bag in which the urinary medicine made from animal bladder or sheep's wool is stored, and its size should be a span."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be perforated in such a way that the space between the cuts is the thickness of the finger." In English: "And it should be perforated in such a way that the space between the cuts is the thickness of the finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And insert it into those cuts carefully and firmly, using a sharp instrument of the same material, or around them; then adjust the bag accordingly; when the bag is placed, it should be tight at the end of the stitch between two distinct points with strong tension, and then stitch each cut: However, the quality of stitching with that is to fill the bag with the medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and take care not to overheat or freeze it."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"Then position the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a pillow; then oil or salve should be applied to the end of the cautery; and insert it gently into the anus with ease and the assistant should take hold of the bag and squeeze it forcefully until everything inside the stitch is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the stitch and the patient lifts their legs against the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine is necessary immediately, let it have as much as it can; if it remains with him for an entire night, it is more helpful.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you are treating the illnesses of the abdomen and its emergency release, then apply a pointed cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is an anal hemorrhoid or abscess in the anus, use a subtle and soft cautery among those that are called "criteria".
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free man, and I will also say the treatment of those with more resources and medications according to their condition.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that sores are differentiated according to what causes them and according to the place where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes that often cause sores are such as injuries from stones, or incision with a knife or sword, or striking with a lance, fist, or arrow, or similar to these.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But sores that occur in the parts of the body are such as a sore on the head, neck, foot, abdomen, chest, and similar to these body parts.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I also recommend the treatment for some sores using this reasoning and rule for other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the simple sores of the head, as the treatment for complex sores will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When a simple sore occurs on the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by a stone or something similar, and the wound has been sewn up but remains large and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then you should immediately lance the skull and drain the pus, without delay; and remove what blood comes out according to the amount of its strength, unless there is some other reason prohibiting lancing, especially if the blood that has come out from the sore is scant.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the lancing should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area, and keep the patient from reopening the wound, drinking alcohol, and eating rich foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any reason for caution, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Wait on the sore if an abscess forms on it, let it be infused with rose oil or vinegar in which is steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of the abscess, wait on the sore if it is new and has not yet changed its powder that I recommend keeping close by.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, wait on some salve until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or caused by incision of space and similar things, and the edges are not properly aligned, then align them with sutures as I recommend for their suturing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the sore has exposed the bone and not blocked, but only a small suspension suture is present, then incise it and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the skin, and order the patient to avoid rich foods: meat and fish and similar things, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is rotting of the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise everything possible and remove it, and care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and has not been separated by medicines, then you should explore the artery, and if it is not incised, incise it with a spatula or lance it; and if necessity requires that what I have said does not conform, then cauterize it until the blood is released.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	But if these sores are simple and small, the cause of them is light; therefore, sprinkle this powder on them, as it will solidify before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method for the powder is as follows: mix one part of oil from crushed walnuts, two parts of dragon's blood sap, three parts of non-extinct herbs; grind and sift everything, fill the sore with it, bind it tightly with a good binding until it adheres well, and let it coagulate with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And strengthen it above with powder and let it dry, and do not remove it until it forms an abscess, as the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes do only cautery when you do not have walnut oil and dragon's blood sap.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now perform this operation on large sores when it is necessary to wait on them and they are tightened, and only recent sores with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered it, and especially in summer, do not consider the position of this powder, but instead care for them as I have said, placing on them various salves or powders made from barley flour with water and honey until they form scabs; and care for them with other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture occurs in bone and it is small, you shall extract it with care.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you shall tell the cure for skull fractures that are poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	On neck wounds.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple skull fracture.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerve or artery in the neck is cut or severed, it is not advisable to treat with anything that causes violent constriction, such as zinjari and zegi, which are poisonous to nerves and harmful to them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any pressure on the wound at all, because the substance of nerves is sensitive and their continuation is near to the brain, which is above all other members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If the wound is cured with light medicines, such as cleaning it with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and sometimes cleaned with sweet water and other remedies according to this method, and then anointed with moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, administer suture, or sew the lips (of the wound), and apply care with powders within it until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lower part of the skull, you shall perforate it in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, you shall separate or stop the flow of blood by ligating it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spinal vertebrae of the neck are cut and the veins of the neck are saved, you shall sew the edges of the wound on the back of the neck over the spine of the neck and do not touch it; elevate it equally and align it with its natural shape, and strengthen it with a decent structure, and allow it to rest for several days; apply care with liniments where there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has entered the bone and there is danger of fragmentation of the bones, you shall percuss it (tap gently with a hammer or similar instrument), and if there are pieces of bone that can be extracted, extract all of them; for what cannot be handled, allow it to rest until the wound becomes more prominent, and separate it from the surrounding tissue and its edge should be relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, you shall sprinkle powder over it that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound is made into a fistula (abnormal passage), you shall treat it with that which the memory brings to mind in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	On neck wounds or similar ones that are made between the shoulders and are caused by a spear, sword, dagger, or similar object.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a spear or sword wound, and sometimes with great depth, you shall consider more if the patient has shortness of breath when he speaks; you shall know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if the wound is not deep and the bleeding is recent from the patient's own blood, you shall pause at the first hour with powder, and not apply pressure to it so that the blood does not remain trapped in the depth of the wound and return to the heart and weaken the patient, but rather wait for an attractive liniment, and remove it every two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the liniment is not available, you shall pause at the orifice of the wound and allow any pus that is there to drain out; make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is in place runs out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and the patient does not suffer from spasm, tremor of heart bad nor chest tightness, sometimes with other good dispositions of it, you shall know that the wound is healed; then treat it with ointments and other care until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is excused and it remains open for a long time, you shall know that it has become a fistula (abnormal passage); treat it accordingly in its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a spear or sword and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, you shall treat it with suture if it is large, or powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if danger has already occurred in the bone and it is only cut pieces of flesh, you shall twist the wound and try to extract those pieces of flesh if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, you shall allow them to rest until the wound becomes more prominent, as extracting them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents that occur in other members, the help in care is the same as what has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the afflictions of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that happens in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In the case of a large [affliction], sometimes it is necessary to insert [something] into the intestine or nerve of the intestine, and the suture must be made forcefully and subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is treated with difficulty by other means, and it is known that its reduction is more difficult unless you take care to insert it into its place immediately, for it swells up and thickens, making the insertion of it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in both cases mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these are common to those sutures of other afflictions of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other particular sutures communicate with other afflictions, but they are more specific to the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend that you have extensive exposure and detailed explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the affliction is small and there is some cause of the intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of two methods can be used: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is so, it is necessary that you warm the intestine in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water only, or you take [the intestine] in hot water and cyperum, spice, and bind it with it until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes you will find one in which there is stricture, and it is better that water alone be used to resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore, when the inflammation is resolved, you moisturize the intestine with water in which salt and wormwood are contained, for this eases the insertion of it with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the insertion is blocked by this treatment, then you cut the disruption slightly with an instrument that is used to incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary treatment is better when it is not cutting, and there should be no concern for cutting unless necessary and unavoidable.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, consider its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One side of the instrument is curved and sharp, while the other side is not curved or pointed, and its tip should be slightly blunt, not as sharp as a spatula's.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the affliction increases and the intestine comes out, its reduction should be according to its natural form in its proper place if possible, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back and elevate their legs as much as possible; if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate their head and feet as much as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should pause your thoughts and consideration immediately so that the side on which the affliction is located is elevated more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And therefore you must attend to this in large and medium-sized afflictions.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small afflictions, pause what is ready for use and make sure that the assistant who will administer it has your full trust, as he will hold the disruption with his entire hand and adjust the lips of it, and approach the incision from one side to avoid causing any other damage.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suturing: one that takes a needle or counting of needles according to the size of the affliction; and approach it from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, tighten the needle once, without inserting it into both ends of the thread, with both ends of the ciphax that is inside the parts, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the ciphax, and they are made in four rows.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten with double thread around the needle, and sometimes from two sides at once, and gather both lips and the affliction by proper approximation; and approach the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in it, and approach it as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the contraction of the affliction.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And needles can be medium-sized between coarseness and fineness, as fine needles penetrate the flesh lightly; while thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread, and therefore it is necessary that they be medium in both coarseness and fineness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at two opposite ends of the wound, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the ulcer heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to extend the stitching, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then sew the ends of the wounds together so that you do not injure the patient while he sleeps; and place pulverized plaster all around the stitching, which will have the ends of the needles; and let it remain until you know that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are suitable for small wounds, because the stitching of them requires only one or two needles around that area.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second stitching is common: and it is that you administer the four edges with a suture, of the wound and two edges of the opening, at one time, with a needle in which silk is tightly wrapped in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then when the needle penetrates these four edges, return the needle from that divided area from which you started, so that the thread takes away the pus rising up from the wound, so that the stitching is done with linen thread as the linen threads are strong.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each stitch the thickness of a needle.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitching is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And I sewed up the wound that had occurred in a man's stomach, which was wounded by a sword, and it was a disruption of the wound larger than a palm, and it had burst out from two palms away from the hernia of the same location and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestine had been outside for 48 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound healed in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured it and it was healed; and let it live for many years, and it was maintained in its condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by miracle, because I did not cure it with a lance, since it was in a location where a lance could not be found or any medicine, instead I placed a hot poultice over the wound twice daily and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you two types of stitching according to the teaching of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you start with the suture of the wound, and insert the needle from the outside edge to the inside edge.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle pierces the hide and enters it according to the rule and length of the entire body, and leaves the end of the bladder where you have inserted the needle; and causes the needle to penetrate into the other extremity from the inside to the outside in the other part of the urethra.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so, when you have caused it to penetrate (the needle), then cause it to penetrate again into the other entry point of the urethra from inside to outside; and leave the bladder end that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other entry point from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	Make the entry point where you have made it enter (the needle) penetrate again with that penetration into the bladder in its external entry point, which is inside all of that (the penis).
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And so, begin to draw out the side of this entry (the urethra) and direct it towards the other side, which is the bladder's external end, and pull the needle out from the hide that has penetrated; and return that one into the bladder and direct the bladder's external end towards the other side of this entry with this exterior end of the penis; and pull that one out from the bladder which is on its side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this again and again, and do it again approaching further until you have gathered all that is outside according to the example given.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The total sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with skin sutures and stitch the skin, as if you were sewing the bladder once from the side of the bladder's external end (the urethra), and leave the other part until you have filled it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	However, the second type of suturing called Gualla is specifically mentioned, and it is about sewing according to this method and is recommended by some doctors. This means that you sew according to half-sewing, as some physicians do, adding all parts together in a suitable way according to nature; and apply the edge of one side and the edge of the penis to the other edge of it, and this is done as I have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You must place the needle in the penis's external edge, facing the side of the bladder, and make it penetrate into the bladder only, leaving two ends of the bladder; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through the two ends of the bladder.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each one and make each one penetrate from inside to outside through the two ends of the penis in opposite directions (i.e., at the opposite sides).
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing that I have previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the Gualla method
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	However, others say that the abdominal suturing is corrected with two needles, meaning that you insert one needle at each end, and start with the introduction of a needle into the other side according to the suture of those who sew the heart properly (i.e., in an alternating fashion).
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when a rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, the suturing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	However, the treatment of plague is judged according to other plagues (i.e., each plague requires a different treatment).
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you get the plague recently and before the air alters it, you reduce the bladder, stitch it properly, and prepare it well; then you pause over the carbolic powder (i.e., a disinfectant used at that time).
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those antiseptics that are in your presence until they dry and harden the bladder and penis; and return to care it as the treatment for other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	However, if you are not present for the medication, then pause over it immediately, because it begins to weep, rot, and change color every two days, as I have shown you, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	However, if you fear that the plague may spread to the main members (i.e., the large intestines), then it is necessary for you to immerse wool in boiled oil or unboiled oil and place it over the area between the anus and the scrotum (i.e., over the lower abdomen).
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in your bladder (i.e., the urinary tract), because it has become pus-filled, then you should cauterize that with black sticky vinegar, and especially if the pustulation occurs in the bladder and a puncture is made to penetrate into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that healing from the large bladder (i.e., the urinary bladder) is easier than healing from the small bladders (i.e., the ureters).
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the bladder that is called "gugunu" does not receive healing from plague that occurs in all parts; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its size, its subtle nature, and its proximity to nerve tissue.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what proceeds from the wound is linen, and you can obtain it recently, roll it up according to your rule as you do with hernias.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed a long time and it becomes black or green, then you must apply a tight ligature to the affected area, so that blood flows out, because in linen there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert a ligature at that place where the wound is located, and pause the ends of the thread hanging from the incision, so that the attraction towards it may be alleviated. By pulling on the linen and releasing the pressure of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recalling wounds when they occur in the hernia.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small disruption in the hernia, it is possible to restore it in some men, because I saw one who was repeatedly wounded in his abdomen with a lance and had a wound on the right side of his stomach, and the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and exudation from it and foul smell.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore, I continued the treatment since it was not completed in healing, but rather continued to cauterize the area where the fire healed and the location was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the location already consolidated, and advised the patient to avoid any further injury to his stomach; no one should suffer from this unfortunate event and disrupt their daily routines of eating and drinking, and instead take a bath and rest.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the hernia, it is necessary to tie it as follows: take large grapes; then align the two lips of the wound and place one grape with its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; when you press on it, separate the head from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And pause another grape near the first, and do not continue to make one grape after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And tie that one and close the wound; keep the attached heads in the hernia until the hernia is healed; do not harm the patient with any inconvenience.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible to tie the hernia with a thin thread made from an animal intestine, because it is finer; and take the end of these threads from the intestines, which should be devoid of flesh, and tie the end of it with a thread wrapped around it, then insert the thread into needles and sew it to the hernia, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with grapes is not reliable or trustworthy.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the delicate hernias, then it is not repair, but rather cauterization, and not healing from all aspects.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatment for abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess that becomes old and is not healed and remains wet all the time and does not drain off, whether it is in any part of the body, is universally called a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula, according to truth, is a hard, white nodule, without pain and with a concavity similar to the concavity of an ulcer; and it is therefore called "rizzated abscess", i.e. ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it is a wet fistula that drains pus; and its moisture is discharged in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture moves, and it is small, thick, and thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have already mentioned in the division, when I spoke of wounds, that any ulcer that is not healed or is not in raw flesh is not this but one of these causes: either because there is little blood in the body; or due to malignancy of it; or because between it and the lips there is tough skin prohibiting the growth of flesh; or because it is a moving abscess; or because the ulcer itself produces pus and the material sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its treatment; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, such as Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult, and the healing of abscesses by nature is slow; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all these causes, their symptoms and the treatment of them in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to know the treatment of fistulas, which is performed by operation with a surgeon.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for they are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the hernia, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed in such a way as the hand and the foot; and they are those that provide proximity to the main member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus that fistula which follows this method belongs to difficult-to-heal ailments and does not receive cure, and care for it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If the depth of one of these fistulas does not reach these places as stated, and you hope for its healing and believe in it, and wish to understand more about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows a straight path, touch it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then examine it with a probe of fine lead, because lead has the lightness of its body, and is easily curved to follow the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has moving painful parts, it is not possible for you to probe it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, cauterize the orifices with cautery, because the moisture you use to cauterize one will go to other orifices and spread from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then you must examine carefully, according to the method that is possible for you to determine if here you have bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short in cavity, or is a fistula with many orifices and lies completely beneath the maximum of your strength, your questioning, and the examination of the patient, and the discovery of the pain must be your compression on the area, and similar to the signs and causes accidental to an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes with true vigilance, then proceed to the healing with confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is apparent near a salt spot, far from a joint, or of nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry out the fistula according to what was said before about its nature, and stop that which is in its filtering and corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the skin, or flesh, or similar, and cure it within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of deep length and follows a straight path, it is necessary that you incise it into the preon as far as possible for you, and clean out all its corrupted flesh; and administer warm poultices covered in acute medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have enclosed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And leave it for a few watch-periods until the acute medicine has eaten up all that has been rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with healthy substances which produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it according to the method you have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify this, then examine it and dry it out according to the method you have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as you have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackening in it, then cut it out until the corruption is completely stopped; and treat it with something that causes flesh to grow on it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and discharges pus as before, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and therefore investigate again with great care, make the reasoning for it and clean it with your last strength, and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And thus if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and in that case, you can do nothing but let it be.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small or it can be shot out, then shoot it out with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if the bones are moving, then you must perform a precise removal of all of them, and leave no cause for them with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humors opposes you and in its incision there is no fear or error, then incise the liquid or flesh here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then stop over the wound as much as possible, and leave it until the surroundings of those bones become flesh and liquid, and guard the wound that is not consolidated, and constrain the incision which you have made during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Therefore, if you fear, stop over the wound submerged in hot oil, or a wound submerged in strong Egyptian ointment, or one of the green poultices, for when they are heated, the liquids separate from the bones and their abscesses are drained, and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thigh or hip bones or similar to those, and what is rotten from it is only the face of it, then cut out the rot only from behind until the blackness and corruption is removed, and restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupt in him is large and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close and completely excise that and the surrounding tissue where the corruption has occurred, and then care should be taken to heal it when it has been consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Recommend to you that which happens to a man in his private part for him to restrain and assist with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around 30 years of age suffered pain in his testicles and from inside the scrotum there was pus-like matter that had spread into the body interior to the scrotum, this matter is abscess with large abscess, and it is not external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Therefore, the time was extended by the error of doctors until the abscess had matured, and then the matter emerged, and its healing was delayed until the scrotum became fistula, and you must make incisions in the pustules that all got pus and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then many doctors treated it for about two years, without wisdom but in skill, until I was summoned.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the scrotum of him and the matter that flowed from those pustules through a large wound, and the body of that man was completely stabilized and his color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those pustules and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I approached and examined all the pustules and found that they were connected to all parts of the scrotum.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut into one of those pustules until I discovered a bone cavity, and found that it was corrupted, and it was already hard and corrupted and rotten; and a part of the scrotum had already been corrupted to the extent that it had penetrated into the muscle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I removed what was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I found that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had been excised and removed, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And I placed the restoration of the wound with a consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I examined again and found over the bone according to the previous finding, and found continuous corruption around the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I removed what appeared to be from that corruption, and then I was determined to perform the healing and restoration of it, but it did not heal.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I examined again and did not stop cutting the bone little by little specifically and continued the restoration of it, and it did not heal until I cut around an inch of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and I restored it with medicine, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	The operation and section of him was not necessary except for the provision of the firmness of it and due to the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because he suffered in all hours due to excessive loss of syncopes.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, it is healed completely and there is nothing in the bone marrow; the arrangement of it was good in his body and the virtue of it returned; and it was kept in its arrangements and no harm was done to him in any way nor any injury in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in the body broken, then it becomes necessary that you cut it in this way: and it is that you take hold of it firmly at its extremity and command someone to stretch it out; and place a strong linen bandage on top of it; and place it over the flesh that is left behind the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to pull the flesh apart, and you discover the flesh over the place which you want to cut, so that the cut does not injure the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And stop a table or board behind the bone properly, because when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut through the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the cut be made over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the depression of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to touch, and perhaps another examination will be needed.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, then one part is continuously connected to the other, and the corruption is at the same place or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh; and stop a table behind, and cut from the first part where the corruption is until the cutting of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the cut according to the location of the corruption, as mentioned above.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is connected to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not rational but artifice.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in what way it appears to you, and cut it open, clean it according to each arrangement that is possible for you, and with each artifice be corrected, provided that it does not harm veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Know what the saw-like instruments are for cutting these bones and which saws should be used on these bones depends on the position of the bones, the preparation of those bones, and their thickness and fineness or coarseness; therefore, you must prepare all types of equipment suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	E sapias that the operation signifies to you the type of instrument that is necessary; when indeed, you are skilled and experienced in the ways of this art, and witness to the methods of illnesses, therefore now you must choose for yourself what is suitable for those instruments in every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	E thou should make at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments which you will use as simple ones with which you will perform the prohibition that you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Forma della sega:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma d'altra sega:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma d'altra sega:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma d'altra sega grossa:
Forma de ray:	Forma di raggio:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	La cima di questo raggiello ha la forma di testa di chiusura a stella, e le punte sono come quelle dell'astaferaggio.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	E non bisogna che le parti di congiunzione siano conforate se sono corrotte o la bocca è larga.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma di lame più grandi delle altre:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma di lame minori:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma di lame a forma di lato:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma di altra sega con arco superiore più elevato e la punta di ferro affilata correttamente, e i bracci dello strumento sono diseguali.
Forma de lu:	La forma di quella:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma di lame con convessità:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Forma di lame ancora più fina:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Forma di altra lame con estremità curva:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma di lame piccola simile ad una freccia:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Forma di raschiatori per tagliare le ossa:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma di raschiatori ancora più piccoli:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another saw-like instrument; this resembles a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the joints of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a rasp-like instrument that serves to cut through the bone:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and sharp-edged.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of iron from India, and it resembles all the causes that we mentioned for rasps, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision and the cutting through of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The incisions can be caused intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated a corruption and the cure does not help, or the corruption spreads to a member that was not affected by any cause, then you must make an incision in the member to the depth of the corruption, so that the patient escapes death or a greater evil that is more harmful to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of this is that the member turns black before it can be burned, or it may become black to the depth where the corruption enters the member and takes hold of the entire body; therefore, you must make an incision in that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poison from certain venomous creatures such as scorpionfish, viper, or rattle snakes and similar animals.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or poison is at the end of a finger, then you should incise the finger and not give space to the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise the arm at its joint and do not give space to the corruption to enter into the elbow of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it swells up (the corruption), then you should incise the arm at the shoulder joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If the corruption spreads beyond the shoulder and sometimes surrounds it, then in this case the patient is at death's door; and administering another cause for treatment is as good as nothing.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if the corruption spreads to the foot and swells up the toe, then you should incise it at one of the joints (of the toe).
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If it starts climbing up the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it climbs into the ankle, then you should incise the calf at the ankle joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has reached the ankles, then do nothing but dismiss the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incising or sawing a member is that you strengthen the ligament on the side where you want to make the incision, and strengthen another ligament on the other side; and extend one ligament away from the incision site, and extend the other ligament over it; and separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make an incision or saw.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to place a layer of cloth over all the incision sites to protect them, and bring the wound to the patient dressed and covered with a cauterizing dressing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should cauterize the site immediately, or apply some astringent powders to stop the bleeding; and return to your treatment when it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place the affected member in appropriate bandages and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend that you place the patient's foot in a splint for this accident that we both recommend, which is when the blackness occurs in the patient's foot due to burn-like blistering.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first appears at the toe and tends to spread over the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore, the patient must prepare himself by putting on thick socks to protect the foot from the intensity of the pain and burn-like blistering, and then incise the foot at the joint and heal it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that insidious corruption occurred in the finger of the hand, indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And so it was with me, and I performed the necessary removal of that superfluity over the hand with the application of medicines, and the superfluity did not recur and began to spread to another finger starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called on me to incise the hand of that person, but I did not want to do it because of the risk of recurrence of the superfluity, and instead I feared the incision of the hand would cause death, as the patient's strength was failing.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And so he lost hope in me and returned to his homeland, but I learned that the man had prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this narrative is not meant to be read as entertainment but as guidance for dealing with this illness and as a sign of the significance of such treatment.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Treat the wound properly and carefully, using appropriate cleansing solutions and medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until pus collection occurs, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is released from it, leaving a hollow cavity behind like a vessel, covered with thin fabric such as linen, and no secondary corruption occurs, and no pressure is applied to the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	If the space is prolonged before corruption affects any member, it is called a fistula and not a wound.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is that the wound is stitched up in the same way as a loop is turned, and especially when it becomes thin and is sewn with linen, making sure it does not stick to the place due to corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the wound will stick and if corruption has not yet been achieved by a wrong sequence of events, and there is swelling in the wound, then you cure it with a suppository.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the mucus that comes out of it has a fetid odor, then you purge it with an Egyptian remedy which is made of oil, vinegar and ginger, which are ground together and divided into portions, and put in a container, and placed over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the desired consistency.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; purge the sinus with this, strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract it with care; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the odor has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Sometimes it is purged with water made from ashes, when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ash of burnt wheat, put it in water, let it settle, then collect it and purge the sinus with it until you are confident that the sinus has stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water made from ashes, then purge it with water and honey mixed with ginger crushed, or with vinegar and honey mixed, for by nature honey is cleansing and washing, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of bitterness and dryness in the vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this for some days and are confident that the sinus has subsided, then purge it with a liquid that makes the flesh come out of it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take diaphonicon, dissolve it in oil of roses and vinegar of bitterness; or you purge it with various medicines and other remedies that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on clysters.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the canula of the clyster cannot be received in it, then you gradually widen it with a small iron, pausing when it is covered with Egyptian or basilicon oil until it is sufficiently widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the opening is wide, then you stitch up the lips of it with suture and leave it in a size such that the clyster does not protrude from it.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of which the mucus comes out is elevated at the partings above it, then dry it in the pus-like place where it is located so that the mucus flows back inside, because when the mucus is obstructed in the sinus, flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the bone pus-like area as you wish, then prepare the member by preparing it with the preparation that allows the mucus to flow out easily and without being obstructed by any cause of the mucus.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are placed on the sinus as needed, so that they extend over linen fabric.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The linen fabric should be of such size that it communicates with the entire sinus; and then insert a larger, slightly longer probe into the right opening of the sinus using forceps; and extend another linen fabric of the lion's oil over this linen fabric according to the length of the probe, and place it on top of this for a long distance from the opening of the sinus so that the discomfort of the mucus is relieved from the area and the linen fabric does not become too large, but rather every few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But the one that is over the opening of the sinus, which you always wash to let out whatever is inside it.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	So that you know if what comes out from the mucus is liquid or solid, or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this you observe the location of the sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this way, and the matter that was deposited on the opening of the sinus has already adhered or shows signs of adhesion, then you should loosen it or wait three days, and when the wound is loosened, then change the linen fabric for another and renew the oil.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a long space with subtle virus, do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching, because some men have slow regeneration of flesh in their wounds and this is opposite to that.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus has been discharging undigested mucus for many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and this is prolonged, then you adjust it with a drying treatment, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their effect, they should be dried as with diaphonicon, when there is excess addition of zinc.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The patient's last aid is to take a thick, dissolved defugation in rose oil and place it on the affected area, and then bandage it using that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	When there is no other remedy, take thickened honey and apply it; or take myrrh and aloes, grind them all together into a powder and sprinkle it over the heated honey, then draw a line with that mixture onto linen and strengthen it with wax; draw a line on the honey-covered area that you have thickened, and sprinkle more of the powdered mixture onto linen and strengthen it again.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	When used occasionally, administer the long-term aristology of celestial lily (which is celestial lily) and flour made from fennel seeds and centaury, and use those simple ingredients or adjust as necessary, grind them and sift them into a powder, sprinkle that over the honey.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinus prolongs and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption is in its front part, and it starts to attack the bones or other hard parts or ligaments; you should treat it with fistula treatment, as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment for paronychia and cuticle removal, nail trimming, and incision.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises under the nail of the toe or finger, and it grows stronger in other places, and when prolonged and its cure is delayed, it can become an abscess or rot, and it eats away at the root of the nail, rotting it completely, and its corruption spreads to the bone underneath, making the end of the finger putrid, and the color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have the above mentioned condition and your treatment does not improve, it is necessary that you cut off all the excess rotten part of the nail and cauterize the affected area with hot iron, as cauterization is helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, but the additions of the nail press the skin at the sides inside, and it starts to hurt and swell there, you should pause a thin needle at the angle where the nail penetrates the skin, push it through, and cut the affected skin with ease, and pause medicines containing corrosive substances on what remains of the skin until it is completely healed; then treat the area with an ointment until it is cured.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already entered the bone, you should cut and extract it because there is no cure for a rotten bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the corruption and rot are spreading in the finger, you should cut it open at one of its nodes according to its memory (meaning: where it hurts most), and then treat the area until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has been percussed or crushed, and pain is very intense, you should first anesthetize the patient, then cut the nail with a sharp knife in a transverse section from top to bottom, but make sure that the cut does not reach the skin below the nail, because it will cause severe pain to the patient and can lead to the growth of superfluous tissue at the site; then treat the area with what relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Adjusted digit (a common condition in many men), which is entirely flesh, and it is very strong in bones, or it is very strong in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Some are born with the condition of the joint, or they have it in the knuckles of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	A person born with a condition of the finger knuckle is not ill, but one who is born with a joint disorder is sick.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	For those who are born with fleshiness, the section is easy, and it should be cut with a thin knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for those who are born with joint disorders, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of an abscess forming there.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	For the one born with a condition of the finger, it is necessary to first cut the skin around the knuckle with a round incision into the bone, then use a suitable saw and treat the area until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation that happens in the fingers due to various conditions or by birth of the person with such condition, or due to plague consolidation or burn from fire, or similar, it is necessary to cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Place a thin layer of lead between them in rose oil to prevent them from easily consolidating, or separate them with a piece of thin fabric until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if there is consolidation in the palm of the hand, you should cut off that consolidation according to its preparation and the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Incision of vessels results in varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vessels are varicose veins, which are large swollen veins filled with melancholic waste that move in the body's members, and their greatest danger is in the legs, especially in travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer the body's purge of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and return blood to the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure for them is according to two methods: the first one is that it should be cut and the black bile extracted, and the second method is that the vein should be raised and everything removed.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is performed according to this method: first, the vein should be wrapped with warm water until the thick black bile is dissolved, which is mucus from the vein, and then tightly bind the patient's leg above the knee and below the groin with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one, two or three places, and cut the vein widely, and raise the black bile with the patient's own hand from below the vein upwards and downwards until the desired amount and the number of times you want to extract it have been achieved, and the patient's condition will improve.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then tie it up, and order him to avoid foods that produce black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full, and you notice this in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The raising of the area is performed according to this method: you should wash the patient's leg if there are sores, and then immerse his leg in warm water until it swells up and the veins are filled; or exercise it with strong exercise, if washing is not available, until the member is softened.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And cut the cordon on the side of the vein in a long or short incision, depending on whether it is on the right side of the vein or the left, or at the bottom of it you must do this.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And open the cordon with scissors and expose the vein from all sides until you can feel it, and you should know that the pain decreases when it turns black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And since it is swollen and you see that the cordon is white, you should open the cordon and expose the vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then you should place the lance beneath it until it is raised and displaced from the cordon, and suspend it with a lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And cut another incision opposite the first one for three fingers' width, and expose the cordon above the vein up to where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And raise that and incise the lower incision at the bottom of it, and extract that and raise that up to where it comes out through the second incision, and extract that from the incision above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until the entire cord is extracted from the higher or lower incision or all of the incisions, until it has been completely removed; then close that incision.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you find that it is difficult to extract and raise, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it off, or place the lance beneath it and turn your hand all around until it is dislodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise it and may cause harm to the patient because of this injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that entire cord is dislodged, place a dressing over the wound soaked in wine and olive oil, both red and white, and heal it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wound is contracted with tortuosity in which there is adhesion at the sides, and it is not straight as we have said, you must cut it all along the side of the tortuosity and the places of adhesion, and suspend it with scissors until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Be careful to make your incision without cutting the vein and damaging it, for it will be difficult to raise it, and use your judgment in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision that is performed on a contracted vein:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a lion's claw:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not appropriate to apply it like a nail or of sharp extremity so as not to harm the vein; and it is of large flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having excessive thickness like we said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Translation: Extraction of leg vein. (Meaning: Removal of a vein from the leg.)
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the knees, such as in the Egyptian lands in the Arabian deserts and in the Indian lands with little vegetation and where there is no grass or herbs.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body other than the knees.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is due to corruption, which comes from the bowels such as venom that escapes inside the body and snakes, worms, scabies and worms multiplying between the bowels and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	A sign of the onset of this condition is the swelling of the knee, which becomes extremely inflamed; and place your hand over it, as it begins to emit a vein similar in appearance to a plant from the site of that inflammation.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	When the fetus appears at the end, it is necessary to cover it with a lead weight of a pound or two and leave it suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever any signs of that condition appear outside, cover it with lead and secure it in place.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it persists, you should make an incision there and cover the remaining part; do not incise that which is visible outside, as incising it will cause contraction, entering the flesh and causing abscesses, pus, and a bad ulcer at the site.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted slowly, until it is completely expelled from the body without any remaining cause within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it has been expelled in some men who are of the length of five palms (approximately 18 inches) and I have heard that one as long as twenty palms has also been expelled.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during treatment, insert the lance into its depth and perforate it lengthwise with the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer corruption of the site for several days with medicines; and care for it as you would treat abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes stops growing, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it often causes abscesses, and is extracted from each abscess separately.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, treat it as previously described and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On incision of worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine illness (cattle sickness).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is known in some lands as "bovine disease" because it often invades cattle and is a rare worm that develops between the bowels and flesh, moves throughout the body, and eventually breaks through the skin, displaying symptoms in different parts of the body until the bowel is ruptured and it comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of this condition is due to the corruption of certain humors such as worms, snakes, larvae, and tapeworms in the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of its malicious nature, as when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can cause a severe cough, enter the brain, and destroy it, causing numerous symptoms in various parts of the body.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when you want to cure and remove it, do not proceed if its movement and appearance have not been observed, and it is necessary to strengthen the area above and below it and apply constant pressure, and then press firmly and dry the affected area before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is incised in the flesh but not completely penetrated, then you pause cauterizing fire upon that spot, and the main fear is corruption of the wound by which the site is also corrupted as has been said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it comes to the head of the nose, you apply pressure above the eyebrow with strong tightening and wipe it, and pull it out; be sure that the patient uses purgatives for their body and medications that evacuate putrid humors, and keep away from foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From incision to the pain of the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen it according to what I advised.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a sick woman in a village, and you found her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was cut open for an hour, I saw that inflammation swell as if worms were crawling towards this, but less noticeably than blood flowing from place to place. Like silver flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved to that spot and settled in the muscle, and here it stayed for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	It went back into the other body towards the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I advise you to rotate the body all around as I saw; and it was very marveled at by the change and the speed of the member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	You have already seen such cases in the most serious wounds according to that method, but I have also seen some who had pain transmitted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not as in the woman's case.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that kind of case because the woman was old, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this case, it appeared to me as a kind of wind transmitted by sensation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and have bodies with soft veins weakened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	As you want the healing of it, and the patient feels that pain, do not press on the wound as has been said, but instead apply pressure gently and wipe it until the constriction subsides, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in your wounds, then you cure it by purging the body and expelling wind, and administer pills made of figs and fig-tree leaves and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of sutures.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sutures are of various types according to their species and the parts of the body where they are located, because of their diversity, some have large points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, solid ones; some have three corners, those that have tongues, and those called stitches.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the type that is according to the limbs and places where it occurs is according to two methods: because the limbs or principal members include the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, hernias, bladder, and similar ones; therefore, when you find one of these limbs and notice signs of death, I recommend that you avoid extracting that suture in those where death is imminent in the place where it occurs, especially in the most serious cases. If you do not experience such bad signs, and the suture is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	From the signs of the server is when you find a suture passing through bone, exiting from the skull which is above the brain, because this often causes intense headache, blindness, dizziness, burning in the wounds, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, strong fever is separated from speech and destroyed voice, and white pus-like discharge comes out of the wound, similar to the moisture of meat.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so, if these signs appear to you, you should abstain from treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the signs of an arrow in the heart occur, which is near the left breast and felt as if it were lodged in a hard place and not empty, and its movement resembles that of the pulse, and there is a black blood flow from the wound, and such chilliness at the extremities, shivering, sweating, and fainting; then know that death approaches.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are certainly of foamy blood from the wound, and vessels near the neck are filled, and the patient's complexion is changed, and exhales a strong spirit and demands cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the scrotum which is in the groin area, and the pain occurs near the small ribs, it is accompanied by great and violent pain and shortness of breath, and not all the body muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, there will be a strong flow of undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the arrow strikes the abdomen and lodges there, there will be a fissure from the wound, or tissues, or an intestine that has been torn apart, and there is no hope in the removal of the arrow for healing.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow strikes the bladder and passes out through urine, and there is some cause for rupture outside, and the pain on the patient is strong, then know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	However, other parts of the body such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, ribs, spine, furcula (clavicle), pelvis, and their similar members are saved according to the greater precautions if the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that I have seen the nature of these arrows, which means by this to use caution in treating them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason is that in a man, an arrow entered the tear duct of his eye during a nosebleed, and I extracted it from the other side without damaging the eyebrow, and it healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been struck in the eyebrow during a nosebleed, tearing away the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden, not discovered except for a small tip that adhered to his handle, and it was a sharp Turkish arrow with a lion head without teeth.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew was saved, and there was no serious harm done to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the throat, an Arabic arrow with teeth, and it was embedded in his neck; then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; then I softened it with the guide, and I carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the stomach, and I thought he would die because of it; but since thirty days had passed without any change due to his precautions, I incised it and threaded it, and he was healed, and there was no serious harm done.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound was healed over it, and after six years, I extracted the arrow from the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her stomach, and the wound was healed within it, and there was no change in her condition over six years, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his face and the wound was healed over it, and the arrow was removed without causing much pain, and similar symptoms occurred.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I extracted the arrow from the man of the king which had lodged in his nose in the worst possible location and had declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	I was called upon to treat him within three days of the arrow wounding.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I examined the wound of the arrow, and it was not very deep; then I examined it carefully with subtlety, but I did not feel it; however, I felt a prick under the right eyebrow, and so I hoped that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	I spread out the area with ointment containing an attractive and digestive property, assuming that the wound would open up so that the arrow could be seen.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Nothing serious happened at the site where the arrow had lodged; and I continued with the ointment for many days, but there was no change; and over time the wound healed, and the patient was cured by waiting several days before he felt the arrow in his nose again and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied an aggressive and corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe I discovered that it was the tip of the arrow that had adhered to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Approach and adjust the incision in the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow becomes visible to my sight, and pass the time with it for the space of time up to four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Once the wound has been expanded, and it is possible for me to insert forceps into it, leave that in place and do not move it excessively. Then continue to refine and work on it with various techniques until one day using forceps carefully made, according to the shape that will come at the end of this section, begins to take hold of it; and after extracting it, restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And certain doctors have judged that the cartilage of the nose has not been restored, and I will restore it, and the wound is healed, and the patient recovers health entirely without any further problems.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you pause this rule and meaning over that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understandable through narration or do not comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsman compares little with much; and he takes into account what is present about what is absent; and you should apply new operation and new instruments to the removal of foreign causes in the art when it occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members in which they have been placed except by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is lodged or by the opposite side of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which has been shot into the place where it enters or is an arrow originating from a fleshly location and shot out of place.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not move it excessively at the time when it catches, then you must leave it for some days until the surrounding flesh can be softened and relieved of its attraction and exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is lodged in bone and you do not move it excessively, then leave it for some days and gradually move it with traction and motion every day, and it will be extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not move it excessively for some days, then you must perforate the circumference of the arrow in that bone on all sides with a fine tool until the location is expanded by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and it has already processed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of those accidents occur as I have said, then you must refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it for some days until its being is balanced; because if the arrow reaches the skull, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone of the chest and does not pass into the skull, and the patient remains for some days without any occurrence of those accidents, then you apply various techniques to the attraction of the arrow and the attraction of the wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound is moving and not suitable for extraction, then you administer various treatments around the arrow as recommended, and care for the location until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is deeply hidden in the chest and is felt, then you investigate it with exploration, and if you feel it, then shoot it out with various tools appropriate for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot move it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the pus, and this is not bone, nerve or vein, then you make an incision over the wound until it is expanded and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are arrows lodged in the ear with which care must be taken, then you remove the flesh surrounding it on all sides with all the ingenuity that you can; and apply ingenuity to it, if you cannot move out of the flesh due to the fracture of the auricles and twisting of those until it becomes necessary.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps at all sides until it becomes obedient; and refine it with the finest refinement so that the arrow does not break and is made difficult to extract.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot move it at your time, then leave it for some days until the parts surrounding it can be softened, and then gradually move it when you are relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If there is opposition to the flow of blood (hemorrhage), then you administer what has been said in its chapter on treatment.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Moreover, observe the virtue of incision in vein or nerve, or cord, and apply means to prevent the suture from escaping; and do it with ease, calm, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, tighten the suture to make the patient be in the figure as you should place the suture in it, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures (or shapes).
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the sutures that have been lost on one side or that have separated from the other part, or if some part has protruded from the suture, or if it bulges out because of the upper layer (or skin) and sometimes even more; then you sew over it; and make the incision according to the amount by which the forceps take hold; and pull it back, since it is easily pulled out.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is held in the bone, then you twist the scalpel against the suture as necessary until the suture enters the bone, and widen the hole made by it, and pull it out.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the suture is in it (the wound or tissue), you push it out with something.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the suture is cut and you wish to apply pressure, you insert a probe into it (the wound or tissue), if it is narrow, a concave stirrup so that it enters the concavity of the suture and then push it in with something.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the suture is concave, you push it out with a strong probe entering it, because the suture is relieved by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the suture is contracted, you must convex all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then care for it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the suture catches in the foot, or stomach, bladder, ribs, and is near where you touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to sew over it, then you sew over it and be careful not to incise a vein or nerve, pull it out, close the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps used for suturing:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	They have ends shaped like bird beaks, which are made with scissors when they take hold of the suture to prevent it from slipping.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these (forceps) are made various types, large, few and medium-sized, according to the size of the suture and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the tightness of the tissue.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the probe for this concave end similar to a bird's beak to relieve the insertion of the suture in it, and pushing of that narrow one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the probe with a narrow end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Similar to a rod to relieve the insertion in the concave suture and is pushed with that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein lancing (or phlebotomy).
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, which it is customary to puncture with a lancet numbered 30. of which it is in the head, sixteen [parts or areas] These are the pulsating veins, which are approximately at the ears, say earlobes; two herbs that appear in both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes called lachrymal ducts; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two arteries that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins called angelic ones; and two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are punctured in the arms are five [veins]. One of those is the cephalic vein, and it is the latissimus dorsi vein; the common people call it "the vein of the head", and it's deaf (or silent), and it's a minor vein, and it has one branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic vein; it is called "the vein of the whole body", and the basilic vein is punctured in the cubital fossa, and it is called "cubital", and the common people call it "the vein of the belly"; the cephalic vein, which is in the arm, runs along the forearm, and it is the one that is punctured, and it appears above the pulse for a clear appearance; the saphenous vein, which is between the greater auricular vein and the smallest digit, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the calf there are three veins: one of them is below the curve of the latissimus dorsi muscle; the second is saphenous, and its location is below the calf of the arm; the sciatic vein, and its location is below the calf of the leg; and in the calf there are other veins that are similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The aid for the veins that are near the ears is against old catarrhs, migraines, and headaches, as well as old ulcers of the scalp.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be shaved the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital region at the location where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; place a strong bandage around the patient's neck that covers the areas near the ears on two pressure points of the head; and have that done with your own hand, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your own hand, here try it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the surgical lancet (which is pointed), and insert it below the vein in the cudena (the groove on the inside of the arm) until the blood comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift your hand with the vein and the cudena (the groove on the inside of the arm) to the crease above, and make an incision in the vein using a sharp blade or lancet.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be adjusted to two fingers or around that amount; and make the incision as deep as you want, letting the blood flow out as much as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply pressure on the pulse and press it until it is healed (or stops bleeding).
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has been previously mentioned at the beginning of this text the incision and cauterization of those (veins).
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arteries that are in the temples, the aid for bloodletting is against old migraines and chronic diseases of the eyes, and excess acute fluids in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those (veins) is as I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck so that both veins appear by sensation (palpation) and make sure that the pulse of their veins can be felt with your own hand; then proceed with the bloodletting.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you raise the bandage above the vein at the parting as indicated, insert the lancet and incise it, then lift the vein upward; incise it in the same manner as you have done with the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the amount of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you release the constriction of the patient and place your fingers on the vein for an hour, then apply pressure on that spot and massage it strongly, leaving it alone until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Here the memory of theirs, and of those (veins), the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book are explained.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore, the aid of frontal vein lancing is similar to the lancing of the facial vein for ancient patients with facial migraines, headaches, and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the lancing (procedure) is as you recommend; that is, the patient should press their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of the lancet at the tip of the instrument on that vein and hit it obliquely or with another cause in its manner, letting the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then release the perforation of the patient and leave it alone until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened with a lancet, but it is not necessary that the lancet should be of an acute tip like other lancets, instead it should have a blunt tip, and lance it transversely, as the bone is close and strong; if the lancet is thin, it could break the bone during the lancing.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The aid of the two veins that are in the eyelids for scabies of the eyes due to headache and swelling in the eyes, and face diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the lancing (procedure) is that the patient should press their neck with a bandage and you lance them; you should be standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	The lancing should be done transversely to the length a little and make a few shallow lancetings, as there is not much flesh in that area; if the lancet is thin, its tip could break off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Make the blood flow as much as necessary and press on those spots, hold them for a moment, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The lancing of the nose vein is given for acute fever and strong sodium, as well as face diseases, migraines, and headaches that occur on the face, especially in older people.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the lancing (procedure) is that the patient should press their neck and place your left hand under their nose, take a thin long lancet and insert it in the middle of the nostril as indicated, as the vein cannot be felt here, and blood will start flowing immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You should move the lancet slowly along your hand and make blood flow as much as necessary; then release it for a moment, as it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The aid of the lancing of both guiding veins helps with alopecia and the beginning of leprosy, as well as many other diseases, itching, and painful, corrosive ulcers like herpetiformis.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the lancing (procedure) for those veins is that the patient should press their neck with a pillow and be seated on a chair. The artist should be standing over the patient's head.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Make the long vein lancing with a broad thin lancet, and move it along slowly, taking out blood at a measured amount or as much as you see necessary for that purpose; and make the same incision in the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Release the pillow and apply gentle pressure to both veins with slight constriction, so that the patient is not discomforted; leave it for a while until the wound heals.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The aid of the lancing of veins in the region (around the mouth), is given for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of gums, painful ulcers, and fissures, as well as ulcers that are around the nose and in its vicinity.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the lancing (procedure) for those veins is that you should hold the patient's mouth open, and press their neck with a bandage; then rotate their lips and observe the two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each of them, and this is more noticeable because there are small black veins in that area; then incise each one with an incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt as to which one they are, incise the larger of the two and the one with more pus.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Make an incision in the same manner as those veins on the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The aid of both veins that are under the tongue is given for the lancing of the facial vein for toothaches, throat diseases, and mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of leeching those is that the patient lies down with his face towards the sun, raises his tongue, and looks down at it, from one side of it a vein appears and from the other side another vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then, bleed each one; be careful not to injure your hand when bleeding them, because these are veins.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that are to be bled in the arm are the ones where bleeding is common in all men, and the venesection of these is done according to two methods: either they put mulberry or olive oil at a fine consistency, which is then inserted into the vein; or they cut with a scalpel, and call it alnessil, and this is the method:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This alnessil method requires cutting and is suitable for specific, thin, and delicate veins according to the size of the veins and their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of mulberry bleeding:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The veins may appear like this sometimes, and it is necessary to open the concave full veins that seem thick, especially those containing coagulated blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	Method of olive bleeding:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This type of bleeding is smaller and has a thinner and more delicate end, and it is suitable for the bleeding of subtle veins containing thin citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The bleeding of the basilic vein is beneficial because it is one of three veins: because it drains the blood from the patient's head and neck, and from that which soaks the feet and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the bleeder to be careful when bleeding that one, as it has an artery nearby, and if you make a mistake and pierce the vein during bleeding, you will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is important not to bleed that one with a sharp needle, but instead to cut it like alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilic vein does not appear clearly, you must leave it and move on to the other one or look for a branch; or bleed in the place where the end of the arm is, as that appears clearly, and cut it with alnessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to bleed the elbow, it is necessary in front of the arm's bend that you touch the place between where you know the wrist is and cover it with a cloth; and place your hand on it and cut the vein with a concave incision using alnessil as we have said, and be careful not to hit the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see the patient experiencing pain, swelling appears in the place that you have covered with a cloth, and that swelling is a sign of an injured artery, so avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see the blood flow during bleeding like that of a child's urine and the blood is thin red, then you know it is arterial blood; in that case, you should press and hold your hand on the area for a long time; and if the blood flows out, which means it has been cut, you should tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Keep the patient away from his urine, and be cautious of him lest he move it for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the abscess is not incised and you do not have medicine available, then cut the artery if it appears; since the extremity becomes constricted and the blood drains out; or take a probe and open the fistula, take one bandage and apply strength to that area on the location of the vein with narrowing, with lint inside for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the abscess is incised, that's good; otherwise, treat it with the liquid from which the memory of the location of the powder for draining blood remains.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The abscess draining from the wound is difficult due to its small size and the possibility of using a lint bandage.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Moreover, the dark vein's phlebotomy is beneficial for draining blood from the subcranial part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it consists of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins as we said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The phlebotomist should be cautious during the phlebotomy, because after that is a nerve; and if you press in the puncture of the phlebotomy and crush the nerve, it will cause stupor, and healing will be difficult, and weak people will not heal completely. This nerve can often be seen; and if it is hidden at some men and subtle and not visible, then you must stop the phlebotomy with the one you have already started, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you make the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves the pains in the skull.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this case, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive-leaf phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; because it is safe for all veins, since neither artery nor nerve is present there.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, it is appropriate for you to ensure that during the phlebotomy, you do not puncture the head of the artery alone, and seek a more accessible location, and don't hesitate if it cannot be found at first, as long as you press the area with the initial percussion before making any incisions in that area with phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, weak people can have an abscess in some men, when it is not drained during the initial percussion, but don't be alarmed if such an abscess appears.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the phlebotomy and the complications arising from it are numerous, for which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first point is that you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and with hope for recovery and caution to avoid illness, and that it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the cavity: cephalic, dark (fusca), or basilic; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, before breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near food intake, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And the phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or on the first day following a passage of three hours from the previous day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy that is administered, but only when it is convenient and necessary, or at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Children should not be phlebotomized before they reach the age of twelve, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized unless during the fourth to seventh month, and old people should not be phlebotomized if they are already over sixty years old.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When someone wants to be lanced in any manner, it is necessary to clean the intestines before lancing with leon's clyster (enema), if there is a large wound held back, so that superfluous blood does not enter the lancing of the intestines, which are pure, and does not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Lancing should not be performed on patients with nausea, vomiting, sickness, drunkenness or illness, nor should it be done until the ailment is cured, unless the patient has dropsy, and lancing is feared due to colic pain, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive creation of bile and exercise of fasting or vigils, and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then, in subtle diagnosis of humors before the sanction (surgery), consider if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Then enter the bath if there is no prohibition, or exercise for some activity to make the blood thin.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Stop lancing on the foot during the day, unless it is around three hours as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Therefore, keep the foot guarded during that day from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear and from all corporeal accidents such as excessive labor, pain, fever and those similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	In the selection of remedies, consider the causes for which men usually use aromatics, fragrances and balms and similar substances according to their quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the lancer over a cushion that is softer than the one of the patient who is to be lanced.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then stretch out your arm, and wash it with your hand, the lancer two or three times; then tighten the linen bandage and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The tightening should be moderated, because excessive or superfluous tightening causes the blood not to flow; or if it is for softening, then prevent the heart of the blood from flowing in that way.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then, the tightening must be done so that the patient washes his hands with water between them until the veins are inflated and detected by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The lancer anoints his lancing spot with a little antique oil properly; then place your left hand on the vein, over the location of the desired lancing, so that the vein protrudes a little and the percussion is quiet because sometimes the veins behave like cords flee when pressure is applied, and from those comes the windiness and when you press the lancing spot, the vein contracts and is discovered; and the lancer does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for this reason, the lancer must be firm and careful in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then pause the lancing, but if the vein is visible in one attempt, that's good; and if not, you wait a little more at that spot or impatiently, if it is not marked.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the spot is marked or the patient feels pain, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage too tightly because heat attracts abscesses cautiously, nor enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Repeat the lancing if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and the blood flows thinly and you fear that there will not be enough blood, repeat the lancing in that spot according to the rule and adjust the opening slightly, and do it quickly before the spot is marked because in many people, the spot is marked by little opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it is already marked, do not repeat on it, because you have no excuse; and pause over some part of the oil opening, because it helps the blood flow.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in that spot to use oil than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, an oil opening is administered in all lancings where the prohibition of blood flow applies and they do this by using turpentine and sage when it is paused on one of them over the spot because the blood is thinned and is turned when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If an abscess is generated in the location of lancing (incision), which often happens and more so in cases where the bleeding is not immediate but only after observation or the opening of a vein with little blood flow, and then you cauterize, place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and keep it for an hour as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It is necessary to tie the vein with that blood or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If it remains in the place for several days with black or green discoloration, do not notice it; if you want to, place some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved or some cause of mint juice or camphor or similar on it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Abscesses and swellings often occur, so make incisions in the armpit.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore place your hand on it, and if you notice that it becomes soft, then apply compression to it, as the swelling is bad; and therefore make sure to place some cause of what has been mentioned there, because it will flow strongly from the artery blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply a plaster with the substance that has astringent properties, so that the place is hardened, and treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to draw blood from all people according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color that appears in the blood as it emerges.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, you let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly, if it is thick, you let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you keep the sharpness for a while.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	It is necessary for someone who is full and strong and has the need to draw blood in one day, that the incision of the vein be deepened and the incisions be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in someone who is weak, it should be done the opposite of that, and it is necessary to draw it out too often, and the wound should be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best that can be administered in vein lancing is a cross section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of vein lancing is safe from bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more admirable and safer than lancing according to the latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	In someone who often faints, it is necessary to administer a small piece of bread infused in milk of magnesia or simple camphor scalded before the lancing, and draw blood from that place in three or four days.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is compression due to swelling, take something before the lancing to infuse with myrrh syrup or scented honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or scented syrup with a fragrance.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs due to blood loss, it is necessary to take something to drink water with a subtle fragrance and scented syrup before the lancing; use an aromatic substance with something and limit its legs with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wants to purify their arm and dissolve their blood according to the day, it is necessary for someone who has lancing as a means of evacuation, and whose virtue is fragile, to gradually evacuate the blood according to the amount of its virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to purify their arm and release the blood several times, and their body is strong, do this about seven or nine hours after the first lancing.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of its descent, it is necessary that it be purified on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in someone whose blood is already scalded and sharp and causes fever, it is necessary to draw out that blood in one day and a large amount and widen the incision until fainting occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of lancing; and you must place your hand on the pulse of the blood, to prevent death from occurring due to fainting, because many times this happens when the lancer is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	It is not necessary that when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood according to the day, as the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, that you press hard on it with force and extend it slightly, because that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it until it is lanced again; or remedy that with the sharpness of the incision that coagulates the blood in the vein orifices; or place something made of tarragon, or sage, on it and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is abscessed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is calm.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If you are forced to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then mark the place or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "the cord of the arm" is tapped at the location of the groin or basilica, when it is not contracted or hidden, because it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the tapping at that location is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water until the needle becomes thick and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then tie it tightly with a ligature or tight bandage around the area where there is a narrow vein; and tap the vein perpendicularly, not transverse or longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Make a wide opening and your tapping should be on the joint of the arm where there is a small vein.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is forbidden, you immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into it until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if it is summer days, you are excused from immersing the hand in cold water, and in winter the heart of blood must not be cooled by cold water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The tapping of this vein is safer than all other veins because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The tapping of the tendon of the right arm is given to patients with liver disease.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the tapping at that location is to tie your hand tightly or the patient's hand, then immerse it in cold water until the vein swells and is clearly visible; and tap it transversely; if you are unable to find the vein with this method, it will not be useful.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to harm your hand in tapping, because nerves are exposed there without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run in it, because if you do not immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn in the required quantity, you must stop it on the oil and salt vein to prevent it from clotting; and similarly, you must do the same with all branches.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the benefit of tapping that of the left arm is for patients with spleen disease.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do the same in tapping at this location as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The benefit of tapping the saphenous vein is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as dysentery, retention of menstruation, lung problems and ulcers of breasts and old wounds, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the tapping at that location is that the patient immerses their foot in cold water and makes friction on it until the veins appear; then place a rope around the ankle; and the area of the vein, you must press the toe down so that it appears clearly, and from there it branches out to the sole of the foot many times.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, tapping on the wide part of the sole or below the joint you must press down with the addition of water, because it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you tap on the sole of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are located below it on the sole of the foot, and place your tapping so that it is perpendicular to the vein, as if you wanted to puncture it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let the tap be sharp.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, if the withdrawal of blood is forbidden; you immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood run out of it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the tapper is wrong in the first examination, you must immerse it again with tapping a little more, because the location is good; and do not fear the trickery, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the location as we have said should be pressed down below the hip of the thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The benefit of tapping at that location is for back pain when it is due to blood clots.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the tapping at that location is that the patient bathes and holds their buttocks tight from the waist to below the fourth finger with a long narrow bandage, which is not visible unless it is done so.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, you must tap it according to the method that is possible for you and perpendicularly, which is better; or pierce it through puncture or cut it by section, because the location is good.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in many weak men who are constipated; and if it is contracted there, and is not felt at all, you must tap any branch of it, and it is the one that appears near the heel opposite the ear lobe and the ankle.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the desired quantity.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the tight bandage and place on the site of the tapping carefully and hold it firmly because it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From ventosection and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventosections are for corns, warts or veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Gout is made in two ways: one way is through incision and bleeding, the other way is through ventosication without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This ventosication that is with incision is according to two ways, for it can be with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The locations where ventosication with incision and bleeding are administered are twelve in the body, of which one is where ventosications are placed, which is at the nape of the neck - the last part of the head; the midpoint of the collarbone from both sides; ventosications on the chin behind the mouth; ventosications with two spatulas; ventosications for an abscess, and it is over the end of the cavity; ventosications with two bellows, they are of two forearms; ventosications of two cuisses; and ventosications of two cuishes.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventosication does not draw blood from the veins, but rather from small scattered vessels in the flesh, and thus its effect is not achieved by this method as it is with lancing; nor is it necessary that ventosication be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion before the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if it is necessary to perform ventosication due to illness or continuous, administer it at any time during the beginning and end of the month, as well as in its midpoint and at some other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men blood accumulates before it needs to be extracted by ventosication and becomes serious swelling on the head; and in these cases swelling and repletion occur on the face and on the head, as well as in the neck; and in these cases pustules form on the face and forehead, and darkening and dullness in the eyes; and in these cases the location of the ventosication is changed; and in these cases the nose becomes enlarged; and in these cases there is a taste for blood in the mouth or the tongue is swollen and spits blood; and in these cases sleep is excessive, and they dream of blood, redness, ancient illnesses, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when it is seen in any of these cases and especially if it is during the third or middle of the month, then command ventosication to be performed after more than two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	In addition to ventosication of the neck, it is also that when it causes gravity in the head and what happens is that it sinks into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventosication is in the location of lancing of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not appropriate to use it for complete purge or in cases of catarrh, as this causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore, it is not necessary to use it on the elderly or those with cold heads (diseases).
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But in the case of continuous bleeding on that spot, it is necessary to command the ventosicator to pause his hand a little at the opening, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventosication of the axilla is in the location of lancing of the vein of the arm and the basilica: and this causes asthma, constriction of the chest and splitting of the costal cartilage, cough, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	It is necessary to prick the axillary ventosication slightly, as if it is left undone, it generates weakness in the chest and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The ventosication of alhagdahan causes accidental pains in the head and optic neuritis, emigration (spreading), inflammation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; it is in the location of lancing of the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	It is necessary to command the ventosicator not to press his hand during incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Ventosication behind the mouth causes alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and is similar to oral diseases that are located in the location of lancing of the alveolar vein on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventosication made with two spatulas causes catarrh of the head (croup), which is caused by accumulation of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	In addition, the ventosication of both armpits causes lancing of three veins, namely the basilica, femoral, and cephalic, as it draws blood from all those small vessels that are in the flesh, and those small veins from other larger veins before reaching the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the ventosicator not to proceed with incision as the area is exposed with flesh, and there are nerves and arteries below it.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This is a ventosication on the anus and causes hemorrhoids of the rectum and ulcers below it.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	It is necessary to command the ventosicator that it be a large ventosication, and that it be on an area requiring strong incision; and strong cuts are needed for subtle ventosications and it should be incised with incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the small ventosications in the chest cause blood to be drawn from the entire body, and cause old pains of coughs and malaise, as well as of the bladder; they provoke menstruation, and cause abscesses and edema; and they are located for lancing of two subclavian veins and the axillary.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	The body as a whole weakens and causes fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From the hernias, the remedy is similar to the remedy for two-sided hernias.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of hernias is to place the hernia at first on a cushion and suck it with early suction, and not to prolong the position of hernias, but rather to let them rest lightly, and keep them constantly, and that the humors come to the area by chance.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Do not stop repeating it and continue until you see the place redden and swell and that the pus appears from the wound.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you will cut and repeat the suction little by little, and be careful in the placement of the patient's body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	However, for a man with tender skin of rare pores, you must cut only once and not repeatedly, so as not to ulcerate the area.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the hernia surgeon to enlarge the incision and make a small wound, and take care to facilitate the suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the pus becomes thick, then you must cut twice, as in the first cutting it opens the passage for fine drainage and for the liquid to flow out.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, there is a more thorough investigation of the removal of thick pus.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the pus is very foul-smelling, then a third cutting should be made to achieve the final result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we want to extract the pus little by little or in small amounts, it is enough for us with one cutting.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of pus, we must cut with many cuts; and if we know that the pus is thick, then it is necessary to cut with a deeper incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the depth of incision in the term "cutting" only refers to the stitching.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stitching is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the places of hernias should be treated more gently, more open, resolved; if it is in summer, as with aloe oil or violet oil, or olive oil from double-pressed olives, or oil from camomile seeds, or similar substances; and if it is in winter, use narce oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or oil of pus and similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick, then use oil of wormwood, balm of Gilead, aloe oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the hernia surgeon has wide pores of tender skin, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and instead, wash the places of hernias with warm water or boiling water from solanum, camomile flowers, mustard, or similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for one whose pus is of much moisture, wash the hernias with vinegar or myrtle and sumac water, similar to these substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for one whose excesses are thick, wash the hernias with old vinegar, or water of mustard that is greater than camomile, or decoction of aniseed, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	It is necessary to keep the hernia covered before washing; having it washed immediately after washing for one or two hours, and sleeping near the hernia.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it necessary to do so that a person with hernia is bled before the herniotomy.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	You must first consider: if the hernia surgeon or one who is to bleed is cold and has sharp blood and inflammation, then you must take cooling agents, as with peppermint, endive leaves, vinegar, and lettuce, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, foods seasoned with acids, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for one whose complexion is cold, take almond syrup or anise seed syrup, sumac, and a moderately fragrant oil between November and Easter; and it should be advised to drink sparingly and eat little, pause the poultry and game birds, fish, and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of herniotomy and bleeding, the drink should be more than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is necessary to give some men tarragon extract or musk medicine (musk oil or aloeswood) in advance of the herniotomy or bleeding, or near it, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made thin; and it is not necessary to give that scalding.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, hernias that are not incised are hernias that are stopped in the liver, on the spleen and on the navel, in the inguinal areas, and in the area of the anus, because these members cannot be incised on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And this is not desired for them but rather the attraction of blood from a member, as stopping a hernia on the breast in anemia of blood from the nose or mouth; and it is used to dissolve cold and thickened blood in a member, as stopping on the stomach and navel; because this dilates the member and heats it up and reduces the pain that resolves the hernia.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it is necessary for the bladder or stone to be removed when it happens in their oblation or passage, because by its strong attraction, it draws the bladder and expels the stone from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is necessary for the liver and spleen to be removed because of their imprisonment in that area.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These evacuations are administered with juice alone, and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some of these evacuations are administered full of tepid water in the case of spleen diseases.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is because the evacuation should be filled and as large as possible, which is tepid water alone or tepid water with appropriate herbs added to it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The method of evacuation with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers' width, according to how we have formed it; and the depth of the wound should be as wide as that, the size of the probe should be as large as a thumb; and in its length, in the area around it, it should be as wide as that, the incision should be small according to the size of an awl that fits inside it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of ivy or lemon leaves, with thick edges, lion's tooth, and clean for it not to hurt the member when placed on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in its middle, a crossbar of ivy or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this evacuation should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller according to the disease and the state of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the evacuations for children and women are different from those for young men and large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of performing this evacuation with fire on the member is that it should extend the skin with a sufficient amount of wood and a little candle wax, and place it on the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the opening, so that the fire is lit around the edges to prevent burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed on the patient's member, and the aforementioned candle is to be placed on the incision that we have mentioned, until when we have the evacuations and do not require the candle and the steam rises over that incision, then the evacuation will quickly dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Use fire according to its method, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	When performing an evacuation for pleurisy disease, with water, in which there is no crossbar or incision, and it should not be administered unless it is filled with water, and placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its method: The larger the evacuation, the better it is because it can receive more water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capital 75.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisuga is not administered in any member except in members where the position of evacuations is not possible due to their small size, such as lips and similar, or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and its similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those is to find sanguisuga in the pure waters of stone quarries.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be washed daily and at night in pure water until they are clean, and no cause remains in their belly; and they should be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and evacuations; and they should rub the patient's member before it becomes dark; and they should be placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and ready.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to get juice from the place of evacuation, it is more useful in addition.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, wash the place with vinegar and add salt water, rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body's bleeding lasts for a long time because of sanguisuga, and it is exuded, then place a cloth dipped in cold water on it, and leave it until the discharge stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the bleeding is excessive, sprinkle vitriol triturated powder or similar stiptics on it, until the bleeding is stopped; or place leeks cooked in boiling water, and leave them until they adhere to the area, and let the bleeding stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the administration of sanguisuga when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the administration of sanguisuga is prohibited for suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or insert an awl into the area until it bleeds; and place them on it, because they immediately stick to the blood when they feel it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, sprinkle a little powdered allium (onion) or salt or ashes on them and shake them immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	In the same way begins the procedure for the third division: recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is about some procedures necessary in the art of medicine; and it concerns the recovery from fractures and dislocation accidents in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, understand that the foolish doctors and common people and those who do not care about the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the wise men in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at any time; but I have not put it into practice before a long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of them, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Approach with the intention of experimenting and studying throughout one's lifetime.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	You have already described in this chapter everything that contains the main science and on which much experiment has been conducted; therefore, here I will abbreviate it for you and free you from the burden of lengthy explanation; I will abridge it in the end of abridgement; and at the end of declaration, I will show it; I will form many forms of the instruments that are administered in this, as is done by addition of declaration, such as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection from the causes of bone fractures, from which a premise is necessary before we begin the recalling of fractured limbs and various types of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I shall state in the prologue of this chapter the summation of the argument; and the chapters to which the craftsmen are introduced and stand at attention regarding the truth of these matters; it is for you and those who wish to learn or quickly understand this noble art of yours.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And I say that when an accident occurs such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or breakage, it is necessary at the beginning to perform fleubotomy or allaying of that member, or whatever else, unless there is any prohibiting cause, such as weakness of strength, or if that member is in motion, or old age, or time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be content with a diet of cooling herbs and bird meats such as thrush and partridge; and prohibit heavy meats and filling with food or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of cauterizing an abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their initial regimen with which they are accustomed to follow.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency and those which have viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat and water, rice, peas, beans, cow's stomach, hog's flesh, fresh meat, thick vegetables, and similar foods; and with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is performed more easily and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones shattered in men who are young and those who are old and weak cannot be continued or consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of their members due to disease.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And these bones are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying out of those members, and these bones that are in the latter stages of growth, such as a child's bones, are consolidated and continued.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature also adjusts and mends in every part of the broken bone some cause similar to a splint in which swelling occurs that adheres to it until it is consolidated and fixed together, until the time of hardness and firmness arrives, such as fire at the beginning, until any prohibiting cause does not interfere with its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's diet, a diet that has weight and viscosity and thickness, as I have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fracture varies according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture in the thigh bone is different from a fracture in the head bone; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the arm bone; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	I will continue with the recalling of every type of fracture, described in its own chapter separately.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The diversity of fractures is as follows:
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The sentence means: "There are various types of bone fractures in their causes; one is the arched fracture, which occurs in the stars (stellas); and some are fractured according to the length of the bone: and those of the shinbone and splinter fractures, both occurring and not occurring, such as a fracture prepared for writing, and is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and is a fissured small fracture."
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	"In every type of fracture, there is pain or torment peculiar to its restoration according to the recall of its separate details in their respective places."
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	"Sign of a bone fracture."
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	"And by that is recognized a bone fracture: its twisted state, and the prominence and awareness of it to the sensation, and only when you press it with your hand."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	"Therefore, if there is no apparent twisted state or it does not produce pain when touched with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture."
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	"It is possible that there may be a twisted state or a small fissure, in which case you must press it with your hand and compress it entirely; pause over the location of the medicine whose remedy comes to mind at that moment that suits the location; and apply tightness through subtle constraint."
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	"And you should know that the location which is arched and not split in two or something that does not occur in the shinbone, such as complete detachment of its entire part, then it is necessary to start from your time on the correction of it having applied a post-operative cauterization."
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	"And if there has been post-operative cauterization, then you should leave it for several days until the cauterization ceases; and apply ointment to it in whatever way that suits your discretion."
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	"And you should know that the restoration and piercing of a fracture is easier than in the bone where such a shinbone fracture occurs."
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	"And strengthen it according to the recall of it."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	"But if it is a shinbone fracture, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand."
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	"And position yourself in such a way as to place the limb where it is extended according to its natural figure, while the fractured parts are being extended, you should then make an effort to return those additions with discretion and in whatever way you can manage."
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"And be careful not to injure the patient through your action or cause harm; and proceed according to your strength that you apply one bone with another in the best ways possible."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"And it is necessary that at this time you press with your hand, and if there is any other cause here, correct it and guide it according to the amount of your power."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause post-operative cauterization or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen through their actions."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"And connect, align, perform proper operation and constrain that limb, rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make him aware not to move it at the time of his vigils and sleep, observe its rotation and agitation, and take care of all its movements with your entire power; and wait for the position of the limb to be in a position that ensures pain, which cause is because when he feels pain in the position of the injured or fractured limb; then it is necessary to change that position to another position where there is no pain; and ensure that the position of it is straight and aligned so that the limb does not twist as it is being restored."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"And the quality of the constraint of a fractured and immobilized limb is that which I recommend, because you should know that fractured limbs are diverse in their size, shape, and nature."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be made of thin fabric."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"But for those that are large such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that the wrapping be broad and hard, because a firm binding connects the large limb and strengthens it throughout with constraint, in this way that nothing enters into it."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And begin with your evacuation of alignment, pause appropriately according to the situation, over the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the limb; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And beware of that at the upper end of the location of the fracture, and strengthen less than you have tightened the area of the fracture."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And extend yourself and the wrapping at the location of the fracture a little, and loosen the tightness gradually until you take a large portion of it."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And take another bandage and wrap it over the fractured area with the previous wrapping, and wrap the ends at the lower end of the fracture; and your action is in tightening the bandage and loosening it according to what you have said in the first bandage."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And place a cushion between the swellings of the thigh bone or the lion's skin cloth that is wrapped around the tortuous nature of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; but if not, do not cause any pressure on it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And place a cushion over the other wound, and wrap it with appropriate bandages immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess at that location, and then press on the one where the abscess is and heal the inflammation; leave it for some days; and afterwards press firmly on the wounds.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The needles should be made of linen thread and well-crafted; or of wood; or of palm fronds; and their size should be according to this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and narrower than the other stitches, and the length of the thread according to what is appropriate for the limb in size and shape; and press firmly on the stitches with another bandage according to your primary binding; and place it above with a cloth properly tied as we have said about binding, and it should be your binding according to the location of the fracture more, and the longer it is away from the fracture, the less the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and subtlety, and made of flax; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the work of some foolish people using thick ropes instead of threads in binding, and this is a great error, because the binding will not be equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not suitable because you will not be able to achieve binding with them, and it is necessary that there be a space of one finger width between each stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient is pricked by the ends of the stitches near the binding in those places, then stop immediately and wrap them with lion skin or woolen cloth before it causes injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by an abscess, and there is a rupture in the bandage, and I will come back to remember it in that chapter according to its specificity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that the entire broken member is not to be stitched on the first day; this is because a large limb does not require stitching immediately but rather waits for 5 or 7 days, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plasters used by the ancients to restore fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Common plaster method for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and more commonly used for women and children, because it is applied to what does not require warmth or friction; take powder from milling, and this is the marrow of the flour that comes out when grinding the wheat in the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Mix it in this way if possible, otherwise sieve it with egg whites, and prepare the paste without being too thick or too thin, and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for treating dislocated and twisted fractures: a recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, migrax (wild marjoram), which is a mixture of one pound of each ingredient; myrrh, aloe, and allochil (a type of resin) in half a pound each. They are crushed and sieved, then mixed with aloe water or egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly. Use this ointment because it has good composition and helps heal broken bones gently, and is suitable for most men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for treating dislocated or twisted fractures: a recipe of wild marjoram and white alum in equal parts, one pound each; myrrh and aloe in half a pound each. Acacia is six pounds, Armenian bole is two pounds.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Mix all of these ingredients in a mortar with powdered charcoal and sieve them, then prepare a compress with water or egg white and administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Apply a poultice to joints and bones separated from their places, relieve pain in those areas and swelling or fractures: take wool soaked in vinegar and oil of cedar, squeeze it and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Do not expect this poultice to have restorative properties, but rather to promote drainage and relieve pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of poultice for fractured bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of opium poppy; grind everything together to make a poultice from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened method of poultice for fractured bones and the resolution of abscesses: grind a mixture of althea, camomile flowers, violets, oats and all other ingredients. Grind all ingredients in vinegar if the limb is not scalded (burned).
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then compress it with a cold water of colander or the same water (used for washing).
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of poultice for hard abscess that requires the resolution of the limb: grind a mixture of althea and its seeds, balm of Gilead, melilot, marjoram, violets, camomile, everything together and compress it with water of willow bark or sweet water or vinegar, depending on the quality of the limb and the relaxation of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that a poultice should be placed on a broken limb for its recovery, but rather a resinous mixture of wax and oil, without any other cause; he recommends it to be medium between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In Gaul it is seen that poultices are placed on a broken limb for its recovery and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat such as myrrh, juniper, similar to those we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A poultice that relieves injury and pain: grind meadowsweet, hops, shaved human skin or pen of goose feathers, althea, salt and mix everything together; sieve it and compress it to make a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount that should remain for the wound to heal and be discharged depends on whether there is pain or inflammation or if the bone is broken out of its place, in such a case you should not undress it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is strong pain or inflammation at the location, you should remove it at that time and apply a poultice to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge soaked in lemon juice, immerse it in warm water, and with that wash the affected area until the inflammation and pain cease; let the limb rest for an hour; then apply a compress made of wool soaked in vinegar and oil or scented oil on it, for one night until you are sure the abscess has drained, and that the inflammation of the limb is relieved, and the pain is gone.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply a gentle and small pressure to the affected area, without straining it at first, and gradually make it smaller until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If the abscess and redness, pain, inflammation, and all symptoms have been healed, and no longer need poultices or pressure, then you should proceed as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those mentioned above affects the limb, you should not undress it for three or four days or five or six days. And after certain periods of time (20 days according to your judgment based on the undressing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the skin begins to heal over it).
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And you should tighten the bandage more than your initial one and adjust the swelling of the patient's food supply as required, according to the previous reminder.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see the location of the fracture already dried and extended more than necessary, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; therefore, wrap it with hot, boiling water continuously for three days, relax the constriction a little, and through this operation, allow nourishment to flow to the limb, and it will heal lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what the foolish restorers of a limb's fracture do later when it is not restored at first, as necessary, and it is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and there is great fear, and if it were correct they would have enlarged the Ancients in their books and would have acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone among them do that, so it is reasonable that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter on fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are multiple, and the shapes of them are various, and the causes are distinct, for some fracture is caused by a blow with a sharp object that penetrates the whole bone, which is then broken, as happens in the leg, and this type of fracture is called sciatic; or the sharp object cuts into one part of the bone and cuts through the flesh but does not penetrate to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small, and the fracture can be concave or convex; the cause of it is striking with heavy objects or falling on stones, and so forth.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture can either penetrate the subcutaneous tissue (pannicol), which is located just below the bone, or it can occur on the surface of the bone, and the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture that is reduced in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair follicle, small, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	The fracture that is caused by falling or striking with stones, and similar occurrences, causes one layer of the bone to separate from its edges, and it occurs in the concave area, such as when it happens to the vertebrae when they are struck and separated at their edges.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Moreover, this is done in bones that are soft, such as in the spines of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures have similar symptoms, such as separated bones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will come with remedy for all in their place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I will discern all kinds of fracture through examination and by testing for them and the removal of corrupt flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A capillary fracture is recognized by being uncovered on the bone, and it is scraped off, and it turns white when tested, for a fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture, it is first necessary to consider the conditions of the patient, and afterwards if you see signs that indicate fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscesses in the throat, fainting, acute fever, inflammation or redness of the eyes, and similar signs in the greater dispositions, one doubts that it is healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if there are no unusual signs, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has come to you in the beginning like a fracture and that is during winter days, then you must remove the bone splint no later than the twelfth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is during summer days, then you must remove the bone splint no later than the seventh day, because if the bone remains untreated for too long, it may rot due to the fat, and the signs that I mentioned before may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the fat covering the brain, and it is fragmented into small parts and sticky, then you must pack the fractured area with compressed material according to my recommendation.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you raise the head of the patient with fracture, and uncover the bone according to your custom and as possible according to the shape of the injury, and it should be comfortable for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it occurs to you, you must examine the bone, search for bleeding or an abscess, and then oppose yourself with what is necessary, which is to place damp cloths soaked in wine and olive oil over the injury, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is relieved, and make sure that the bleeding has stopped; and begin with the circumcision of the bone and excision of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method is that you insert the bone splint with a narrow incision tool of this kind: And place another incision tool of slightly greater size on it; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Place the wider incision tool on top of the narrow one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary for you to have a number of incision tools of different sizes, some larger than others, and some shorter than the others and ending in sharp points, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them with ease when striking the incision tool to avoid hitting the head and damaging it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is hard and strong, then you must perforate around it before applying the incision tools with levers, which are called non-penetrating levers.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called that because the lever does not reach the end of the bone, so at the lever's tip is rounded or edge on top of the sharp head of it, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is appropriate for you to take a large number of these levers, the quantity of which should be according to the thickness of each bone, until it reaches the end of every part of the skull, the sharpness of which may vary in length and width according to the thickness of the bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the shape of three types of levers: The purpose of perforating around the broken bone is to place the lever on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you feel that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the lever to another location, and place it where the amount of thickness of the rod or environment is maximum.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And insert the incision tools between each crack in the bone and use the smallest one that you can on it until you have cut through the bone or with your hand or some other means using various tools such as tweezers and pliers, which you will prepare for this purpose.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you take care that the incision tool does not touch any nerve.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, when you perforate the bone, if it is continuous with the nerve, you should separate it from the nerve and extract it, and then cut and file away the sharp edges of the bone with another tool similar to an incision tool but much thinner.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small fragments or splinters of bones remain, you should take care of them with the tools that are necessary for you; and then treat the wound with linen and ointment as I have said before.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method is light and free of fear, which is known as Guillaume's operation and is highly praised; and this is its explanation: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most obvious and visible until when you have found that fragment and stopped at its end, the tip of the following incision tool should be placed gently and slowly over it. The shape of the incision tool is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The first sharp incision is made along two sides advancing in length, as sometimes occurs; the second rounded incision should be adjusted at the hipbone with the edge of the first sharp incision in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike with the blunt side of the incision tool into a small depression that cuts through all the bone with ease as it rotates, and you must be assured that no panic will occur in the event that you fear something might happen in any way; if the healer was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them, certainly, he would be asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any cause of panic remains attached to the bone of the incision, you will make an incision with the rounded edge of the incision tool in that location of the bone, and it will be delivered easily, since it is delivered from there without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the incision, and what is abscessed or remains from the bone is its surface, and it retains roughness and subtle fissures, then you must smooth that roughness and remove those fissures with fine razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places the most suitable and the most correct according to where your operation goes wrong with the broken bone and the shape of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	You must administer the razor with which you smooth the bone at first from the side of those razors, and then use it near the subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so continuously until you reach administering the pus and all the subtle parts of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you lost during correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because not all those who have studied in that art are equally skilled.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we write about what they have demonstrated in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the incision is rectangular when you smooth the bone, then you must take linen cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in warm oil, and place it over the wound; and take another linen cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in vinegar and oil, and place it on top of the first cloth and perform a light massage on the pus that you can without injuring the bone; and apply ointment to it, but do not press it too much, only as much as the wound requires.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; then loosen it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed oil, flour of rye, powder of asafoetida and aristolochia, and similar to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	You should make powder of these medicines that is pulverized over the wound, such as drying ones; and in general, administer all medicine of the property of which is that it absorbs but does not burn.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Be careful that the wound in your care is clean; do not let it get infected with any filth or anything else; nor leave virulence there; because when it is placed on the skull of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, causing harm to the patient with a wicked malignant illness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	If it happens on the skull of the head, when the bone is corrected and treatment is applied to it, and becomes darker in its surface; then consider if the accidents that we have said happen to the patient, you will know that they are harmful without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it does not get darker due to the medicine that is applied on it, but rather due to the nature of the medicine, then you must take honey and warm oil in three parts. And with that linen cloth, place it on the skull; and care for it with the spices of healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into two parts together, but rather one of those parts is elevated above the other, because there are two bones in it; and the fracture does not occur in one of them, but rather it bends, twists, and swells.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in one of its two divisions, then it is necessary that you insert your little finger into the nose and guide the fracture within with your other finger, and apply pressure from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do this for ease, but be careful not to harm the patient due to your treatment.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then you must align the extremity of the ray where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two places, then you should make an approximation (of what was done).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Cure the patient in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then return the wound to rest for seven or ten days under a cauterized dressing.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Insert a piece of cloth into the nose if the fracture is in one place, or two small ones (cotton balls), if the fracture is in two places, and make them as thick as necessary to fill the hollow of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	As the old restorers say, the cotton balls should be sewn in felt and kept for a day, but I do not see it; however, the cloth must be soaked in hog's fat with powdered millstone, and then leave it until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Enter the nose every few days instead of cotton balls, since there is too much pus that is wrapped in a lion's cloth; and if the fracture of the nose is very painful and the patient is not forbidden from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; if you wish, do it, and if you wish, use cotton balls.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another seven days have passed and the wound is cauterized, fill the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil or with honey.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if the wound is not cauterized, then fill it from outside with sizzling flour and powdered ashes mixed with albumen of eggs, and place a cloth over it (to prevent it) and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the nasal bones are broken with a small or comminuted fracture, then you must cut them, extract them using the instruments appropriate for the case; and sew up the incision, cure it with what heals and consolidates, and apply ointments as necessary.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is an ulcer inside the nose, you must cure it with cotton and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone breaks and the fracture is not an ulcer, observe whether the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not broken in two and curved towards the inside. If this is the case, its recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger in the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger into the mouth; and press with one hand the swelling of the fracture towards the inside with ease at the outer parts, and with the other hand at the outer part of the bone; do this gently.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, you must administer extension to both sides according to right angles until it is possible for them to be aligned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is a dislocation of teeth due to shock, you must stabilize those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or suture; and place cotton over the broken jawbone, place cotton over the double cloth, and place a large flat stone gently made, or a single piece of felt long enough for the jawbone; and hold it in place according to what is suitable for the injury and the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Order the patient to rest and peace, and prevent the sour-tasting lemons from eating.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the shape has been altered in some way, you must examine it on the third day and correct what has already been altered; then fill it with powdered millstone, albumen of eggs or flour of sesame, since you will have removed the wax, and place a woolen cloth over the ointment.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And thus, when the ointment is attached and adjusted to the bone, and its position is not altered, leave it alone, as it will not be removed until it heals and strengthens the fracture; because many weeks have passed since this fracture was tightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another seven days have passed and the wound is cauterized, administer what was said earlier for its treatment until it heals, and remove the cautery.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is an ulcer, consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or not, you must carefully remove those pieces with the tools appropriate for the case.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the ulcer is narrow, you must widen it with a curette according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have stopped the bleeding from the wound, and it does not continue to flow, then sew up the opening of the sore if it is wide; or apply a dressing that suits the case until it heals.
Capitol .v.	If the swelling in the body part continues to grow, even after the application of leeches, and the wound does not heal within ten days, then make an incision into it with a knife, and apply a poultice or plaster that suits the case, until it heals.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the repair of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A broken collarbone that is fractured in front must be treated by cutting the muscles on the side of the break and setting the bone fragments in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If the fracture is simple, comminuted, or compound (with an open wound); and if it does not cause severe bleeding or swelling; then it is easier to treat. However, if the fracture causes severe bleeding or swelling, it is difficult to treat, or the fracture is accompanied by a sore.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure for treating a fracture that is accompanied by a sore, is to have two assistants present, one of whom will hold the broken collarbone and guide it back into place, while the other extends the neck on the side of the break.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with the teeth, until it is set in its proper form, and not too deep or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If more extension is needed, then place a cloth or linen under the patient's armpit and make it as large as your need requires. Then extend and elevate the arm, and support it with your hand until you align the fracture in its proper position.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you are unable to extend the arm beyond the shoulder joint due to swelling or pain, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a soft cushion under one elbow (depending on the size needed).
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Then the assistant pulls on the muscle of the arm towards the elbow until the bones in the collarbone are elevated above the shoulder joint, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the teeth.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if the collarbone is painful and swollen, then you must make an incision over it and extract the pus with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is lodged in the bone, you must make an incision over it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have placed the chisel under the collarbone. The chisel has a handle or a shaft of wood or iron and its shape is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is shaped like a mortar or pestle with a concave bottom, and its width should be as needed for the bone or fracture, depending on its size or depth.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of the chisel should be as long as is practical for the operation, with two ends so that one end is broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the wound caused by the incision that you have made to extract pus from the bone is wide, and it appears that there is no more pus coming out, then you must sew the edges of the wound together with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, then you should fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If an abscess occurs, then you should insert cloth soaked in warm vinegar and oil of roses and wait.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When a bone break has an open wound and is split, then you should apply plaster made of ground wheat flour mixed with egg white, place it on the lion's stopper, and cover the sphere from its head to its tip, if necessary, and apply humidification (a kind of steam), which is the Saracen woman's twist, long and wide enough; about one palm or around that. Then apply double powders on the plaster; and take a thin wooden stick with a width of three fingers and length similar to it; wrap it in cloth, wrap the cloth with the stick in the location above the fracture; apply humidification as before, rotate it over the bone and its head, and over the patient's hand, turn it back and forth over the entire fracture area, and when the fracture swelling subsides and is no longer hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And it is important that the splint not be too tight over the broken bone; therefore, you must observe the patient every day to ensure that the swelling is reduced or the splint has been removed, at which point you should correct and strengthen the immobilization.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Place the patient's head on the pillow and support their neck with a small cushion to ensure that they sleep slightly raised at night; in this way, the assistance provided to the latissimus dorsi muscle is elevated, causing the fracture of the clavicle to heal by raising it. Or, place the patient's arms along their chest.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the immobilization unless an infection or abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Reapply the plaster if you see any signs of infection at the site, adjust it to fit the immobilization, and leave it in place until the clavicle fracture is healed and has formed a callus.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	The immobilization should be strengthened and supported for about 28 days, and in some cases, it may take longer, even several months for the healing process to occur.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the treatment of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is broken in its lateral part and not at the tip but along its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Since the scapula is broken in its lateral part and not at the tip, but rather along its edges, when it is fractured in this manner and cannot be seen without touching, you should prepare for surgery and reduce the fracture according to its natural shape using any engineering method that is possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Place powder made of ground wheat flour mixed with egg white and lion's stopper on the fracture site, apply double layers of cloth, place a thin wooden stick across the shoulder blade according to the size of the scapula or slightly more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the wooden stick is concave in any of the scapula's locations, you should fill that concavity with lion's stopper, and adjust the stick accordingly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Strengthen it above with warm steam and hold the stick firmly in place until it no longer protrudes from its original position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the immobilization every day, and whenever it becomes softened, replace it with a new one and adjust and straighten the stick if it protrudes from its original position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Keep the patient in a comfortable position.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The scapula heals within 20 days or up to 35 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Once this period has elapsed, you should remove the immobilization, and be sure that the bones from which it began have not been affected or their dissolution has not occurred.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If the bone protrudes from the socket and you place a ligament over it, then you should cut through the ligament, remove the bone, and follow the instructions given for treating a clavicle fracture if an abscess occurs in this case.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the treatment of an elbow fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The elbow is sometimes broken in its middle part and extends into the joint, but more often, the ends of the bone are fractured and compressed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the bone is broken among its parts, it tends towards fracture and occurs great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and heavy lethargy and vomiting; and it is apparent in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulders; and press upon the muscles of it, and adjust its ribs with the edge of two fingers, subtly perform the operation and in accordance with all possible means and what is appropriate, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then cover and pack it with plaster and gauze and rest upon a thin board of willow or alder and similarly in lightness, because you wrap it in cloth; and subtly tie it over the broken bone so that it is not crooked; and go along its length according to the roundness of the back some times, and tighten it properly; and consider the length at all times, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to remove the plaster or pus that occurs in the area, you must corrode or cauterize it, or pain, or abscess, then cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what has occurred by means of treatment; and reduce the plaster, sometimes changing its face; and adjust it with proper tightening until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of ribs does not occur in thin places, but only where they are located near the chest; and at the extremities of its division from the front, it does not contract because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of this is not hidden from sensation, you must examine it with palpation.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you guide the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, until it is aligned as it should be, and cover and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is tending towards the division inside, it causes strong pain and puncture in the patient, as in puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason you cover the bones with a gauze; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancient physicians were ingenious in treating this with various means.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: it is necessary to stop the food of the patient that generates swelling and flatulence, so that the abdomen is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the division outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we avoid that for fear it may cause abscesses, unless they occur; and if they do occur, then help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that it should be avoided wind and that it should drain with force; and this is reasoning, but it is feared that the wind attracts superfluidity to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: it should be covered with wool that is already soaked in hot oil, and powder applied between the ribs until it is filled, so that the length is aligned when you wrap it according to roundness; and take care of the patient with treatment for pleurisy and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the strong constriction of the patient who cannot bear it, and the bones are covered with a gauze with puncture, fear is felt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut through the area, uncover the broken rib, and cover it with an instrument that preserves the fracture, the memory of which was mentioned earlier, and cut through the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And that we align the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then cut and pour powder in rose oil and cover the area, and treat the patient according to what is necessary for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And lie on the bed until healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Chapter X.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes the fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and then they tighten, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you want to know whether it will heal or not, consider whether the muscles are already softened and stupefied and dead, and cannot strengthen or extend them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle without feeling pain in them, then you know that it is not healed, and in these cases it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if the muscles are swollen and there is constriction and piercing with fingers, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling such [condition] and wish to know if it will heal or not, then consider its feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Here is the translation: If it becomes soft and swollen like that which happens in other places and when it lies on its back, it shows signs of inflammation and excess fluid retention without its will, and sometimes it rolls over onto its back and wishes to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and at that point, do not bother with the treatment of it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no such cause occurs, the situation is better and easier to deal with.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment is to apply cauterization to the abscess that has formed on the swollen vertebra, or with oily soaked mullein leaves; place it over that area for several days until the abscess is cauterized.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place a comforting and soothing plaster on the affected area, apply strong medicine to it; and command the patient to rest, remain calm, and not sleep on the affected side until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If there is need for the removal of the affected bone or any other cause that has been separated from it, then cut the skin and expose the bone; align the edges of the wound, and stitch if necessary; and care for it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the lower end of the bone in the heel is broken and the skin is torn off, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and pull out the broken bone with the right hand according to what is possible by equalizing it; and apply a plaster and splint if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel fractures in it [the bone], then split it open, remove the fracture, and care for the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the repair of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are broken and if they break, their fracture is not anything other than communication between the ends and they are inserted along the length and decline into the sides; pain and puncture occur at the site and the leg is paralyzed when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The repair of it [the ankle] is to stretch your hand over the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it [the bone], then you pull it out as much as is appropriate according to what is necessary for alignment with its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or descends to its sides, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until the repair of that fracture is prepared.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And once you have pulled it out [the bone], place a plaster over it and place an immobilizer of wood or skin over that, and tighten it with bandaging without fear of re-fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Pull the concavity with whatever fills it until it takes on the alignment, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their unaffected side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, then you cease the extension and repair of it until the abscess is cauterized, and place something over it as prescribed; and return to the repair of it, and strengthen it in that manner.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are swollen vertebrae or they are shattered, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the repair of the humerus fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The humerus is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the arm.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the repair of it [the humerus] is done in one of two ways, of which one is to take a wooden pole of medium thickness as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The tendons are in two ends and should be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Carry the patient on a stretcher; then throw out his broken arm beyond the post until it reaches the tiptop in the place where the curvature of the post is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Suspend the patient with some serious cause, or let the servant extend it to the sides; then call for the doctor who is familiar with fractures and keep him with it until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the patient lies down on his back and supports his neck with one hand; then command two servants, one to hold whatever is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the foot below; each of them should extend to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be stronger, then press hard on the fracture with both hands and have each of the servants extend to two sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place a cushion under the middle of the limb and the other on the side of the fracture to keep it compressed.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is at the joint, then it is necessary to place the limb on that location and compress the joint as well.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Hold it with ease and without trouble, and apply pressure when it is necessary and correctly placed in a good manner; then press it if no pus comes out (abscess).
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess occurs, leave the constriction for seven days and apply wool soaked in vinegar and olive oil to it until the abscess subsides; then press on it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of pressing on the fracture is to place a plaster on it, then cover it with a linen bandage, and adjust the arm using a splint; place your hand open over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Place the cloth and press on the splint to hold the arm in place so that it is in the correct position, unless there is some reason due to a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Use splints (stents).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Place the wider and stronger splint over the fracture, placing the width of the finger between each splint and making the length of the splints according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then press on the splints as described at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	Your constriction over the location of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The longer the break, the looser the compression.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore, if you see that the position of the splints and compression is as described in the time when you restore the limb to its natural position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, leave the constriction (or bandaging) and let the probes (or needles) stay in for up to seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the linen in all parts for three days to prevent inflammation or pressure in the area; or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to the excess constriction of the bandaging; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are in doubt about any cause of this (the condition), then do not undo the bandaging except after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Let the patient lie on their back, and let the hands be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Place a hot poultice filled with wool on the broken member, and consider during the night or day that neither the member's figure nor the bandaging should be undone or removed; or the linen should be softened, therefore correct everything with your judgment.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The food of the patient should be as previously ordered, only the food should be subtle at first until it begins to strengthen; and then you must make the food coarser for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The hot poultice and the blanket of the patient are usually strengthened for 40 days; and then they should be undone, and a bath and medicine should be administered which will correct it (the condition).
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is fresh, then leave the bandaging and probes in for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones that are called the ulna and radius; the smaller one is located near the elbow, and the larger one is below it (the lower part of the arm).
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger bone is broken, or if both bones are fractured together, it is a severe break.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	If only the smaller bone near the elbow is broken, then the restoration of it is easy and healing is quick.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And if the bone below the break is broken as well, then the injury is bad and healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	It is even worse when both bones are fractured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one near the elbow, it is appropriate for the doctor to carry out the restoration of it with a small and shallow incision, with ease until the wound is closed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is fractured, then you must make a deep and powerful incision.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, then you must make the extraction (removal of the broken bone fragments) less forceful.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	You must make the hand's figure with the restoration of it and the extended incision over a long incision; and the palm of the hand is at the upper parts, as previously said, and the ear lobe is lower than the others mentioned, and the patient lies on a low couch.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Place a small incision in front of it (the wound) at the height or level of it, so that the patient does not have to work excessively.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The assistant should extend the arm above from the wrist with his hand or bandage, and another assistant should do the same on top of it (the broken bone).
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The doctor should wrap the bone in a cloth to reduce it as best as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If there are fragments of bone in the fracture, then you should strive to remove all the pieces at the site with your judgment.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If a fragment of bone appears separated that punctures the skin and is not hopeful for restoration, then you should make an incision on it and remove it using the method previously mentioned.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is open, then refer to the previous chapter for its treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with a wax made from rose oil and white beeswax, and it should be in between thickness and delicacy, and strengthen the cloth over it with a delicate bandage until the abscess subsides; and then remove the wax and place an embrocation prepared with powder of milled charcoal and clay of huou, and let probes be placed; and the probe that is placed over the fracture should be sharp and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Know that the name of the stars in the arm is given in major arrangements, or it is a fracture in one joint or in two joints at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then pause your splint at the site of the fracture firmly and strongly, and when the swelling is more at the parts above the fracture or at the lower parts of it, pause the splint a little less tightly according to whether the reminder of it begins at the start of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough, and the person who is to bind it should be moderately skilled between being subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and the limb for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires rectification, such as the swelling occurring in the member, then you must bind the member with cold water until the swelling ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Leave the member unbound until it stops swelling and then return the splint.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the swelling has subsided and the bone has been reabsorbed and seems similar to these, then you must correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess swelling, as then you must reduce that slightly and leave it for several days until the nourishment returns, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not suffer from any of the aforementioned causes, you do not need to loosen it for approximately twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Place the patient's hand in suspension due to its ability to reduce agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty days, or weakly it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the complications and the disposition of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the thumb and the joints of fingers often suffer fractures, but do not treat them unless they are severely displaced.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the hand is fractured or severely displaced, you must make the patient lie down with his arm elevated according to the level of injury, and then pause the hand over it in an extended position.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The minister should extend the broken bones and the surgeon should align them together until they are properly aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	You must apply plaster and gauze, unless there is an abscess caution; then pause a steel rod according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is inward within the hollow parts, you should press the abdomen with the palm of your hand, and then make a round shape like a piece of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze it with their broken palm, keep it tight with long fabric.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The needle of the heart should be with cloth that is lightweight so that the heart is applied to the palm, and squeeze it firmly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is outside the hollow parts, then press down on both sides of the fracture with your palms, so that the hands are open and straight; hold it firmly as needed, so that it is turned over like a handle between the two with linen bandage.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a fracture in one of the knuckles (of the fingers), if it is open, then close it as needed and hold it with the palm and if desired, place a small straight splint on it to lift the fracture and prevent it from becoming worse.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other fingers (such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger or little finger), then close it and tie it with a linen strip where the finger is, or all of them together if possible, which is better; or place a small splint on it as previously mentioned for the knuckle.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your treatment and apply the cauterized abscess and opposite position - with the operation - to what is needed when there is any cause of such a thing, as the narration has been repeated about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the bone fracture of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh, when moved, are broken and declared by examination according to whether it turns to the front or swollen part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration is done in such a way that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage on the opposite side of the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And extend all the bandages to the appropriate side according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is proximate to the hip of the thigh, then extend the bandage towards the lower side at the front of the thigh, so that the extension contains it, and another bandage on the opposite side of the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is proximate to the lower part, then make the bandage towards the lower part and let the extension be at the front parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The doctor should close the bone with both hands inside to reduce it as much as possible in its natural position and the bone is joined by a good connection; then it is necessary to place plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess on the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If there is an abscess, you should leave it for some days until the cauterized abscess is healed, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be done in this way: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it over two or three times and remove any excess; then wrap the leg towards the lower part and towards the hip of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long needle between the thigh and the lower leg near the front part, and let the ends of the needle come out from the swollen part on both sides, and turn it over the thigh and leg as much as possible with the excess bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Place your hand on the thigh at the location of the fracture and place a splint on it over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill in the spaces between the thigh and the leg with soft cloth to coagulate the extravasation (excess fluid).
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Start the strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you approach the bandage at the location of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller, lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the needle to both ends of the leg towards the lower part up to the ankle of the foot, and hold both ends of the other splints on the opposite side so that the bandage does not slip from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Place the bandage over this so that it does not cause corruption, cauterized abscess or inflammation and resemble those; and if there is any such condition, then consult with the doctor immediately, and correct all of it as needed according to what has been previously said.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is a tumor in the bone, you should close it as much as possible; if not, let it fester and remove it, and heal it with what has been previously mentioned until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some weeks this thigh bone fracture is bound tighter than the others as has been said in the help and arm sections.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in such a treatment method, the patient should not become crippled; if it is treated alone, but the other leg is not applied, then it is necessary that he walk with a crutch on the affected side.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a few months or a few weeks, and all of this depends on the complexity of the condition and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the femur head.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the femur head fracture is difficult to detect, but it often occurs in old age.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it occurs as a fracture, it is only a crack or break in its parts, and this is a wound or multiple wounds, and overall it is the sensation of pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the fracture is in such a way that it is plugged with what is broken from its parts, and this should be inserted into the joint so that it can be united according to what is possible by alignment, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And apply a bandage and place a pad over the round rod if necessary; and strengthen it with a compression at that point.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the provisions recommended for other fractures, such as applying a pouch and similar to those that oppose any accident in which it is appropriate to the fracture until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the femoral shaft fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the femur there are two bones of which one is large and is called by its name femur; and the other is thin, and is called shaft.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if it occurs in any of the types of fracture that occur in either of the bones of the arm, and for this its restoration is done as a restoration of the arm plugging, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If both bones are broken, the femur is divided into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if one of the bones is thinly broken, the femur becomes divided in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if one of the bones is thickly broken, place it back and it is one of those causes that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And apply extension, alignment, and ligament repair according to the plugging technique.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the femur shaft fracture is wide and has many steps, extend it less and more gently, and alleviate with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the femur there is some cause for an operation on the arm when you plug the fractures and complete all the operation, then you will take pieces of poplar wood that have been cut out from solid logs, and these are made exactly like branches of palm; align them to those with small protrusions, and do not touch the ends, and their length should be according to the length of the femur, and from the head to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And apply two layers of cloth over each one according to the length of it, and place one on the fracture of the femur in one area and the other on the other side, and they should be from the head to the foot base of the leg.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And align the two fractures in three places of both ends and at the middle place, because with this compression the femur is prevented from closing on the right and left sides, and it is in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a splint of poplar wood should be administered according to the length of the femur, and it should be placed on the femur to preserve its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Furthermore, whatever you do in a fracture, and when it is a wound properly speaking.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the femur every day and study it further, and keep it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, you should oppose yourself to it until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not always suffer from fracture; but the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes seldom suffer fractures, and they do not suffer them except in the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above them, then the patient must rest his foot on the ground in such a way as they walk.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on what is raised from those bones, and press, and bend, and tie it so that it returns to the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place poultice and a stopper over it, and under the abdomen of the foot place a small table with two hollows.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen it with the foot and with traction, as you have wrapped it in cloths and for other reasons that are necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you remove the ligature because you will observe the bones tied, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are broken, then you restore them and tie them as I and recommend to you in the restoration of the hands.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the broken toe in such a way as to match the length of the toe, and it should be slightly wider than usual; and under the foot place this table that is recommended to you, and strengthen it with traction suitable for the situation.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place a splint on each toe according to its size wrapped in lion skin, and strengthen the table under the heel of the foot, and it must be stationary on one of the hollows of the table so that it remains with good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is necessary for you to remember that you do not overlook all the causes which I told you in other fractures of the accidents mentioned; and beware of every accident with what has happened.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the hinge of the woman and the bone of the pelvis and of the buttocks of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hinge of the woman is broken, then you make it lie in a bed inclined to one side, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the midwife packs the hinge with cotton and it is made in the cavity of the pelvis as desired; and the woman is constrained, and her hips are elevated little by little because everything is forgotten in front of the separation of the pelvis and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place pillows on the hips and when you want to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and allow it to be urinated upon, and return and restore it in the same way as you first placed it, and return to its own pillow first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or more until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen over the wound a cannula of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the pelvis, and force air through the cannula until the bladder is inflated inside the pelvis because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it is filled with cotton and remain for as many days as I have recommended until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the pelvis in a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and treatment what I have recommended for the bones of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be concealed in these fractures which are very close and sometimes require treatment, especially for those who have some knowledge and experience and understand this book well; because the fracture signifies to you in the major situations a direct route in the restoration and traction of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the buttocks of a man when it is broken, take guarguamela of vinegar, and place the buttocks in that; and hold over it a wrapping of cloth, and it should be wrapped and laid for three days or more until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of a bone fracture when it's an ulceration.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for the one who has a fracture with an ulceration, and especially if the bone is large like that of the hip or shoulder, similar to that, you should drill it as soon as the conditions for trephination are available to you or testified as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the ulcer exudes pus, then you must take care to retain it until you dust it with powdered lime or some other agent, if for any other reason it is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture in that (place) on the following day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs cautiously, you should delay the restoration of it for up to nine days until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day, because you will cause harmful events to occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone is prominent on the skin surface, then you must forcefully reduce it and bind it with your hands with as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and the balance of it with your hands, then you must reduce it with these instruments; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width according to the size of the ulcer; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four fingers according to the quantity that is needed in the healing of all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and in little roughness to prevent it from being doubled over during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp tip where there is a margin on the sides; and the upper part of it should be thickened, and from its middle to the joints (parts).
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called "labre voluntary hernia" in Greek, or a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, the end of it should be paused and raised above the protruding end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Insert it once and withdraw it only when the bone has returned to its position, and bind it with some means.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore, you must bind the fracture ends together, and if the fractured end is small, and it does not take the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the fractured end into the instrument up to the point where the instrument has the ability to hold it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what we have recommended, then insert it using one of the incisors that we mentioned; or it will be with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And smooth out that which remains in the bone, and remove small roughnesses.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced and the patient suddenly feels strong pain, understand that the bone has not returned to its natural position, and then do what you can to confer great benefit on the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your bone restoration is complete, immerse the linen in black mustard oil and apply it directly to the ulcerated area, especially if it's summertime; do not pause over the wound or any other place where there is oil present to prevent pustulation and corruption from occurring.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer stars at the time of your completion of bone restoration, and leave the ulcerated area exposed so that you can insert probes with forceps and bandage according to the size of the ulcer.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be extremely careful not to cause the ulceration with the fracture, because many foolish doctors have often caused death or serious illness or rot on their patients because of it, which is sinful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the ligament is loose, soft, and different from other fractures, then...(Translation incomplete)
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the ulcer is large or a bad one, and you fear that other harmful events may occur as we have recommended, and there is pain in the area, then do not apply the stars; instead, use a hard bandage of cloth instead of the stars and tighten it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the ulcer begins after one or two days and is caused by a bruise, you should remove the cloth that you have placed on it with oil, and then administer warm water with such medications as we customarily treat ulcers, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is necessary for you to remove the ligament and examine the ulcer every morning and evening until it has become consolidated and closed, and the limb should be prepared in such a way that the pus runs out towards the joints easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the ulcer has passed many days and is not consolidated or has not drained the bruise, then understand that this is a sign of the small pus pockets, and you must examine the ulcer with caution.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small pus pockets that are separated and removed, those that do not separate and put the limb at risk and cause pain, force yourself to insert them if possible according to what is available to you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If a pustule or abscess occurs, it is styomatios, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must stop someone who knows how to treat it according to the treatment described in its respective chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning the matter where it is necessary for you to say something: when a bone is broken, you should lay it as follows on the limb in the same way as the bones of the thigh and elbow and similar large bones, and do not attempt to attract or extract it, because many times this leads to death; leave it inside as long as possible, since it can break again in about twenty days or less. If you see the wound, then treat it, if it does not heal itself.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodes that occur on the trace of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This node often occurs during the healing of a fracture, especially near joints, and is swollen in the shape of the limb; and forcibly preventing the limb from its natural operation can cause harm.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the node is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and others like them; in this case you take some or all of these, and compress it with something stifling, or with albumen of egg, or with vinegar, and place it on the node in a poultice, and bind it tightly with good binding.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Pull the extracted pus sac out gently day by day; return it and apply another one until the node is gone; or press firmly on that lead plate properly, for lead has the property of retaining anything inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the node has already turned hard and is tight and it becomes necessary to remove it periodically, then cut it along its most superior part, excise the excess and eminent part, or cauterize it with lancet-like instruments until it is gone; care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	The above text appears to be a medical treatise written in an old Italian dialect that includes some Latin, Spanish, and French vocabulary. Below is a line-by-line translation of the given text:
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the fracture has been restored, and the limb remains slender and does not follow its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	If the fracture of bone is restored, and the limb remains slender and does not follow its natural course, this occurs for several reasons: one reason being an excessive loosening of the ligament and the suture made not in accordance with what is required; or due to excess stricture of the ligaments before nutrients are prohibited from reaching the member; or due to excessive embrocaccio (swelling); or due to superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or due to a decrease in blood in the patient's body and debilitation.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart strong until blood is multiplied in their body; administer baths; and apply heat and comfort on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a dressing over the limb to attract nourishment, or continue swelling of it with hot water until nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	This line is likely a heading or title for the following section. It may indicate that the discussion in this section will be about the treatment of fractures in the second chapter. The text provided seems to discuss the issues that can arise when a fracture does not heal properly, as well as some potential treatments to promote healing.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When the bones are fractured and restored improperly, prohibit any operation on them that is necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb has been restored but is still not healed from improper healing of the fractured bone and node, this happens because the limb's form is blocked. However, the limb should not be prohibited from its natural operation, unless you hear that the person whose limb it is has had a new fracture.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly condemnable, causing great fear of the mortal consequence of which it is a part.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limpness and nodes are recent, then they should be swollen with hot water in which are placed soft-soothing herbs such as althea leaves, razor root, melilot, and similar herbs; and it should be made into a paste with soothing paste such as dyallaquilon well prepared; or it may be sought mucilage of althea root and be combined with gum of galena or oil of camphor, and applied to it; or it may seek figs that are fat and beaten with pigeon feathers, similar to the medicines called "amermans consolidatio" (bitter consolidation).
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases it is dissolved by continuous light friction with the most humid substances, and the member's movement should be administered throughout all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the twisting has already advanced and become hard and turned into stone and has been necessitated for healing by iron, then it is necessary to drain the pus from the affected area and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and remove any excess node from that member with fine cutting instruments, and ease the process with solicitude and diligence.
Capitol .xxiii.	This line appears to be a heading or title for the next section, indicating that it is the twenty-third chapter of the medical treatise. The previous sections have discussed various aspects of fractures, including their causes, potential complications, and treatments to promote healing. In this section, it seems likely that the discussion will continue focusing on the treatment of fractures or bone injuries.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Dislocation discussion (or Treatise on Dislocations)
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, and distorts the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act promptly to reduce it, and not to delay its reduction, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes swollen and soft tissue damage is done, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not good to be sick or lying down during the swelling period, as many times it brings spasms and painful cramps.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary that you attend to the patient's flabotomy (incision), and prepare immediately to drain the swelling; and wrap the member in warm water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be cured with the medicine that will bring back their original position (or healing).
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture: from the upper part of the body down to the lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated, they should not be left like that; and a dislocation of either jaw can occur in two ways: one is reduced gently by moving them slightly back into their original position, or it is completely dislocated and needs to be mollified at the juncture before saliva from the patient's mouth flows out and they cannot close their lips, and their tongue becomes wrapped in its fold.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation is slight, it can be reduced with minimal effort.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and extensive, it requires gentle and prompt reduction.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The attendant should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert their thumb into the appropriate place inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is in one part; or they should insert both thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is in both parts, and the other attendants should be outside with them to support. The doctor should then instruct the patient to stop moving their jaws and allow them to return to their original position; and the doctor should hold the jaw and wrap it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer warm water and oil to facilitate easy reduction and do not delay the reduction of both. As previously mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And once they have been reduced and wrapped, the patient's mouth should be closed and not allowed to move, and you can apply powdered fabric with wax (beeswax) coated in oil to the area and let it soften gently.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The patient should sleep on their back, and their head should be placed between two pillows to prevent it from leaning to the right or left; do not force them to swallow anything; let their food be lean meat until the pain has subsided and the jaws have healed.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be done with ease, and do not strain the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, speaking, or chewing, until the jaw has healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their original position, this may lead to recurring fevers and constant sweating, and a strong urge for vomiting may occur, accompanied by pure blood.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you should know that it is a bad sign; and many times the patient dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Treatment of dislocation of the neck and extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The neck is not dislocated from the side through its continuous connection with the ribs; and sometimes it can be dislocated at the back of the neck, and this can be determined by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The treatment for a neck dislocation is that the patient lies on their back and stretches their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And press the joint with your palm using strong pressure, as it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand on that plaster and powder it strongly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The end of that broken and continuous limb should not be displaced in any day; then it must be reduced and set as we have said and as you are equipped to do.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand on that plaster, powder and extractor, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	When this method of treatment reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the biceps to the opposite side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is rarely done; it is not dislocated behind the shoulder; nor is it dislocated in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Moreover, it is dislocated and out of the sides on the opposite side of the biceps, and moreover in those with less flesh it is easily dislocated; but in those with thicker flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a strong blow or fall often happens to some men, and the muscle of that man is separated from the cauterized abscess, and it is dressed with what has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you must find out what was done to him, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The dislocation of it is known when it is on the opposite side from the biceps; therefore distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the undislocated one, for you will find clear differences among them; and you feel the concavity at the head of the muscle in this way like an hour-glass, and on the biceps side of the muscle you should touch the head of the muscle in such a way that it is like an hour-glass, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his elbow, nor can he move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated on the foot or below, you should find clear tactile differences and do not hide them.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand above it, and places his thumbs below the biceps of it, and raises the joint with strength toward its location, and the minister raises the hand and extends it; and he places it below as it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return by what we have said, and is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days later you must bathe the patient in hot water and administer a plaster that softens and liniments like if it were a chest wound of aloe, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on his back and positioned below the biceps of it is to wait for a linen that is between looseness and tightness, and then the doctor places his foot on the shoulder, and lifts the head of the muscle with force, and draws the hand of the patient so that it does not move toward the opposite side, and another minister holds the head of the patient, who must not move to the opposite side, because it will soon return to its location.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this way: it is that you bring a man who is longer than the patient and stands on the side of him, and places his muscle below the biceps of the patient and elevates the biceps of him to the shoulders until the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the opposite side of his stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, you must have something suspended to weigh him down, so that the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another way: it is that a long pole with its head rounded like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin, is placed on the ground, and positioned below the patient; then you stand on top of the pole fabric, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and his hand should be extended toward the opposite side, and the other part should be extended with strength, because the joint will return to its location quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the reasons we have said, then use this treatment: it is that you take a pole whose length is two forearms and its width four fingers, and its thickness is reduced in the proximal part of the biceps according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place leather strips around the rounded head so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Position the biceps of the patient below and extend the arm or shoulder over the pole to the opposite side, and tie the pole to the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Position the arm on a ladder of steps according to its width, and extend the hand to the opposite side, and the other part should be suspended from the other part, because the joint will soon join together.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the incision of him is completed in any way that is possible for you, then you must stop pressing on the wound with a lamb's wool pad of appropriate size; and place a plaster prepared from powdered mint leaves and honey over the muscle, so it is rolled up, and press down on the wound with a suitable constrictor; and let the dressing be rolled over the plaster, and his hand should be connected to his neck, and let it rest, and his hand should not be moved for 12 days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the wound of the patient be stopped up little by little until the member is comforted because it is easier for healing to occur there.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then apply more dressing to the wound or exercise movement on it, so if it remains closed and does not become soft, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated by moisture that occurs in it or for another reason, then in such a case, it is necessary to administer three cauteries as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and the dressing is removed after seven days and the joint is not closed, and the plaster and bandage are reduced upon it a little, and it remains unclosed and swollen and that arm cannot be raised to the upper parts, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have become injured or stretched out or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	In the case of the dislocation mentioned above, you must apply pressure to the foot and the breast or the upper parts behind it, the reduction is done with a push and extension until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another bandage should be applied to that one, and take care of it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is delay in the healing of the member or gravity in its movement, then the patient should bathe it frequently until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated on all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it is evidently displaced by either the elbow or the touch, depending on the shape of the dislocation, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder according to the arm, that is clearly stated to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you must quickly reduce the dislocation in front so that it reaches a blister of cautery, because if it gets to a blister of cautery, the reduction is difficult and recovery from it is not easy; and especially when it is at the rear parts, for all other types of dislocations are worse than this one and more painful, and many wounds occur in the process, which can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that his hand should be extended with two others, and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are above the shoulder and below it, and he pushes the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the flat part of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front parts, then it returns by bending the arm with its hand until it strikes the shoulder with the flat part of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then you administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and have another two ministers to ensure that there is no excessive extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Approach should be to roll up the entire arm, as it is wrapped in long folded cloth around it, or bound.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this may help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its movement; then press the joint firmly until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Approach the reduction of it (the hernia) requires that pressure be applied on the plaster where there is swelling and protrusion with honey albumen, and it should be drawn out by means of a strong bandage descent; and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Approach should be to loosen it (the bandage); and since the joint has been formed in its place, you should then loosen the bandage from there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not strong, then you should repeatedly apply the plaster and bandage to it, and leave it for some days until it is drawn out; then approach should be to loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is danger of gravitation during the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, you should administer humectation in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or press on the dislocated joint, which is a matter of heavy grease; then tie it, and leave it on the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Approach should be to place it (the dislocated joint) back in its place, and immerse it in bath; when it swells, you should then rub the joint gently with friction, and approach repeatedly on the dislocated joint, which is a matter of round motion, once, twice, and three times.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has now reached the intestine internally through bathing, and it needs to stop spreading.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, press on the warm and moist cowhide gash with a rod and press firmly on it; do this several times, for it is moist and helps to reduce it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the hand sometimes dislocates, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it is necessary to be quick in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, before the location is disrupted or there is a cautionary warning of disruption.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and extend their arm, and then place your hand or palm over the proximity of the joint and press it firmly until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered if the palm has already been placed on the belly of the hand; in this case, you should extend and reduce the patient's fingers, and if the dislocation is precedent (meaning before), then the position of the hand should be intrinsically placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand fits over the proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, you should press it firmly with plaster waiting for the dislocation to occur, and do not repeat it, as it can cause pain or be impossible to reduce it unless days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint should be treated according to its curvature; and do not notice any pain in the patient, but rather soften the hand and do not make it stronger because the nerves may be broken or crushed; then understand that the nerves are crushed or fractured, and then do not engage in it unless it is strong enough with cautery for the treatment of the fracture and confer some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the shoulder is returned, you should press on the plaster that has been recommended and leave it and strengthen it for 5 days; then approach should be to loosen it and leave the arm of the patient to rest and exercise.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and there is danger in it, you should gently massage it with hot water and friction for several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Fingers are sometimes dislocated in various places.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a finger of these is dislocated at the palm or belly of it, you should squeeze the finger and press the dislocation with your thumb until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Approach should be to support the head of the finger, and suspend the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Approach should be to extend it (the dislocated finger) and suspend it until it is straightened on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night comes, you should follow this procedure, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise movement, and leave it at night; do so for several days until it is strengthened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Do the same thing if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and leave it to that location and perform the first operation as described above, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Do the same thing when it is dislocated in other locations.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of spondylus (vertebra) of the back (spine).
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When one of the vertebrae in the back or neck experiences complete dislocation and remains displaced from its place, there is no cure for it as death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the patient's bowel movement is out of their control and they cannot retain it; many times various body parts or legs or arms, or one of them, are weakened, or a vertebra has been displaced from its place, because weakness means that a vertebra has been dislocated and it is removed in four pieces.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been removed in pieces at the back and is called gibbosity.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure for it is to consider whether gibbosity occurs in childhood, because in that case there is neither a cure nor healing of the entire body.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in cases caused by accidents or blows or similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of cure at length, but I have abridged it from that source for a shorter explanation, since it is closer to the clearer exposition, which I have expanded and arranged using various instruments, with which I will show you and expand upon it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in gibbosity caused by the front part of the foot, there is neither cure nor healing for it; similarly, in those that are made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And the one that occurs in the back is not cured except for that which I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient should be extended on their back close to a wall with their feet stretched out so that the walls do not touch their feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And a straight staff should be placed nearby, fixed into the ground at the foot of the patient around their head, and another staff on the other side to elevate their feet at the other end of the staff.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the staff, and it should not be fixed in a pit; another minister should hold the other according to that shape.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And cover the patient's head with a cloth and tighten it around their forehead firmly; extend the end of the linen to the staff that should support their head, and tie it there; strengthen another linen across their buttocks, under their arms, and over their chest, and hold it by the feet; then adjust all the linens and tie them to the other staff that should support their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend each linen to the end of the staff, and neither should the two staffs and linens at their respective locations where they are fixed be removed, but rather leave them as I have said before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor should place their hands firmly on the vertebra until it returns, or they should place a table under it and make sure that their feet are adjusted on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three feet and carve into the wall near the patient's head a hole where the end of the table fits.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the tabletop on the vertebra and the doctor should place their feet on the other end of the table, pulling strongly until the vertebra is dislocated and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the hole that is twisted with the hand; and it is that you squat in front of the patient's head at the end of two staffs, whose length should be one arm, and the distance between each staff should be one palm, and a groove should be made in each staff for the turning rod to pass through, and each rod should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it is not damaged.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should also be a round staff with the turning hole in both grooves of the two staffs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the round rod with a length of one palm rotates; and the same applies to the other two staffs.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then strengthen the linens that you have stretched in the patient's feet on the groove that should support their head, and the linens that you have stretched in their chest on the turning rod that should support their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And you should also have each turn and a minister who turns the rod with their hand, while the doctor holds the vertebra as previously mentioned.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turning rod:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	When the vertebra has returned and the location is covered, it is necessary to apply an adhesive plaster with egg white, and then stop it; then place a wooden splint on top of the plaster that is three fingers wide or more, and the length is the measurement taken at the site of the gibbosity, and above the edge of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And let the patient use the linen that we mentioned for nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is still a weakness in the location at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and liniment it for a long time with the administration of the table, which we have recommended; and a lead sheet has already been administered in that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes the imminence occurs in the lower part of the spine, called dislocation; and that bone is already inclined to such a condition so that it is not necessary to make an opening for it with this medicine, because great force may cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter thirty-one.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On treating a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not move but only dislocate, and it does not happen to those that happens to other joints due to small displacement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inside the pelvis, outside the pelvis, in front, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Most commonly, it is dislocated inside the pelvis, and rarely in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation in the pelvis is when, when you align the healthy person's hip with the patient's, the healthy one appears longer and its tip is more prominent than the patient's, and the patient cannot bend their leg. You should anoint the area with cauterized dressing, so that the head of the dislocated bone has already been reached.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation that occurs outside the pelvis is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation that occurs in front is that the thigh expands according to its natural shape, but it does not bend without pain at the tip, and if it is forced to move, it cannot go forward; the urine is retained and the dressing must be applied to it, and you should walk on your heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation that occurs behind is that the tip does not extend and cannot bend the front part where it bends the dressing, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the dressing is softened, and you should reach for the head of the dislocated bone there.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the types of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, in which case it has already become fixed in its position, in which case it is not a cure; therefore, it is not necessary to make an opening for it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of a recent dislocation (one of the four types of dislocations), you should try to move the joint and extend it in both directions, left and right, because great force will return it and it does not need any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this way, then you must prepare strong medicine and extend the thigh of the affected side from the lower part, or with your hands, or apply a ligament on top of the thigh below the tip; and another minister should extend their hand above it as far as possible to press down on the dislocated bone; and another minister should press strongly on the ligament near the root of the joint, and another minister should hold the end of the ligament firmly.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension of the limb or from the pelvis to the ankle, or from the back to the lower back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension should be done all at once while the patient is lifted off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; and if not, it is necessary for all types to follow the instructions for their own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocated part, when it is within the joints, it is necessary that the patient lies on their side; then place cushions under the affected area where the head of the dislocation is located and the site to be reduced, extending the limb in the direction opposite the dislocation to the same side of the clavicle.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And take another strong servant and grasp the patient's arms, and forcefully pull the affected joint in the opposite direction to extend it wide apart, because that will return it to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type of treatment is for light cure, in which the limb can be reduced more easily than by other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if the patient resists and refuses to cooperate with this type of treatment, it is necessary that both of their feet be bound tightly, loosely, around both the ankles and wrists.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let each side be of four fingers in length, and the affected area should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And suspend the patient over the head of the post (or bed), so that they are in the highest position possible; and let their feet be two arm-lengths away from the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to grasp the head of the dislocated joint, and suspend another young man from the patient. The third young man should push on the affected joint with force, because the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of a dislocation outside the joint, it is necessary for the patient to lie face down as previously recommended; and tie the affected area tightly with ropes around the chest and feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two posts should be placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and posts adjusted to the middle of the beam fixed above on which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the post being between their thighs, so that the extension at the affected joint is not restricted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each servant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art (or technique).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if the patient complies, it will be very good; but if they resist, hold them down carefully and guide them as previously recommended.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But the patient must lie face down.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the front joint, it should be extended slightly and in accordance with this narrative on the beam (or post). The doctor places his right hand on the affected limb, and with the other hand he compresses that area, and with that compression, he extends the affected arm to the opposite side of the hip.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back joint, it should not be extended to the opposite side, but raised above the ground; and it should be placed on a hard surface, as in the case where an ankle is dislocated outside the joint, as previously discussed about the position of the patient on two cushions, and his face should be placed down, and the limbs should be extended, as previously mentioned, which will not cause harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a table on the site where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, as the reduction is complex, and the method of reducing it is not hidden from you (you will be extending the patient's legs), when you see them straightened out with no resistance, you will know that the limb, according to what is necessary, has been returned. Then you adjust the thighs and bind them tightly with bandages so that the affected area does not become swollen in any direction; and keep the patient resting for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And loosen the bandage and the padding, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see them straightened out in their proper position, then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed, and at this point, let the patient get up.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any signs of swelling, then return and treat that area, extend it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And loosen that area, and make it walk slowly on crutches for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outside the joint, inside the joint, and more often behind the joint; but not in front of the joint.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of a dislocation is that you command the patient to move their ankle, and then you will know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all three types of dislocations is that you straighten the patient's leg, so that they can extend their ankle if possible; place your hands on the sides of it, and hold their foot between your feet; and grasp the ankle with both hands and keep them apart from each other with force, and another servant extends his foot until the ankle returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The thigh bone adheres to the hip without moving away.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Apply that and let the thigh bone adhere to the hip, and apply bandages for three or four days, then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not make the patient walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction cannot be accomplished, then administer strong extension with ligaments as mentioned in the treatment of the thigh.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Treatment for the Dislocation of the Ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes moved slightly out of place by accident, and at other times it is dislocated due to trauma, and the dislocation occurs either inside the joint or outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation is that the ankle appears swollen around the area where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	However, the treatment for a slight displacement is easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease and then returned to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	If the dislocation occurs due to trauma, one must first immobilize the patient correctly, and have a strong and capable assistant from behind the feet in the correct position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Place your right hand on the upper part of the patient's foot and your left hand on the lower part of the foot near the heel in the location of the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Pull the foot towards you with your right hand and push it away from you twice with your left hand, extending it, then push on the front of the shinbone with your left hand while pushing backward on the heel with your right hand to force the bones into their proper alignment.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve the desired result.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Push the shinbone toward the hip one last time, and you are at the joint.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one or two days using this method and the foot appears swollen, that is good; otherwise, repeat the operation as it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If the reduction of it is forbidden as prescribed by what you have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, stretch out a flat stone on the ground, and let them lower themselves onto it so that they rest between their thighs, and you have already covered them with cloth to prevent discomfort for the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And place the minister in charge of it with their knees, and another minister should extend the foot with their hands or secure it with ropes around the neck of the foot; and each minister should extend that part as far as they can, and the stone should remain between the patient's thighs to hold it in place so that the body is not torn apart at the sides.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should compress the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy part at the sides, as the dislocation will return easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you have confirmed the health of the reduction of it, then stop applying the plaster and remove it firmly, and tie the leg to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful or protect yourself from the nerves that are located behind the ankle, so that the ropes around it are not tight and do not hurt it too much.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And keep it like that for two or three days; if the ropes become softened, remove them.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go in front of that space, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and approach what does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it turns into a cauterized abscess, you must administer the prescribed treatment in the location of cure and dressing mentioned in our narrative until it heals over.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the cure of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It must be compressed gently without much extension; and that is not difficult, it is easy to do so.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, it must be compressed with the patient's foot on a level surface such as the ground or a table, and remain like that as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And you stand by the patient, and place your foot on top of what supports the joints, and press down on it with your foot using force until it returns, and make sure that it remains compressed and does not appear again in the elevated area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place the patient's foot on a table that holds the entire foot, which has two arms, and strengthen it with a suitable and secure structure for three days; then remove it and allow it to rest from walking until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation caused by a wound, fracture, or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those occurs and you engage in the cure and restoration of it, many times death occurs after several days.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore, in the treatment of it, do not presume without being knowledgeable and experienced in the art, long practice, mercy, compassion, patience, humility, and modesty; use medicines that dissolve cauterized abscesses only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but help the one you hope will be saved from destruction, with relief from pain, and in which you see some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, strive to make the reduction at the beginning of the cause before abscesses occur.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore, if the member returns as desired, then administer the treatment that dissolves cauterized abscesses and heals the wound with what is appropriate for dry dressings.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture and separate bone fragments, you should perform the setting of them, and do what we said in simple fractures as mentioned in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Keep and avoid what we have mentioned in the paths of fear as preceded by my teachings; for that is better for you, it will please your Creator, and more persistent to your glory, and healthier to your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Zahrawi, may God be pleased with him.
Amen.	Amen.
