Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus commence the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of medical science, by doing so it will be perfected in you, and by studying it, and by declaring it, I believe that I should transmit this treatise to you regarding surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since surgery is completely absent in our region and our time, there is a great danger to science itself, as well as the instruments of it; not only will they disappear, but they have already been obscured, reduced to a few scattered descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have become obsolete and led to errors and confusion until the intentions of them are misunderstood and their strength and art are weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I see that I should organize this treatise in an orderly manner according to the method of explanation, declaration, and abbreviation; moreover, it is necessary to include the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools required for the work, as well as their preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	One reason that a good craftsman with his art cannot be found in this time is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be well-versed in anatomy, which includes knowing the joints and forms of members; the conjunction and separation of them; having knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, as well as their arrangement; and understanding the pulse and quiet veins, and their locations.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And according to Hippocrates, a word is a small thing, but in the work of the hand it is much more important.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Moreover, we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not familiar with anatomy will inevitably fall into error and endanger people's lives, as I have often seen many who were educated in this science but lacked experience in it.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed out until the woman died among them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who thought he could extract a stone from a man in his condition, and the stone was large; it came out and he cut a piece of the bladder while doing so, resulting in the man dying on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for help to extract it and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who received wages from one of our dukes for surgery, and he treated a black-skinned man with a fracture in his thigh; and, armed with ignorance, the doctor cut through the fracture, using sutures and staples with a strong structure, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he tied it according to his desires, sutured and bandaged it, and kept it closed for several days as instructed; however, the thigh and leg became abscessed, resulting in harm.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and upon removing the bandages, calmness and relief were achieved, and his pain diminished.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient's life was endangered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who opened an abscess called cancer, and it was ulcerated in just a few days, amplifying the wickedness of it with its master.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that cancer is free of melancholy humor, therefore it must be treated with caution and not completely removed from the body, but rather an affected member should be left behind as much as possible.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my son, it is necessary that the work of the hand be divided into two categories: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work that poses a greater risk in its execution.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	I have already emphasized this throughout the book in operations where there is error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to take note of this and be careful not to fall into such errors and dishonor.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so, take up your arms with humility and with God's protection, and your patients with kindness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Use the best way for God's grace to save and bless, and leave behind terrible diseases difficult to heal, and withdraw your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that the examination of faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains for your glory, and moreover in this world and after in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Furthermore, I say to some monks:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad illnesses, so that evil doctors do not take credit for it."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have now completed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered regarding feet, in the shapes of instruments and the ironwork of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on abscesses and perforations, blisters, sores, and extraction of stones and similar cases, all categorized by the shapes of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The fourth chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar cases, categorized by the shapes of instruments regarding feet.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization with fire and acute medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to discuss the quality of the materials used in that cautery and its disadvantages, as well as when cauterization should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discussion of the quality of the material for cautery and its disadvantages is a long, complex, and subtle topic, requiring knowledge, and it has already been discussed by many wise men, with disagreement among them; as for me, I will only touch on one of their discussions, fearing tediousness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cauterization generally pertains to all universal aspects concerning the material or materials, except for two cases, which are those with the absence of material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of dry and hard matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for an illness characterized by quality and dryness, as the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is appropriate for a dry and hard illness to be treated with something wet.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he says the opposite, that cauterization is beneficial in all dry and hard illnesses that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its moisture with the nature of fire, it cools the body of man.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say from my own experience that this has been verified for me on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Nevertheless, it is not necessary for me to come back to what has already been proven and exercised in the chapter on cauterization in previous work, and to know the diversity of human cases and the locations of their diseases, as well as the causes of those diseases, the characteristics of them, and the space of time of those diseases.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other cases, there is no cause for concern, and more so in wet and cold illnesses, as all doctors have already agreed on these, and there is no disagreement about the treatment of those diseases with cauterization.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it are due to cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple; its action does not reach beyond the member being cauterized, but only causes minor damage to the adjacent members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of burning medicine reaches to those adjacent members, and it quickly brings pain in the member with difficult healing and quick healing.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, due to its sublimity and inherent goodness, does not produce such results; this has been known through experience and long years of study on the nature of causes; therefore, I am excused for the length of my speech, except that it is not suitable for this book in this pause to reveal secret knowledge about fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion of diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative argument, which would sharpen your thoughts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Understand, my sons, that they disagree on the time when it is appropriate to do cauterization and pause the best time of early spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	It is said that cauterization is appropriate at all times, so the disadvantage due to the accidental time is submerged in the advantage of those who do cauterization being ready, and even more so if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, strong or fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay, since it is feared that the evil that comes with delay may be greater than a small disadvantage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not doubt in your hearts, or my sons, that they do not believe this except for the vulgar people and foolish doctors, since that sickness which is cured by cauterization is not a remedy at all times and it is best to pause its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think for that reason, because cauterization is not a medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the moisture that causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Nevertheless, cauterization is superior to medicine because of the greatness of its effect and the value and virtue of its operation.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's sickness returns at some point in time, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their sickness, as well as the virtue of the medication prepared for them, and what has been achieved through their diet and similar factors, unless the sickness to which cauterization is administered is a subtle one in a few parts with little excess moisture (such as cauterization of a tooth for pain, etc.), it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather it will be minor.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But it is a common belief that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, and this opinion is incorrect, not because I do not understand it, but because they believe that it is not a cure that benefits from medication or any other reason for using cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is actually the opposite; and my understanding is that the belief that cauterization is the last resort in medicine only occurs when certain healing methods have been attempted for some illnesses, and those medications do not work, and at the end of the cause, cauterization is administered, which proves effective.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Therefore, from here on, it is clear that cauterization is not the last resort in medicine, contrary to the belief held by the common people and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this because of the equality between gold and its nobility.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	The ancients said that the place of cauterization does not hurt, but this is not absolutely true, as I have already proven and observed that it only causes harm in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than iron as they said, but if you perform cauterization with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, since it depends on the quantity of gold you want for its heat, and it is prepared to be cooled; and if you adjust it over the fire and some layers are created due to the occupation of that material.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, cauterization with iron should be performed lightly and carefully to ensure proper operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those related to the feet within that section, so as to lighten the inquiry for those who are seeking it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization of headache due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization treats the excess coldness and moisture in the affected area, which are two causes of headache, so it is used to treat scrofula, runny nose, and fluid discharge from the ears and eyes, as well as insomnia, toothache, and gout, and generally any illness that arises due to coldness, such as paralysis, sclerosis, and similar conditions in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: First, command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the severity of the disease, the age of the person and their habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then command him to shave his head with the razor, and have him sit on a bench with his legs apart and hold his hands.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the back of your hand on the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the indicated location is reached, mark it with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cautery of the following shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then hold that probe on the marked location as it descends and turn it gently, so that your hand remains constrained slightly.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see any amount of bone being exposed, for example, the size of a grain of sand, then raise your hand, and if not, return your hand with that tool, or another cold one, until the bone that I told you about is visible.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a pinch of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then hold the probe on the edge of the burn and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the location with a strong tetrapotion until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	It has been said that when the wound remains open, it gets better by itself, because it is better and more helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	It has been said that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should remain there until some part of the coccyx is destroyed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then scrape away what is attached to the bone, and let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	It has been said that the cautery should reach the bone, until it strongly penetrates the bone until the bone breaks, and this is the form of a small splinter:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	It is estimated that the vapors from the head will escape from that location.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	The wound should be kept open for a long time and treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	However, I do not see both types of cauterization in all cases, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, because it is better for health when it is. The head is revealed by the solution of continuity of these things, as we have testified in other members, and especially if the patient's head is of fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and therefore choose that one for safety.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head's cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head of the patient, and he uses swords, daggers, knives, plasters, ointments, cudgels, bandages, slings, and similar things, and if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not improve his condition, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in nature; and if it is not frail and weak, then cauterize him again with another cautery.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize the patient's head at the crown with a new cautery where the skin is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the skin and expose the quantity of bone that has been cauterized previously and cauterize it again in the area at the back of the head, called "vessels", - and this is the place where a blister was formed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And be careful not to expose the bone, for the patient experiences great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Call this cautery by its name, because the cautery used for the corn of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one used at other parts of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Title: The Head
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Modern Migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When dull or spreading pain occurs in the back of the head, or sharp pain enters the skull, evacuate with medications that alleviate headaches, and administer other treatment as I have described in the section on diseases; if none of this works, then cauterize it in two ways: either with a burning medicine or with an iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Burning the cautery with a mustard plaster is when you take a mustard-filled bag and squeeze out its contents, making sure to remove both the ends of the bag from each side of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision in the temple area where the pain is, with a sharp lance to create a small hole beneath the skin.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	You should tighten it with a binding that restricts it slightly and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and massage the alum and leave the plaster for two or three days, and place a pad over the submerged area until the wound heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	You should care for it with a mouthwash until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you wish, do it with some burning medications as I have written in the second treatise on burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The iron cauterization method is as follows: fire for cauterizing it with this shape:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called "closed fracture of the clavicle," because its shape resembles a thorn with some curvature, and in a certain place it has a slight prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then press on the painful spot and hold your hand there - to prevent the bowstring from being injured that follows - and gently rotate the small blade slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of tissue injured by the operation is considerable and the vein is not affected, raise your hand to prevent the vein from being injured that follows, so that blood does not flow out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then immerse the wound in saltwater and place it on that spot, and leave it for three days; then immerse the wound in vinegar with bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize the end of the ulcer with a lancet according to the method of cauterization, and be careful not to cut the artery in this new type of surgery that is not ancient.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On ancient cauterization of ulcers.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat ulcers with what I have mentioned in the previous cure and in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not improve and sometimes because of the disease that does not respond to what was said about the first cautery with medicine or cauterization with fire, then it is necessary for you to ignite the lancet until it becomes white. This means placing a line on the painful spot with the length of which is the size of the finger, or whatever its size; and after waiting a while and strengthening it, you will cut the vein and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the jawbone, which is harmful because of chewing, and that the nerve that controls it is not injured, and that the spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that has been cut, since in cutting it there is fear, especially for those who do not know what to do and are not trained and experienced; leave the operation at first.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come with the reminder of the regulation of blood flow accidents of the vein according to its manner, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient to be tolerable, cauterize it in the right place on the head as I have described, and take care of the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that I mentioned in the chapter on the compression of the vein with cautery having two blades, and this cauterization is better and more beneficial.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On cauterizing ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain caused by cold and it is cured with medicinal means and the other cure mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, which is called "point," and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the point near the fire and show it around the whole ear as if a wheel is rolled, or in the area of each example if the pain is in one of them.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Hold the cautery of the ear's incision little by little with your hand, so that you know the spot where to try.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you use many points on the whole ear, and which one it is, then care for the spots until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On cauterizing tumor.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Tumor that is cured and with cauterization is only from the species that come from worms, as I mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing the species that enter through dryness or through spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this type of tumor with herbs and capillaries and guarguarmes and it does not improve your cure, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one is an incision of the ear, and the second a small one near its temple, and the third is the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Place your caution opposite to the side of the disease, because softening does not appear except on the side that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the right end of the ear above a small amount on the tip of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and after waiting a while with the cautery until the quantity of tissue cut by the operation is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, and it belongs to the blacksmith, its shape resembling a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more subtle that what you see; and it is necessary to cut off any unnecessary roughness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area with whatever process is needed before it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On ancient cauterization for apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and the care for it has been discussed and no fever is present in the patient, then cauterize it with four cauteries: especially on all the corners of his head; and over the middle of the head, as mentioned before; and on the back of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method for using the cautery is done as described before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	It has already been cauterized at the mouth of the stomach; it is more posterior; let it be healed with whatever process you use.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for memory loss caused by plague.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient, at the beginning, large and round pills for purification.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster of the described composition, as detailed in the treatise on plasters, over it.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Leave that area unattended for some time, as this is the method of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do what has been ordered by the physician who provided the treatment.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If the patient recovers well by this method, then it is good; otherwise, apply three cauterizations to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the most supreme part of the head down to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Leave some time between each cauterization, and take care of the cauterized area with the appropriate treatment.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to increase the treatment and the patient is tolerant of it, then cauterize in the middle area; if you want more treatment, then cauterize at both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for the cauterized area until it heals; and ensure that the cautery is olive-shaped as described earlier.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization for protection and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary to process the head with purgatives and as previously described; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it in the middle of the head, on all corners of the head, on the lower part of his neck, and three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body due to excessive hardness and the patient can tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards cauterize inwardly until the marrow is reached, and raise your hand higher.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Care for the cauterized area until it heals, and ensure that the cautery is olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by plague.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is necessary to purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with purgatives and the other treatment previously described when the patient is large and tolerates the exclusion of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer emetics and chewing agents for purification, using them for several days with proper dietary restrictions.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Approach the patient's head and shave it first, then cauterize that area with a cautery in its proper location on the head according to the method previously mentioned, and another cautery on the occiput of the patient, and cauterize each of the corners of the head as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those areas with cauteries as previously mentioned, ensuring paralysis and softening of the body over the spondils of the neck and the spondils of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Use an olive-oil cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, pause with a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and weak, thick fluids, cauterize that area with the cauteries as previously mentioned, ensuring paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is a decline of superfluity leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, give him water that purifies his brain as previously described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Approach the patient's head and shave it evenly, then apply a properly made turpentine on the circle (or border), and pause that in its proper location on the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be seated, and should be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Pause a linen soaked in the ancient sheep-grease balm.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that area gently over the fire for a moderate time, so that it does not suffer when placed there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Approach that area in its proper location on the head in the circle, and let it enter until it is soaked.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Give that to the patient every week once, along with good treatment until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize that area making small points as much as possible, but always have a cautery prepared in this manner: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Approach that area with a pad or bandage soaked in quince juice.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Cauterization for water flowing down the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have determined the beginning of water flowing down the vein by the signs I have mentioned in the division, start by giving the patient water that purifies his head, and protect him from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Have him soak in a bath for three days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Approach him and have him rinse his head, then cauterize that area with a cautery in its proper location on the head; and cauterize that area with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of water flow in two veins, or one cautery if it is the beginning of water flow in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are affected by the disease; and make the cauteries in that area at the length of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Be careful to avoid bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop it with some medicine that is within your ability.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with the knowledge needed for extracting arteries, removing abscesses, and preventing blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes the skull is cauterized between two bones with two properly produced cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On Cauterization for Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears in the veins and arteries of the head are ancient and it is determined that they are flowing due to excessive thickened fluids, cauterize that area with a cautery as previously mentioned in the beginning of water flow in the veins, and with another cautery in its proper location on the head and two cauteries between the temples and two cauteries between two bones of the skull.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If it is necessary to add more cauterization, cauterize that area along the entire length of the vein on the side of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterization for Foul Smell of the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating that patient with the method I have described and your treatment does not help, prepare yourself and give him chicory to drink for three nights; then shave his head and cauterize it with a middle-sized olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Cauterize that area with a carnation cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows above the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Be careful not to cut any arteries during this procedure.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The carnation cautery is shaped as follows:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening of Eyelids in the Veins.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the vein is softened due to illness or humidity, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery and here is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you [the reader], cauterize that area between both eyebrows with a small cautery and two cauteries all around, extending towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your hand when using the cautery, but according to the thickness that one third of the eyelid is pressed down.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterizing the eyelid when the skin inside and around it becomes separated and swollen.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin around the eyelid becomes separated and swollen, causing pain, there are two methods for treating it: cauterization with a hot iron or cauterization with medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cauterizing the area with fire is chosen, instruct the patient to wash their skin as they would when cleaning it, and keep it moist until it heals; and if a blister forms, press the eyelids together with a bandage until the skin grows over it.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When the skin is healed and covered, place a handkerchief on top of the patient's head, then gently press the eyelids together with your thumb or index finger in the shape of a holly leaf (as illustrated), starting at the edge of the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place a warm cloth or bird glue on the affected area around the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And bring the heated iron, which is shaped as follows.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And apply the heated iron, following the pattern you have indicated, in small, measured strokes until the surface of the skin (which resembles a holly leaf) is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the healing of this operation is that the eyelid will contract and the skin around it will rise due to the puncture of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore, lift your hand and hold it there for three days, and place a warm cloth over the affected area to promote scarring.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Treat that wound with mouthwash until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin around the wound returns due to some cause and the eyelid becomes swollen again, you should cauterize it once more in the same manner as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin remains in the eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural position, heals, and does not press on the eyeball.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if cauterizing with medicine is chosen, instruct the patient to clean their skin until it heals, and prepare a piece of cloth or paper in the shape of a holly leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take well-known remedies and living substances as needed. 1. 2. Mix those substances well, and apply it quickly to prevent it from becoming too thick; place the mixture on the cloth shaped like a holly leaf, and cover one or both eyes with it; then place a warm cloth soaked in oil over the affected area, and have the patient rest their head on your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	3. Wait for the remedy to take effect and gently press it until the patient feels the burning sensation of the remedy, as a burning sensation indicates that it is working.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	4. Once you feel the remedy taking effect, remove it and wash the area with water; consider whether the eyelid has risen as it should (as when cleaned with heat or an incision), in which case you are done; if not, apply more of the remedy to the unaffected area and repeat the process until your operation is successful and the eyelid heals.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	5. Place a warm cloth over the affected area to promote scarring and heal the wound, using mouthwash or other remedies as necessary until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to guard your operation with diligent vigilance that no error falls from the medicine, and if the eyelid becomes swollen within a few days due to some cause of the skin in the eye, then you should repeat the medicine on that location which has become swollen, and specifically do so as at the beginning, and apply it again until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way to prepare the balm of myrrh.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that men's hernias are various in size and magnitude, so according to that, make your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not conceal the path of straightening for the one who is trained in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as I have said in the division of diseases and do not confer with anyone, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to lower their head onto your lap, and have someone else hold their head so that neither they nor the holder are injured or agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply cotton soaked in oil of hog or mullein root onto the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And prepare the cautery which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	It should have a concave shape, similar to the form of a reed or pen handle, from one end with which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, it should emerge as it tries.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the concave one is better for this work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and drain and dry it from there.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not open, then you should open it and extract the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the cautery on it, which should be well ignited, and you with your hand hold the cautery at the corner of the eye near the nose, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed, and then press the cautery against the edge of the eyelid and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning your cautery enters the bone, it is good; but if not, you should repeat the cauterization once or twice, as necessary; and leave it in this state for three days, and place a dressing over that spot with an absorbent dressing until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If the condition persists for ten days and is not healed, then pause over the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is appropriate in its section.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method for cauterizing a fistula, which some have previously described, is as follows: place your hand on the location of the fistula and burn it, then pause in that incision with a fine needle-shaped substance, which is its form: And it was the amount of one lead pellet melted; hold your hand with good retention, and let it not harm the patient because the melted lead does not reach the wound; and it is necessary to place the fistula on the wound of the patient dipped in oil or water, since lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the method described for cauterizing and healing, that is good; if not, it becomes necessary to administer a probe through the nose and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cauterization of the Fissure of the Anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times, fissures occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then burn it with a small cautery knife in this manner as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity be according to the fineness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place that incision carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And heal it with care until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cauterization of Mouth Fistulas.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess appears in the uvula or palate or in the abscesses of the teeth and it becomes broken, decayed, and is made into a fistula, and if you treat it and your treatment does not heal it, then it is necessary that you burn the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place that burning cautery in the probe of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches the edge of it, and at the end do this once or twice; and heal it with what we have said about healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the abscess is separated and healed, that is good; if not, it becomes necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone according to its proper location.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the Cauterization and Softening of the Teeth and Gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are diseased, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then lay the head of the patient on your lap, and hold the cautery in the shape that is appropriate for this purpose, so that you press the handle on the tooth and enter it with the cautery ignited quickly, and hold your hand a little further until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth to be reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then stop it, since a diseased tooth is closed and a softened gum is strengthened, and corrupt moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Tooth Pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or worms, or does not improve with medication, then cauterize it in one of two ways: cauterize with a cow's bone, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a pointed tip should be taken from the cow's or pig's horn, and it should be sharpened at the end and wrapped around the end of the tendon. Then immerse that pointed tool in hot oil and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or a cloth in the previously mentioned tool, place it on the painful tooth, and hold that hot iron on it until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization with fire should be avoided if the patient has an ulcer or a wound, and if the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply the heated cautery to the tooth in the appropriate form and hold it there until the cautery cools down; repeat this process several times as long as the pain persists, either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to apply pressure on the mouth of the patient with a good cushion for an hour, and then remove it. This is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize the affected area as much as you are able.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Extrusion Cauterization.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When an extrusion is due to inflammation and cold humors that are not obedient to digestive medicines, and you wish to facilitate digestion of this condition somewhat, then use cauterization as follows: heat the form of the cautery as described below (having two pointed ends so that the smoke escapes through the other end), and apply the heated cautery to the apostema once, and if necessary, repeat until it reaches the base of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, cauterize it according to its size, and then leave it for three days before applying fresh hot oil or fat over the burned area until the fire has consumed what it had burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And treat the wound with bandages and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the cannula or cautery should be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Roughness of the Larynx and Constriction of Veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes over the trachea of the lung and especially when this is accompanied by cold congestion, it is necessary that the patient be evacuated with laxative medicines at first, and then cauterize the root of the glottis in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	But be careful not to burn the root of the glottis with the cautery or burn the cartilage of the larynx too much.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that area with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the lower end of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The form of the cautery should be as follows (rounded and resembling a nail).
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that area with what has been described before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold humors, the patient does not have fever or phlegm, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the points where lions' paws and bulls' hooves are depressed; and with another cautery in the middle of the shin between the nipples; and let the cauterizers be rounded, as described before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, perform your cauterization with the pointed cautery known as puntica, whose form is described in the section on earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points at those places; and treat that area with what has been described before until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Now, let the cauteries have three legs for caution's sake, because cauterization is done as follows: in one application, you can perform three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Cauterization of Twitching, which is the head of the helper. (This term may refer to a condition where the patient experiences involuntary muscle spasms or convulsions.)
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and does not return to its original position during its time of return, it should be reduced as soon as possible until it returns to its usual state. Then, by a small movement, you should dislocate it in such a way that it slips out, as we have observed, and it is necessary to first reduce the dislocation. The patient should then be turned over onto their back or side, and the cartilage, which is inside the affected area near the juncture, should be raised using your left hand to the areas above, if the juncture is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approach the cautery with two heads; and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Approach the cautery with two prongs, each prong to penetrate into the other; and you will find the shape of the cauterization afterwards with three prongs of the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and let that be thin according to the quantity of the tendon; and this is its shape:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some observations are adjusted according to this count and for that reason the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then stop the cautery by pressing on it with salt, and then have the patient rest in peace, and let not the member be harmed for any time before being comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the groin area and beyond, then do this: cauterize over the muscle with a cautery nail or a pointed cauterizing needle, because the joint will be confirmed, moisture will be removed, and the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moisture enter the stomach and rot its composition, causing it to multiply rooms within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without conferring, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, extends their hands and legs, and approaches the area with three cauterizations: one cautery beneath the feet at the length of a finger, another cautery beneath the ribs of the caution, until a triangular shape appears; and extend between those not aligned to make blisters.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the third part of the thickness of the tendon.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Let the shape of the cautery be as described, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the appropriate location of the stomach according to this shape; and let this be a cautery shaped like a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	Let the stomach be cauterized at the point where that part of the cautery is frightened: and know that you should puncture the stomach with as many points as you want with tendon, and then cauterize those points with the cautery; and then care for it with the treatment preceding until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Cauterization of the Hernia Suture.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the hernia causes pain due to heat or moisture or large windiness until it is expelled from its normal composition through excessive outflow, and if the patient is cured with what we have said and not conferred, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, and make three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity at the hernia beneath the hipbones, in the male's position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterization be according to the length of the straight body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not press too much with your hand on the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of what is adhered is equal to the thickness of the tendon's knot, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them be seated, which has already extended its legs, and lift its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a surgical cautery, when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and make sure that the entire coating is cauterized so that the entire body and the intestines are reached, because the coating here is delicate; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	The eighteenth chapter:
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of the abscess of the liver with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	If you want to determine whether an abscess is in the liver or its capsule and wish to know if it is located in the liver tissue or the capsule of the liver, then, if it is in the liver tissue, the patient will feel a heavy and painful sensation.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the capsule of the liver, then the pain is severe and often exhausts the physicians who attempt to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore the patient must be placed on his back and the location of the abscess must be determined. Next, the surgeon should apply a hot iron, similar in shape to that shown on the previous page, to the abscess cavity.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	The iron should be heated until it is hot and cauterizes the entire abscess cavity, reaching the cystic duct and causing pus to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	After this treatment, the patient should be given care for other abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	It is not advisable to use this method of cauterization without further study in the art of medicine and knowledge of various maladies; however, some cases may require this operation, but you should consult a more experienced physician for advice on whether or not to perform it.
Capitol .xxix.	The twenty-ninth chapter:
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of piles (hemorrhoids)
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries used for arthritis are now applied to the treatment of piles, and this is the method you should follow: Take a piece of dry cloth or thin metal rod that is about the thickness of your finger and heat it over a fire until it is hot. Then use this heated instrument to press firmly on each pile for a few seconds. This will help to alleviate the pain and swelling caused by hemorrhoids.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	After the cauterization of each pile, submerge it in oil and then apply heat to it again using a heated iron or other instrument. This should be done at the point where the backbone meets the neck and two small cauterizations should be made on either side of the Adam's apple, one slightly lower and one declining between the fifth rib and navel, declining a little towards the rear; another cauterization should be made in the middle of the thigh; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations on the back; and one cauterization at the point where the two shoulders meet and two cauterizations on either side of the thigh, after the first cauterization between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary that you press your hand on the cautery, but rather leave it in open air during its operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it was said by some ancients that there are certain men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that same one, and place it in the location between the ribs, until we reach that spot with the abscess and open the pus, as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this perforation with the cautery, there is no fear, because if someone dies immediately, it occurs at the location of the fistula, where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the Cauterization of the Spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the spleen, as we have said in its treatment by division and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct, of which one is that you make three or four cauteries according to the length of the spleen, following the figure of the cauteries of the liver, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery the thickness should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have said in the cauterization of the liver.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand on the cautery; and let the patient lie face down.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another method of cauterization is that you ignite the cautery having two ends, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the intestine which is at the end of the spleen, allowing the patient to lie on their left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Your lifting should be such that you lift the intestine according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And bring the two ends together, and ignite soon, in that place where they penetrate the intestine of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then withdraw the cautery; and thus, four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And apply the cautery which has been left for several days to boil, because more is conferred by this than other causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the Cauterization of Edema.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should be done in alginate, not in an edema.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating edema with the methods you have mentioned in the division and not conferring your treatment, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization around the navel with four cauteries on the circumference of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, one cautery on the spleen, one cautery on the liver, two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the degree of the wound.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cautery open to allow it to burn for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cauterization with what is necessary for them to remain in that place for two intentions, and it will be hastened to them with assistance of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be round, as the shape of it was described before, and it is that one with which the back is cauterized in an olive shape, according to its previously described form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with edema and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular veins, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand, but do not remove it completely because the stagnant water remains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this way: And place two cauterizations on both thighs, and in each thigh make a cauterization with the tip of the cautery knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be the length of the thigh: and make one at a distance from the groin, and the other slightly lower on the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And heal those causes which were mentioned before.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal organs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When an abdominal organ is weakened and humidity enters that causes the vertues to decay, it is the digestive and retentive vertue, which are in the stomach and the intestines, and is treated with the methods of treatment mentioned before. Sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization that exhibits its virtues, then cauterize it with a large cautery on the patient's stomach as described previously in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the umbilicus, with a fine-pointed cautery; and with a cauterizer over the kidney on large stones or with two cauterizers.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidity is excessive and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it on the pentenilh (a part of the abdomen) and on the intestines, and apply a strong adjustment with two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal area. This is a perfect cure without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When nature produces ancient hemorrhoids or one that is caused by gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are treated with what was mentioned before and their treatment is not effective, then cauterize it with three cauterizations on the pus under the lower spine (sacrum) in a small triangular shape, and with a cautery above the navel at two points.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described before; and make one cauterization on the spleen, and another on the liver with a pointed cautery, leave the cauterization open for some time, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Title .35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of an athlete near an abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut out an abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place a fire in the abscessed abscess and let the tip of the cautery enter the incision until it reaches the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do it once or twice, because if they are many abscesses, then cauterize each of them according to what has been determined, and take care of those that show signs of purulent discharge until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more beneficial in this case.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Title .36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are made by nature in the groin.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by it, heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you see a fistula in nature and it is old, corroded skin and humid matter, then what is most appropriate is to try to cure it with a subtle probe, and bring the quantity of the depth of it along with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity with which it penetrates the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cauterization in that area until the rotten flesh is burned off quickly one or two or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula is on the body of the bladder or the body of the hernia, then avoid all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a meaty area and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the location is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and remains like that for a long time, then you should know that it has been healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not removed from it, then you should know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of a bone that is rotting, or that it will come back to memory of those causes in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Title .37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of snorrs.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the snoring due to cold or excessive congestion, and the patient's throat is irritated, it is necessary to cauterize that area on the snoring with a cautery on each snore with a pointed cautery that precedes the memory of it.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And be careful with the cauterization because it will be seconded by a small cushion, so there will be three cauterizations in a row, and therefore they will be more beneficial in this case.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Title .38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, you should cauterize that area below the bladder, on the side closest to the penis, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	The length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pit; and cauterize that area with a cautery in the lower part or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Let the cautery be pointed as it is prescribed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Title .39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the liver.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the abdomen swells and becomes moist, it is forbidden to engage in any activity, menstruation of the woman is corrupted, their provocation is delayed, pain occurs due to this, so the location must be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as has been said in the bladder cautery; and a cautery on the location below the navel or two cauteries, and let it be a hot cautery.
Capitol .xl.	De la castracion de los hombres.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When swelling and moistness are infiltrated at the ankle joint, and this causes dislocation of the joint, the sign of this is that the joint extends beyond the other when compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is brought out in a place where it can be seen.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have a sign in the circumference of the joint as described, and in this way the joint falls into the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the shape of the cautery used be similar to that used in cauterizing the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then you shall cauterize it with three cauteries and a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Make the cautery according to the size of the dislocation in all the ankle; and care for that which is healed.
Capitol .xli.	De la fracturacio de l’anqua.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle area, caused by inflammation and moisture, the patient is treated with what has been said before and nothing more, which is an old remedy. Therefore, you should lance the patient with thick humors using fumigated pills or artificial pills that resemble them; then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterizing in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medications or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize the ankle area with three triangular cauteries in this manner; do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And make sure that the spaces between each cautery are proportionate to the thickness of the finger and whether the cauteries are large or small.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	However, sometimes the cauterizations should be made on the middle part of the ankle for there to be four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape is preceded in the ankle dislocation cauterization, and which encompasses and burns the entire cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	However, if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauterizations on the thigh at the site where the pain arises; and one cauterization on the hip four fingers below the part of the crease.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is a knife cautery, let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain is extended to the location near the feet, then cauterize there where it arises with a cautery using three or four points, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain is behind the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Always be careful in all cauterizations that you do not burn nerves or large vessels with the cautery, and so as to avoid harming the patient or causing contractions.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen and heard of others who have cauterized on the hip and burned in the cauterization, causing the leg to swell up to the foot, burn through, rot, and corrupt the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And applying this method strongly is a great solution for the stomach, and also leads to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise say in the ankle cauterization using this method: make a circle of iron, and let its circumference be as big as a palm; and place the holes according to the thickness of an almond or walnut.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Inside that circle is another third; let the space between them be equal to the knuckle of the thumb; and let those circles be open in two parts; and let the length of the keys be one or two knuckles, and make the edges of iron appropriately fitted in the circles; and this is the shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Light it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks; and then place it on the ankle area, with the patient's hand on the side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize it with three circles in one visit.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And leave it alone for three days; apply it with a dressing and let the wound remain open for several days; and treat it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	According to Al-Zahrawi: my son, we have rarely used this type of cauterization because of the fear of its consequences, and because few have paid attention to it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Nevertheless, from among the many cauterizations that he suffered, he learned where to apply them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Cauterizations with burning medications are those that you make two circles, having an armed hole in which the handle of the iron is inserted; the length of the wall should be two knuckles or more.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And let the space between each one be equal to the thickness of the finger; and let them open below and above, and let them contain something in the middle like this:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Place your hand on the ankle area with the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand over the ankle area; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be small but gradually increasing, and hold it for the duration of one hour, and have the patient bear the burning and the pain until the burning stops. This is how he learned to bear the pain as if from fire.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand with the tool and wash the entire ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Leave it alone for three days and cover it with a dressing until the blackness of the burn subsides, and leave it uncovered for several days, and apply red paint to it; this is the final step in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Treat it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the thigh or leg, put it in a position where it contains water as was done for the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of hot water, and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of lime burnt without being mixed together on one side, then crush and strain it in a new wave, where the hole left should be pierced with a small hole, according to the amount required.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Wait for the other wave to fill the bottom of the wave, and pour over it warm water with live alkali that rises through your finger, then compress it well with a tight grip, and let the sharp end of the needle pierce the acute water in the other wave-filled hollow.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Adjust all that water and pour over it new warm water and more alkali, because at this point it will have great strength, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, because such an operation produces fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Some of the medications are cauterized wide, such as pitch and honey mixed with sulfur.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Gaul recounts an ancient man's operation and cure for pain in the back and sciatica, and it is remarkable that this was done, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, because it is cured in one go as recommended, because this remedy works very well in bathing and purging, as he recommends.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be prescribed a green verdigris, and if green verdigris is not found, figs should be taken; it should be crushed with a little gray and placed on the back where the pain is, or on the chest, or on the legs, and left to act.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	It should be left for a period of three hours, or as long as the patient can bear the heat.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse it in hot water and when the body of the patient is warm, place it on a hot surface, because the pain ceases and heals.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medications, but rather promote the elimination of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	However, Hippocrates says that when a goat's vein is stretched and cauterized, it will do better; the cautery should be done as follows: wool should be taken and soaked in ancient oil, and placed between the toes and between the grooves.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a dried goat's vein and inflate it with fire until it is made carbon, and place it on the wool and let it expand.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue to apply this, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the back and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called the cattle cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes toothache is due to various causes, such as chipping or hitting, or excessive elimination, and similar causes, by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization should not be used except in this special case caused by an effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, promote the elimination of the patient with pills filled with similar materials that are placed on the toothache area three fingers deep according to the latitude of it, then use cautery or not depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	The cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using the central nail in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Treatment by cauterization at the start of a jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Signs of this disease in infants; and the beginning of it is indicated in infants by their structure becoming rigid, with a swelling and increase in size.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And thickening is observed in the lower part of the back and neck bones that begin to protrude above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when you see this and wish to stop it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Have the cautery cover all parts of the affected vertebrae.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery for two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Make sure the points are evenly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Take care to treat the area where this is healing as directed.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful not to administer cauterization in jaundice caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Treatment by cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout due to cold is cured using the treatment method and the pain does not persist, you should perform additional cauterizations.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is that you cauterize around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-oil cautery should have this shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain spreads into the nails or other joints, and it often indicates this, then cauterize that one with three or four cauterizations all around using this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If more cauterizations are necessary for this procedure, then cauterize it, but do not press too hard with your hand beforehand, just place the coagulum on the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain spreads to both hands and feet, then administer the cautery as described in the previous section.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the limbs, and it's called sciatica, then puncture around the nerves as described earlier, puncture on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain persists in the aforementioned limbs, then puncture around the nerves on each toe and at the wrist of the affected hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pain approaches the joints or muscles after several days, then cauterize all parts of the affected joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient with good management and administration of medicine, for if good management and appropriate treatment is given, this cautery will heal them (God help).
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cauterization of Wounds
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is an injury in the inguinal region and the intestine protrudes toward the genitalia, it is necessary to begin by having the patient abstain from food on that day and use remedies to relax the swelling of the hernia caused by the stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then place the patient on your lap and command them to keep their legs together until the hernia or intestine is pushed back in or reappears through the opening.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return it to the aforementioned place and press on it with your thumbs at the end of the penis, where the shape resembles the head of a circle at the sides of the body divided by ribs.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then heat the cautery to be used.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is well-cooked and bubbles appear.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that spot with your hand steady, and push it in until you reach the penis bone inside the anus; repeat this process again if you did not succeed in reaching the bone during the first examination.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the position of the hernia during your cauterization, to ensure that you do not burn the hernia so as not to cause death or other serious problems for the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when using the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation will be in vain.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	It is necessary for the cautery of children to be subtle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Cure the wound caused by the cautery for three days, using bandages until the scar of the burn heals over.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that one with other soothing ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain lying on their back for forty days, until the wound and sore are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary to restrict the food intake of the patient according to the duration of their treatment and to prevent the hernia from protruding during the healing process.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time to remove the bandages after forty days, administer appropriate treatment, and continue for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	The patient should rest and abstain from work, food, drink, and excessive speech, as using this regime for healing will lead to recovery.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	I will describe the treatment of other hernias in the abdomen, and at the beginning, when you don't know what to do, cauterize the hernia with a circular cautery according to its size, as the third part of it is exposed from the wound; take care of that one using what was described earlier, but do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	I will now tell you about the first method for treating hernias by cauterizing them with a triangular cautery according to this pattern, which is known as:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and the line that extends from the left side to the right above the hernia, and another line across it; place your hand on a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and more effective.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Treatise on Cauterization of Twisting (or Torsion)
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain arises in a limb due to sudden injury or blows and the pain persists for a long time without relief from medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery should be of the appropriate size for each member, taking into account its magnitude and smallness, its nature and characteristics, and the location of torsion and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the wound is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; if not, you should repeat the cauterization on it; for it is common for those pains to be recurrent in the neighboring member, so it is necessary to achieve this with cauterization before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47 (in English numbering)
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Treatise on Cauterization of Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some types of leprosy are seen to be beneficial when cauterized due to a large advantage, and in particular if the type of leprosy is caused by rotting of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common and curable as mentioned in the division, or not present, and beware of the patient that the corruption has spread throughout his body and his entire complexion, then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it, place the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two corns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, place your hand on the cautery a little before it touches the bone and causes a slight pressure, and thus the sores are moved, to ease the expiration of thick vapors from it; and cauterize on the glands as prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is apparent, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries mentioned on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the spine, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the elbows and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and two on the thighs, and two on the shins; and cauterize it over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and over every toe on the feet, and over the wrists of the hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Watch out for the nerves that are on the heel, do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Certainly, some are cauterized with a cautery on the pelvis bone and another on the stomach opening, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more adjustments (applications of the cautery) you make, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they have already been rendered unconscious by the anesthesia.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints, following the recipes of the instruments (tools).
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with a mixture of eggs beaten with honey and other medicine until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization for Stupor (anesthesia).
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is immobilized or anesthetized and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but fails to heal, then you cauterize that immobilized member using cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Your cautery should penetrate the skin a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Treat it with honey until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some stupor is cauterized, which extends to the back and feet, and the spine of the neck, and relieves the pain in the nerves that afflict that member, and the stupor subsides.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit points of nerves throughout the entire body that cause movement.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On Cauterization for Gangrene (mortification of tissue).
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When gangrene is old and does not respond to any of the medicines applied to it, then you cauterize over that area with a pointed cautery to the degree of the size of the wound until the whiteness and color disappear, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with a mixture of eggs and lentils boiled in rose oil and arnica leaves, and goose or hare blood, each part separately and all mixed together, then lay a linen cloth over the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On Cauterization for Cancer (malignant growths).
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the area around it as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise ones say it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle position; however, I have not seen this done, as I fear that it may be ulcerated, and I myself have seen some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is therefore more appropriate to cauterize it in the area around it with a circular or multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 2.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On Cauterization for Hemorrhoids.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an hemorrhoid is delayed in maturation, either due to superfluity or the patient's condition, who is elderly and weak with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of hemorrhoids; then cauterize it in the area around it with multiple small cauteries pointed. Place a linen cloth over that area which will promote maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	However, if you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then ignite the cautery whose shape is as follows: and immerse it in the middle of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in that location which is lower down, to alleviate the arm; then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 3.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Caterization for Corrosion (erosion).
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it like dry wood consumed by fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see corrosion in a location that has been subjected to cautery with fire, then ignite multiple small and large cauteries as appropriate in the location where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then treat it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Place a linen cloth over it for three days and cover the cauterized areas with oil mixed between applications until all scars are eradicated, and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Approach the swollen flesh causing growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If the flesh heals normally after three days without corruption, that is good; otherwise, you must use a cautery on what is rotten in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosive medicine is sometimes used with acute medication, because it serves as an alternative to cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, fire cautery is often a quick aid in the pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already said that acute medication is used for treatment in the division, so take it when needed.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterizing nails and similar items.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Motes observed near the joints of the feet, causing pain that is called a nail, and it is large, vented, which presses on the foot; cauterization in these areas can be performed in two ways: cauterization with fire or cauterization with water heated.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, fire cauterization is performed by heating the convex cautery resembling a pen of a hawk's beak, made from iron in accordance with the size that covers the entire nail and has thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Approach the hammer and pause it on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Then let it rest for three days until pus begins to discharge.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply the plaster made with wild mallow leaves crushed and mixed with salt, let it rest on it for a night, as this will be expelled from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of the area with rotten flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal, and pus appears on the surface of the body, especially in the head and feet, then you must administer cautery with water, take a hot iron or copper or glass rod and place it on the nail; then put some warm water in the cannula, hold your hand, and rotate the cannula around the nail with compression from all sides, and press the edge of the cannula against the root of the nail, allowing the boiling water to enter the root of the wound; wait for an hour as the patient feels the pain of the boiling water, then remove it, as the nail along with its roots will be expelled.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	So do the same to all of them until they are all removed from the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then take care of the pus that arises when the roots of the nails are expelled with rotten flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Capital III (chapter thirty-third)
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the Cauterization of Tremors (Treatment for Tremors)
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When treating tremors caused by irritation of a nerve or fever due to irritation, or for other similar causes, then you must cauterize it with four cauterizations or five on the spine, between each spine with one cautery; and on the legs and above the stomach, use olive oil cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the affected area ceases and hastens the healing of the underlying illness.
Capitol .lv.	Capital LV (chapter fifty-fifth)
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Ulcers on the Body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When ulcers appear on the body that are pus-filled fissures caused by corrupt matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized over the entire opening with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with an esthesiology razor longue; or with a cautery lenticula.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases, cauterization should be performed before the opening of the ulcer using this method; and it is not credible, and the excess is removed, healing from the ulcers.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, in some cases, it should be done with appropriate evacuation using phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capital LVI (chapter fifty-sixth)
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding from Arteries by Incision with an Artery Knife
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	In some cases, bleeding from an artery that is incised must be stopped by closing the wound, or by making a small incision or cauterizing the member, and in such cases, it is difficult to stop the bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when it happens to someone, you must immediately apply pressure with your hand on the artery wound and hold it until the bleeding stops and does not return.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And pause the olive oil cauterizations for few and large amounts, in many cases, until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take a small or large piece of it according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, above the vein as quickly as possible after stopping the bleeding, and cauterize it until the bleeding stops and the blood flow is restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the artery wound when you stop the bleeding and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully prepared among those in the fire, and do not cease to perform this action until the blood flow is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware not to burn the nerve that is here, and let nothing else harm the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood in such cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or cauterization as described earlier; or extraction when it cannot be extracted, for when the extremities are burned and blood flow is restricted; or binding with a ligature or strong suture; or applying medications that have the property of restricting blood; and they should be strengthened with a pulvinar or compress.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	However, those who administer a proper ligature and a strong suture with cloth or by causing burning and similar causes should not trust it too much.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If no doctor or medicine is present and the wound is on a vein as mentioned, then make a pause in that place over the opening of the vein, and understand the great constraint until the blood stops flowing from the main part of the injury, and do not let it be renewed; and above the artery, spray cold water with great coolness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and furthermore, be cautious in what is required for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	If there is no doctor or medicine present and the wound is on a vein as mentioned, then stop the bleeding by pressing on the wound with your hand until it stops flowing, and understand that you must hold pressure until the blood stops completely; and if necessary, use a linen cloth soaked in vinegar to clean the wound; and furthermore, be cautious in what is required for cautery or medicine.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and abscesses and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases where cautery with fire is appropriate and medication burning, and the occasions and causes for this, and the necessary instruments along with the forms of the cauterizations; and we have organized the chapters from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this chapter, we will proceed with this method so that the desired result is achieved, and then on what has been asked for.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before I begin this, let me remind you that in this chapter we are dealing with things that were discussed in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary to be in great caution, since in the operation that will be discussed in this chapter, many things are observed that involve evacuation, which involves blood and which gives life, and the spraying of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an ulcer or purgation of a wound or extraction of a thorn or incision of a stone and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these, there should be fear and trembling, and above all, caution to avoid death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I also advise you to be careful in what you do, because some things you will handle as if they were healthy people, but others as if they were sick with many diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will go away with their disease, and you must be careful because it is easy for them to die due to the severity of their illness, or due to the duration of their illness, and the disease itself signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And some are those that give you their property and goods, you hope for their recovery, but their disease is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you must not agree with those who come to you with this method; and your caution should be greater than greed and rapacity; and do not presume any cause without certain knowledge which verifies what has been asked of you, and for which a good result can be expected.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the care of all your patients predictive and diagnostic methods for those whose health has been restored, because in this there is help for you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire you with His understanding and not deceive or misguide you, for that is in His power.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	I have organized this chapter according to the previous chapter on cautery, from head to feet, so that what you ask for and what you need will be made easier for you.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this illness often develops in infants and when the newborn does not drain the head properly.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes which are unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not see this illness except in infants; and all those whom I have seen suffer from it die of it, so it seems to me that this operation is useless in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen an infant whose head was full of water and the size of his head prevented him from vomiting it out, and moreover, the moisture caused more congestion until death occurred by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture can accumulate between the skull and the bones or be accumulated below the sutures of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in this case if the moisture is between the skull and the bones and the abscess is small, then you must make an incision at the midline of the head with a crack in its length, which should be no more than two inches long, so that the moisture runs out. This is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more severe and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is in the bone, a sign of it is that you see the joints widened everywhere and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your thumb, but not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must make incisions in the correct location on the head in three places according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then remove all the humidity through the incision; strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; broach it with oil and wine for five days, remove the linen and cure the wound with poultices and bandages, strengthen the head with a brace; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it is larger in the occiput or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the filling of water appear, and do what is most easily possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery and let blood flow out, causing death of the patient due to bleeding and the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Capital II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incisions of the arteries which are called auricles, they are called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Capital second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When cataracts or abscesses appear in the ears or feet, and it is old and does not respond to medication, then the last cure is by incising those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to incise the place where the patient's head is swollen, and carefully press the area with a rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the places on each side of the places that are closest to the auricles should be pressed until they disappear, and this is only possible in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And touch the artery with your finger, and incise each one with a sharp scalpel blade that enters the bone through the incision, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel blade under the artery and break it at the incisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' widths apart, because when a vein is incised blood gushes out with pulsatile flow, which jumps far due to its frequency.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure the distance from the auricle to the quantity of three fingers, and touch it with your finger, and proceed to the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood to be removed is a quarter of a pint. And do not remove too much or too little blood, and all this is according to the quantity that appears of the virulence of the disease and the filling of the artery by it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And carefully consider the wound, and therefore if there is any cause of pain over the bone, then incise it so as not to create an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with feathers and linen of linen cloth, and cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capital III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or chronic abscess occurs in the temples or shoulders, due to humoral imbalances and qualities in the muscles of the temples, or old and violent swellings that resemble these, and is treated with the methods of medication without success, we have resorted to this disease extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of them as shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient raises the hairs on his temples; and understand the artery that appears in the temple because it is revealed to you by its pulse, but it is hidden from most men due to its forcefulness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and carefully press the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water to it until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then you take the scalpel, which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And approach the scalpel blade with that ease until you reach the artery; and then make an incision in the upper part and extract it at the superficial level until you extract it from the sheath and expose it from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, you wrap it with a piece of cloth at its tip, and then make an incision in one part according to the size by which the tips are lengthened and contracted, but do not let blood flow out, because if they are not incised, no blood will come out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And apply a wine leech to it. (The word "sanc" is likely a misspelling or error for "sangue", which means blood in Italian, Spanish, French, etc., but here refers to blood drawn by the leech.) Here comes the next sentence:
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the archery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with strong cedar or cord, and not cut it until it has been allowed to fester for a while, during which time the wound will heal and blood will flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut off the excess tissue between two ligaments, and do this at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron (cautery) down to the bone and then make an incision in the extra tissues, and remain at that place during this work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better for the patient to have a fever or be in a state of complete heat; because cauterization is of those causes that help to stop bleeding, and therefore it is better in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to make an incision in the hernia that a person skilled in this procedure should do, and they must place powder on it properly, and heal it with dry medicines so that the flesh may heal and warm water be applied until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If during another examination, blood flows from the hernia, then you should stop this bleeding by using a ligature, or a cautery, or by applying a pad to the area and press firmly until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If one of those causes is not present, you should place a warm cloth over the area until the bleeding stops, and bind it with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and tighten as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The easiest method for extracting hernia is to cauterize the vein with two cauteries (tongs), after which you mark both places with ink, and wait a little while, knowing that it will reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be stretched out, because they are not consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	Here is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of both cauteries be similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if one cautery is hotter than the other, it is better because if they are as sharp as each other and close to the skin, it may cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since in those cases there is some thickness (to the skin), it is necessary to keep the heat of the fire at a moderate level and cut the flesh gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is easier and less painful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let the space between the two cauteries be the thickness of a finger (or a little more or less).
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and chronic coughs in women.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When coughs are acidic and the affected veins are located on the chest above the head, and there is no cause for their cure in medication, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes swollen and he feels as if ants were crawling over his head, and the lips become extended, moistened so much that the skin on them peels off, and the corners of the mouth are scabbed due to the acidity of the tears. In ancient times, they used mastic (spruce resin) for treating this condition, but I name it "spit".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you tell the patient to pull off the skin that is on his forehead and then make three incisions in the forehead at equal distances according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be at an equal distance from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second at an equal distance along the length of the eyelid, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful not to make an incision in the hernias on both sides and stretch your hand from one jaw to the other.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And let the space between each incision be three fingers apart.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry cloths, use them to draw the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And insert the spatula between the two sharp edges, and this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the base of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract the hernia completely by loosening the cord that is between two incisions, and do this from the intermediate incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And press this spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with a sharp knife on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And wait for the sharp edge to reach the adjacent flesh, the cord, and the bone, and push it inward until it reaches the intermediate incision, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the lips.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The continuous incision should be continued to the point where it appears at the coccyx, and then continue it into the middle fissure towards the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	When the quantity of blood clots in the foot swells, squeeze the places of the blood clot with the fingers.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place a cushion on each old wound that has become purulent, and place poultices soaked in wine and oil and vinegar on the pus-filled blisters, and make sure they do not develop an infected abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large fumigation of boiled or distilled water, and take care to treat it with balsam of Basilico oil and others until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On treating ulcers through catharsis and on the boils descending from inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When a patient experiences constant and sharp pain accompanied by catharsis, and the boils of the patient are weakened and small, and their weakness is noticeable, and their ulcerated eyes and eyelashes fall out, and there is an intense headache with accompanying extension, then one should know from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come from any other source but from the veins descending from inside the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best treatment for such cases is as follows: tell the patient to shave his forehead, and then make a small incision in that place on the middle of the forehead (and start from the left temple to the right temple; and make the incision through the bone; and withdraw your hand from the temples, which are painful to touch), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and fill the space between the two lips of the incision with old cotton or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then bind it with poultices soaked in wine and oil to prevent an infected abscess from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove the abscess and see that it has diminished, then it is necessary to clean the bone from where the flesh begins until the surface of the bone is exposed, and treat it with a drying regimen that promotes healing of the flesh, such as if you take flour made from two parts wheat and four parts colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster to be applied on these sores near the natural flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On treating ulcers in the ear.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of ulcers in the ear can be one of four types: mineral poison or something similar to poison such as iron and glass, plants like mustard seed or bean, fluid such as water and vinegar and similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And if poison or something similar to poison enters the ear that does not belong in the ear and is causing trouble there, plug the ear with a wad of cotton, and if possible, remove the poison using an oil such as viola oil or sesame oil. Then, shake the head gently and apply drops of this extract to the nostrils to induce sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then plug the ear with some wool or cotton and gently spread the ear open at the sides, as these causes are often forgotten.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If this is not the case, then administer the extract using the tool called "gesti epicicarios subtil" which has the following shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if the "gesti epicicarios subtil" is forgotten, that's fine; otherwise, administer the extract with a thin spoon with as little duplication as possible.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if this is not forgotten, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and close its opening with wax and soft oil to prevent it from being too open but only the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then draw air out using strong suction, as this is often forgotten.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this is not forgotten, take alum or vinegar prepared with the tool that holds birds' feet and place a small amount on the end of the tube, and then cover it with a suitable stopper.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And insert this into the ear canal gently, and extract moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all these causes are not forgotten, then you should take care to avoid causing an infected abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting this is to first let the patient bleed from the saphenous vein and extract the blood as you would with its virtue, and then place your thumb on one side of the ear and make a small incision in the raised area of the ear where it is most prominent.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Make the incision in the shape of the moon to reach the poison, and once the poison is extracted, close the incision with appropriate tools as soon as possible, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause arises in the ear is one of the swellings that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not attend to it immediately, then you take thin spout as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	Here is the translation: And administer the abscission of that swelling which has arisen in the ear. (The first sentence continues with "but if you do not attend to it immediately, then...")
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform it when you think that the swelling has already been moistened by the steam from the ear, and place it in damp cloths, and extract it with scissors or a thin instrument, or make an incision as described above, because it alleviates the extraction of it. (The sentence refers to continuing the process of removing the swelling if it has not yet been moistened by the steam from the ear.)
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning, and fill their ear with an old cloth, and rub on the ear in which the water is, and if this is done, it is good; but if not, then take thin tweezers or leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of those into the opening of their ear and cough over that part, and strike another stone on the first stone within the ear. (The text describes a process for draining water out of the ear.)
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop with the stone insertion until all the water has been removed. (The sentence suggests that the process should continue until all of the water in the ear has been removed.)
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is removed, take paper or cotton (to absorb it). (The sentence suggests that once all of the water in the ear has been removed, some form of absorbent material should be used to soak up any remaining fluid.) and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until its tip is burned off. (The sentence suggests that the absorbent material should be used to soak up any remaining fluid, and then burned off to sterilize the area.)
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then put another piece of cotton and do this several times until all the water has been removed, and strain it through a tube as described above with the stone extractor. (The sentence suggests that the process should be repeated multiple times if necessary to ensure that all of the water in the ear has been removed.)
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the case of an animal entering the ear, if it is small, perform the same remedy as described above; but if it is large and causes swelling at the base of the neck, administer its extraction with a thin instrument or scissors, and this is easier than all the other causes that may occur in the ear. (The sentence suggests that the process for removing an animal from the ear might be slightly different depending on the size of the animal and the location of the swelling.)
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the case of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what has been described above and in the treatment of distillations and it does not improve, then you must expose the ear to sunlight. (The sentence suggests that if the previous remedies do not work for treating a worm in the ear, exposing the ear to sunlight may be helpful.)
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore, if any cause of worms appears, extract it with a thin instrument or scissors; but if no cause is apparent, take a tube (that is) slightly narrow and wide at the top. (The sentence suggests that if worms are present in the ear, they can be removed with an instrument, but if not, a tube may be used for some other purpose.)
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow end of the tube into the ear to the extent that the patient can tolerate; and apply suction forcefully, and do this several times, until all the worms have been removed. (The sentence suggests that the tube should be inserted into the ear as deeply as is comfortable for the patient, and then used to suck out any worms that may be present.)
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not attend to it immediately, then plug the opening of the tube with beeswax as described above; administer distillations that have been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and follow the instructions for the treatment of distillations. (The sentence suggests that if a worm is not removed promptly, the tube can be plugged to prevent the escape of fluid or air, and then distillations can be used as a treatment.)
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Let your effusion (of oil or medicine) be with the instrument of this form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, narrow in the middle with a small opening at the top. (The sentence describes the specific materials and shape for the instrument used to administer medication or oil to the ear.)
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore let it be as they push in such a way that it is in the concavity of the tube, where it will be necessary. (The sentence suggests that the instrument should be used carefully to avoid causing discomfort or injury.)
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it appropriately around its end, then place oil or juice from a herb, or any of these medicines in the tube (which is inside the ear), and then insert the ray with appropriate pressure, and apply gentle compression to it until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear canal and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is inserted in the ear should be heated slightly in the fire first. (The sentence suggests that heating the medication or oil before it is administered may help improve its effectiveness.)
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because ear medicines do not tolerate heat well. (The sentence suggests that the temperature of any liquid used to treat the ear should be carefully controlled to avoid causing discomfort or injury.)
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII. (The text has moved on to a new section or topic, although it is not immediately clear what it pertains to based on this line alone.)
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstruction in the ears. (The title suggests that the following text will discuss treatments for conditions affecting the ears, such as blockages or hearing loss.)
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some infants born from their mothers' wombs are not perforated, and this happens in some men, ulceration or lack of flesh at the ear area; and sometimes this ulceration is made in the front part of the earlobe that cannot heal, and sometimes it occurs outside these parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	That which happens in the front part of the earlobe, which cannot heal, is in the major disposition for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which heals, you must have the patient lower their ear and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there appears to be ulceration, open it with a thin spatula, which is the form for this.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the affected area is narrow at its end, with one side being sharp and the other not; and the spatula is two lion's paws wide so as not to damage the earlobe.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the ulceration is due to flesh born in the earlobe or meat of it, then cut it with sharp and thin scissors, making a deep incision until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If ulceration is in the front part of the earlobe, then take a thin blade (ray) about a lion's paw long and heat it slightly with fire, and place it in the flesh of the earlobe.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient experiences discomfort and difficulty due to ulceration, relieve the pressure with ease; but be careful not to injure the nerves of the earlobe.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then place a linen cloth on the earlobe according to the size of the wound that you have covered with Egyptian balm; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the ulcer; or take any herb and soak it in water, pulverize it, and use it as indicated after being strained; and if the earlobe is already dressed, you must extract the dressing and replace it with another that you will cover with beeswax made with rose oil until the abscess dries up; and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, immerse sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the earlobe, and use other healing methods to stop the bleeding, which are called in the treatise of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of itchy eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Itchy eyes that affect humans sometimes are moist, other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must have these with tweezers or scissors, and cut them with scissors according to their roots, and then apply the treatment after straining it.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain and bleeding, cauterize them with a small, thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when incisions and wounds return several times because there remains some cause of its roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, these roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of swelling that occurs in the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Sometimes swelling occurs in the eyelids of humans due to a cause similar to swelling in its strength and durability, and for this reason it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, you must examine whether the swelling comes from something that appears on the eyelid and affects all parts, and the cause is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision along its width, and remove it with ease from all sides until it drains; and hang it up with tweezers and extract it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the incision of it, do not proceed to penetrate the eyelid with scissors little by little, as this may cause damage.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is large, adjust it with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the blood of it restores and fills it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is receding inside the eyelid, you should apply pressure to the inner surface of the eyelid, remove the swelling with tweezers, and do not proceed to make an incision if the eyelid is elongated by it, as this may cause damage.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And before making an incision, wash the eyes with saltwater, and care for the area with something that fills until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Treatment of conjunctivitis (inflammation of the conjunctiva) in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Conjunctivitis is a disease that is generated in the upper eyelid, and it mainly affects children, worsening their eyesight and causing catarrh in them; and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears flow towards them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and sleeping on their faces as well; and to the eyelids of their eyes, you place moist compressions that have already been infused with inflammation, and imminence of infection is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you feel the infection going inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	A certain surgical method is applied to the patient when he or she tilts their head towards you and covers it with a cloth, and you place cold water on it and make a circle according to the size that contains arsenic from all parts, then you place this over that and press with your thumbs all around so that the infection is concentrated in the middle of the circle, and you make an incision in the middle of the moistness with a lancet penetrating through the fracture, and the fracture should not be larger than the one made during lancing.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But it is advisable that you cut the skin completely down to the infection, because in more serious cases, the infection spreads by fracture according to the shape of white chalk.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove it with cloths that you have wrapped around the affected areas and roll it between your right and left hands until it is separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to close the fracture so that you don't push the pus out and make it worse.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you don't find pus at the beginning of the fracture, then close it with a small and easily removable stitch until the pus comes out; then remove it as I have said before; immerse cloths in warm water and place them on the area and press firmly with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And also, apply salt and let it stand in the concavity of the fracture to draw out any remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care that it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there is an abscess in the location of a cauterized wound, then take care of it with caustic plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of examining the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes are naturally closed and become old, this should be examined by the eye, and various methods of treating diseases such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and inflammation that may cause destruction of the eye, known as tactinir of the eye, should be treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or by tactinizing through incision and suturing; or by using canes as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so it is necessary that you tilt the patient's head towards you; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the one in which there is no flesh behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through it, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are absent — close to the skin, and pull the needle above the eyelid with the palm of your hand, and turn it outwards.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And make an incision in the inner corner of the eyelid where the hairs are absent, and make an incision from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller lacrimal duct; then remove the needle and place small, powdered cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and apply pressure with a feather or something similar to the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it should be shaped according to the swelling of the eyelid, because this is different in men, for some require that a large incision is made in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And make an incision with the pus along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fracture is near the natural hairs, such as the thickness of a king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the onion in one of the corners of the skin, and excise it entirely; then suture the two lips with a stitch or thin thread, remove the blood, and attach whatever superfluous flesh remains over both eyebrows to some sticky substances, if you want to do this, otherwise, don't bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And remove the stitches of the flesh within three or four days and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want to leave the wound unsutured, take care of it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is alleviated by the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but suturing is better, and therefore the ancients preferred it in this matter.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But it should be done with caution on the patient, and it is good practice, and there is no reason for fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method in tactinizing is to apply something like myrtle leaves on the eyelid and raise the eyelid with three separate and united stitches according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to hold the fingers together, and they cannot be tied, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure (as shown in the diagram), and bring the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second one near the smaller lacrimal, adjusting them evenly with each other. Then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lift the whole bandage on which this is indicated, just as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and take care to heal that which is injured.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, drain the abscess with a lance and apply heat.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Sometimes, the eyelid skin turns into the palpebra (eyelid), so you should use what I said about incision; but stitching is more artificial in some cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To loosen the jaw is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and cut the figure inside as I have described; and carefully create two thin rods or two thin wires whose length should be equal to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be narrower than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already made incisions at each end of every partition, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then gather each partition with fine thread underneath the eyelid edge, and tie the rods of each partition tightly, and leave them like that for a few days, because the bandage due to the tightening will die, disintegrate, and eventually fall off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it takes too long, break the thread and take care of the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is healed (solidada), the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not touch it.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	Here is the form of two rods you will make in this way:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the removal of hairs growing in the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard, bristly, and irritate the eyelids, you should perform the operation by taking a fine needle, pausing on that soft and flexible thread, and ensuring that you adjust the ends precisely and gently in every movement.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be equal to one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then create another fine thread alongside it quickly, and bind the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Place your hand on the patient's head in front of you, and make sure it is close to the sun so that your work can be clearly seen, as it is a subtle and minor operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Insert the needle into the appropriate point of the hair (requiring skill), and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you extract it from the skin naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Pull out a few hairs and insert them in the paste (the paste being prepared for a plaster or salve).
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Pull your hand back when the hair is removed from the eyelid with the paste.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the paste is drawn out and not all the hair is removed from the eyelid, draw more paste from the mixture you have prepared until the paste from above is drawn out.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Watch it carefully, as when you remove the paste and the hair, you must crush the boil and let it drain, leaving the clot for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows fresh flesh over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is shorter, you should select a longer natural hair and raise it up, or let it grow until it reaches an appropriate space, and then lift it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the cure of this ecthyrosis that appears above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When ecthyrosis appears in the boil, and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, on either the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of a plague or injury or burn, and it is called leporina, this ecthyrosis can be natural or accidental, caused by poor consolidation of a plague or injury or burn, or similar to their ill effects.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is to make an incision in the consolidation and separate the lips of it, place a piece of cloth in it, and tie them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is necessary that you use a cure for the causes which dry out, constrict; for if you do this, ecthyrosis will return even worse than before and there will be no time to heal.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use a cure for the causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and wrap it in water in which it has been steeped along with its seeds, or gum tragacanth, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it, and heal with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The secret of your cure is to perform everything with all skill, not allowing any consolidation according to the initial form.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have mentioned is not merely a correction of ecthyrosis but rather a restoration of the form of the place according to its original state.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	When ecthyrosis (a boil or cyst in the eyelid) occurs below the eyelid, it should be treated as follows: First, take a warm poultice and apply it to the affected area, leaving it on for three days. Afterward, make an incision over the inflamed part and remove all pus that is collected in the wound.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ecthyrosis that occurs below the eyelid, which is called accurately ecthyrosis; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental ecthyrosis is caused by a plague, injury, burn, or other similar factors.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation is to take a double-threaded needle and insert it into the skin, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Pull the skin up to the edges with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise it deeply with a large scalpel.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Therefore, if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the edge and place it in the incised form, and turn the eyelid so that it covers the wound, and make two cuts along the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The ends of the two cuts should be at two angles of the incision that you have made, and their meeting point should form an angle, such that when they come together, they should form the figure of their intersection.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is the Greek letter Lambda (λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Pull out the skin to the amount that is the width of the sharp edge below it, so that the eyelid is open.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with linen thread; and then care for those (wounds) with water that has been mentioned in the medications softening and hot compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If a cut, stitch, or cauterization is needed for a wound or incision, then you must make a clean incision along the skin of the eyelid as previously indicated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with hot compresses between two lips as was previously mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In conclusion, the sermon on the treatment of alxacrati, whether above or below, should follow in operation, as prepared according to the form of alxacrati, and that is in the shape of diverse dots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The skillful craftsman always prepares an instrument in every possible way that is within his reach until he restores the figure to its natural form or as close to it as possible, and the patient according to the operation and tools in the best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, especially when the eyelid is firmly adhered to the conjunctiva or cornea, and prohibited from easy movement and natural functions, then you must enter the outer margin of the eye below the eyelid, raise it up, or stretch it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should cut through the adhesion with a fine instrument, which should not be sharp enough to cause pain during the operation, and leave a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by it, and remove the instrument without damaging the eye or its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be as shallow as possible so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you should put salt water in the eye, which you rinse with, or distill it in a small earthen vessel dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with warm compresses, and place wool soaked in oil of hue on the eye, and apply the third day with consolidating substances until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of a nail and excrescence of flesh around the tear duct.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail can be of two types: one is nerve-like and similar to a hard, thin cipher; or it is not nerve-like, resembling congealed white moisture. When you touch it, it becomes swollen, and when it is pierced, it takes on oil, is removed, and the oil is not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And in both cases, they do not begin until the larger tear duct moves towards the smaller one, gradually covering vision and blocking light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of working in the incision of the eye is that the patient rests their head on your chest, and opens their eyes wide, raises the eyelid with your hand, collects the nail with oil-soaked cotton and stretches it towards the upper part.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the skin of a horse or cow or ox or similar, or strong iron, and double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle and remove the nail; stretch it towards the upper part and scrape the skin around the nail that surrounds the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow it with the skin towards the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you should incise the remaining part of the tear duct with a fine instrument or small scissors and remove the natural flesh of the tear duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears during the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And at times the nail with only oil or iron, as previously mentioned, is stretched out or removed with a lion's wool, which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the wool and ensure that there is a break in it, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Make the incision in the eye a little bit of salt or crushed cedarwood and leave it for another day, then care for it with water that is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nerve-like and cannot be pierced with a needle or has become ingrown, it should be treated with this type of nail medicine and cured as such, as recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	To cut it (the nail), you should open the palm of the patient and take a thin, sharp instrument with fine point according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with finesse.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it often becomes hardened and congealed and is used in that way, then distill from your own during the night in the head of a sinus or a skull or with salt crystals, and open the head the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then perform the operation on it until all that is from it has gone, unless the opposite abscess cautery is in the head, for then you should lance it, and treat the abscess at its beginning until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then perform the operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The emission of the lacrimal flesh, if it is found in the head by great injury, should be suspended with a string; and cut that one part through, and do not finish the incision to prevent tears from flowing out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the lacrimal skull of rosin and sinus until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capital 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of abscesses and what is born of flesh attached to the head.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some heads, flesh grows red and is swollen over the eye, covering or approaching the pupil, or pressing strongly on the eyelids at the edges and forming a rosebud like a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on it is that the patient lowers their head into your lap; and open the heads of that area and collect all that flesh with convenient strings or scissors, and hold it with a forceps or a cage; and incise the flesh at the beginning to the end with the scalpel, keeping away from the head so as not to injure yourself in your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And the incision should be either with the scalpel that we have recommended for nail incision, or with small scissors with which you collect the ash according to the form of this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all the flesh has gone, fill the head with salt crystals, or distill in it red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and wait over the head at a safe distance with albumen of egg until the abscess cavity is secured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of abscesses and the abscess cavity is full of pus, and you fear an abscess cavity, you should lance the head and treat that abscess with something that drains the abscess, then perform the operation on it until it is healed, and similarly in the flesh attached to the head of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must ensure that all healing of the skull is by natural or accidental means, work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Capital 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of sand in the head.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sand is red and hard on the head and prohibits clothing from operating there, and you should dissect the head for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the head in which there is sand is strong and there is not another illness than sand, and collect that sand.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to lower their head into your lap, and suspend those veins with a string or two according to your discretion; and that string should be of double finesse as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two strings gradually in one body like this:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And those veins should be collected with fine forceps, with finesse, and the blood should be drawn from time to time, until you see that the veins have gone out of the head and are relaxed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep away from the head with the tip of the instrument; and if your operation is before midday, and you are firm in your operation, do not incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then distill in the head green or red powder to dissolve what remains of the sand.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, you should fill it all with something that relieves the pain of it, and lance it for several days until the pain is alleviated and the abscess cavity is secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Approach it repeatedly until the matter heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	Here is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Here is the title for this section:
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing arteritis at the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat arteritis with cautery or acute medicine as previously mentioned and it does not heal, then do not be deceived by it but instead make an incision over the boil to mature it, and extract all the humidity that is inside it and reveal the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone has been revealed and it appears corrupt or blackened, you remove it with a tool of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp head, made of hard iron and the head should be round like an asher, which is pierced with small holes by grinding or fine sharpening (such as shown in the following image).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Press that tool onto the corrupt part of the bone and hold it between your thumb and index finger, pressing gently until you know that the corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Make several observations, and then restore the area with drying and stiffening agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and good tissue grows back, separates the corpse from the wound and leave it for forty days without renewing or forming a boil or infection, then you know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then do not be deceived but reduce the incision to the shape of the nose and follow this procedure: when you discover bone or use acute medicine, once the bone is revealed, you take a piece of bone as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The edge of the bone should be trimmed triangularly, and the shaft should be first extended to the tip as often as necessary.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Press that tool onto the bone, specifically on the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little farther up the nose, and press with your thumb against the bone until it penetrates completely through the bone, and the patient will feel relief when you release your thumb.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with drying and stiffening agents as previously instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Once the tissue and area are hardened, the fluid that escaped from the sides returns to the nose, which is more difficult for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Title of the next section: Capitol .xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing the swelling of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose swells completely and no damage or shrinkage occurs, it is necessary to loosen the patient, apply gentle pressure on the nose with warm compresses and good sucking; and apply liniment to the nose made of opium, aloe, honey and castor oil, and strengthen the emollient on the nose with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of powders is to take lion's wool and fold each piece into four layers, then grind it into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place them one over the other according to the quantity that each one has need of.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply a strong and firm dressing; and pump the plasters with juice without cutting; and remove the plasters and allow the wound to heal by itself during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament becomes softened, then it must be tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the dressing during the day and night as previously stated.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has already healed, well done; otherwise, apply the dressing with powders and tightening and poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the elevation of the tunica uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the tunica uvea and it becomes prominent, proceed outside the eyelids as with a grain of sand, and shape it like a man's form using that, and if you want to incise it, the operation is as follows: enter the needle into the razor-cut part of the uvea from the lower side to the upper, and place another needle at the lacrimal duct's channel, and make it penetrate, and let the first needle go according to its position; then incise the location of the double needlehole and lift up the uvea's part around the needle's circumference, and tighten that area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on the wool infused in the egg white and let the thread come out with the yolk.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the wound with something that comforts it until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Sometimes apply a piece of cloth around the entire wound with a circle, and then perforate it with a subtle spatula that penetrates the wound to the skin, and let the white fluid run out, and lower the wound and bring it inside immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of eyelids.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called alconati is not simply water accumulating in the eye, but something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the method of treating it is to place the patient on the couch with his head in your hands and lift up one eyelid to see if the water comes out at the lower part, and let it dry, not descend, and keep the light, and allow the patient to see the cause as he used to.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of water is not prepared with what has been said, then place the patient between your hands and take a subtle spatula and fan it over the conjunctiva and cornea's junction at the corona (in the area to be seen), until the water is removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when the water is removed, you should distill in the eye the water left over, into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	When the water descends from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said what types of water there are in the division and which one should be pierced with a needle, do it accordingly.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands on a couch and gently lift his eyelid, tightening it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your hand near the eyelid of the eye from which the water is coming, on the left side if the eye with the water is the left eye; or on the right side if the eye with the water is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take your right hand if it is on the left side of the patient, or your left hand if it is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then bring the thumb near to the crown of the head, close to the corner of the eye on the side of the smaller tear duct, and then rub it with medicine and roll your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then penetrate the tear duct and feel if the thumb has reached its target due to your pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The measurement of the distance from the thumb to the tip should be the same as the width of the tear duct, which is from the pupil to the end of the black part, and that's the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the sight of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then insert the thumb into the tear duct and push it down gently once or twice until the water comes out. If the water comes out quickly, the patient will have watery eyes immediately and the thumb will be in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait for a moment; if the water has come out, you should pause and wait further until the thumb is not inserted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	If the eye is still dry and no water comes out, you should gently remove the thumb, rotate your hand slightly around the eye, and apply a small amount of clear salt crystals dissolved in water to wash the inside of the eye; and then cover the eye with cotton or stopper or infused linen soaked in rose oil, honey, and milk.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	However, we of our time apply a poultice made with honey to the affected area.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you find it difficult to insert the thumb into the eye due to its toughness (for some men have a hard eye), then it is necessary for you to take the spatula, which is called alberid, and this is its shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore, pierce that juncture with the spatula and do not injure your hand in doing so, and make sure to avoid damaging the eye with your thumb.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Insert the thumb as previously described.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must complete the procedure by preparing a comfortable sleeping place for the patient in a dark room where they sleep on their back. It is also necessary to prohibit any movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Pause in nature to ensure that it is smooth for the patient and do not move their head to the right or left.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Keep the bandage as previously arranged for at least three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove the bandage in that dark room and expose the wound to fresh air, let them see certain causes, and return the bandage on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	It is not necessary to perform this procedure during the hours of treatment or immediately after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Since it is necessary for you to avoid this because water can easily leak out due to excessive and vigorous blinking.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If the abscess is cauterized, you should remove the bandage on the seventh day and apply a remedy that dissolves the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Remove the bandage from the patient's face and leave their eyes uncovered, and keep them lying down in a dark room for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Have it gradually moved gently and speak to him about his condition.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that a disciple is not excused from seeing certain sights, and if you are brave, then perform the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	It has been reported to us that one of those who were in the Artaxata region said he made a fire with his thumb, piercing it through the eye and causing water to come out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen it done in our land nor have we read of anyone who has performed this procedure in the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of thumbing procedures for those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They can be made of earth or iron specifically, and their extensions are triangular in shape with sharp points similar to this one.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the treatment of flesh, nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various fleshy growths are born in the nose, one of which is related to scorpion-like motility of heavy legs or polyps resembling that foot representation; and this disease is called polypus.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if there is cancerous flesh, callused, of dark color; and it is called lion's flesh when it is not dark colored.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you must make the patient lie down with his chest facing up, open his mouth wide, and pick it with your thumb where those fleshes are.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then remove that to the incision of the skin on one side, and then make a narrow incision with a sharp thin scalpel from the incision where you know all the flesh has been removed; if it remains due to some reason, then cut it with one of the fine instruments until there is no more reason for it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is a wound or an abscessed boil, you should stop there; or if it is malignant boils, you should cut and cauterize it until it is completely removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And apply heat to the nose near the incision with vinegar or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and moisture is introduced into the back of the throat, you should know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is no flesh inside the nose in the sinuses or bones of the nostrils that have not undergone abscessing.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must insert a fine probe into the nostril where there is any swelling, and apply pressure with your fingers, counting the number of nutmegs or grains of rice, and then anesthetize the patient and introduce one end of the probe into the nostril with the ray or another method that is available.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after that, draw the odorant towards the channels of the nostrils, and let it be excreted on the forehead, for many watched children in schools resemble this action, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then stop the two ends of the probe, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and administer a stitch for the meat with the nuts that are on the probe, and do it until you know that the flesh is attached to the nut on the probe.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the probe, and stop in the nose near the drainage of pus a small cloth, and do it for three days or more until the ulcerated matter is removed from the fleshes.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If it's a matter of healing, use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the shape of the suction device used for purging, with which oils and medications are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Use either silver or ivory, something similar to a small lamp with an open top, like a small cup, and the inside hollow as well.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish to use a closed cannula similar to a syringe, make sure the cannula of the suction device is flat and open; it should have a handle at its end, with which you can hold it when you are suctioning oils or juices from the affected area.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This suction method is precious: the recipe consists of beaver castor oil, white birch bark, ginger, turmeric, long pepper, horseradish, epithelium of the spleen, and a spoonful of honey. Mix with bed rest juice and cabbage juice, make pills of it, and crush one pill in water, then give it to the sick person lying down facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the teeth in the external parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Moths often have teeth in the external parts of the nose, and it is emphasized and explained in some days before the law regarding their treatment takes effect.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you must inspect it at the beginning of its appearance and treat the entire thing.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Place your hand over the area or use caution or medicine that burns, which is located there.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its inspection is delayed until it becomes noticeable, then consider whether it has been calcified, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, in which case do not touch it with iron, for moths often lay eggs at this calcified abscess and cause great harm to the person who touches them.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is touchable and not dark-colored, and its inspection is possible in all cases, then evacuate the sick person, inspect it without fear, and treat the area with whatever is available and confine it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the continuity is dissolved in one of these cartilages, it is not advisable to perform this operation except in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you treat any cause of these, consider whether the wound is fresh with its own blood, and if so, adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cover it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated and each one is healthy, then it is necessary that you cut each part of its cord as far as bleeding occurs.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with stitching and tighten them, sprinkle powdered dragon's blood on top of it, spread a dressing of emplastic diaphinicon or another consolidating plaster over the powder, leave it for two or three days, then remove it and replace it with a new one and continue to treat it until the wounds are healed by themselves, and apply an oral remedy until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suture is to add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as in abdominal suturing, or to add the dissolution of continuity with thread as you have learned.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips on the inside cuts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Moths often lay eggs in the inside cuts of men's lips where hard abscesses similar to tumors occur, and some are mild and others are severe.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore it is necessary that you cut and open all those hard calluses on every part, and fill the abscess with soft sterilized linen until the bleeding stops, and wash it with warm water and heal the wound with a remedy that promotes healing, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	The number xxviii refers to chapter 28 in a book or treatise. In Roman numerals, it would be written as XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the attached flesh in the gums. This sentence is in Spanish and translates to "On the Incision of Attached Flesh in the Gums" in English. The original text was discussing surgical procedures, as indicated by the use of medical terms such as "incision" and "gums".
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Daily observation should be made of the attached flesh in the gums, which were formerly called albulus. Therefore it is necessary that you suspend it with a probe or hold it with forceps and incise it properly, and let the blood flow or the saliva drain. This sentence continues the discussion about surgical procedures on the gums, specifically discussing the need for daily observation and the proper methods for making an incision.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply a dressing to the sutured wound or other styptic powder or cauterizing agent. This sentence suggests that after making an incision in the gum, it is necessary to apply a dressing or some type of styptic (blood-stopping) powder or cauterizing agent to the wound to stop any bleeding and promote healing. The word "stipticas" refers to blood-stopping agents, while "excicativas" may refer to surgical cauteries used to burn or cauterize tissue. This continues the discussion about the proper methods for performing a surgical procedure on the gums.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return. This sentence suggests that if the attached tissue in the gums does not respond to the initial treatment (such as incision and application of a styptic agent), it may be necessary to repeat the procedure or apply additional treatments such as cauterization. The caution about the cautery not returning indicates that the process of cauterizing the tissue is intended to be permanent, preventing the gum from growing back in the same area. This continues the discussion about surgical procedures on the gums and possible complications that may arise.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix refers to chapter 29 in a book or treatise. In Roman numerals, it would be written as XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for tooth extraction. This sentence suggests that the text is discussing the reasons why a tooth may need to be extracted, such as severe decay, infection, or crowding. The word "dentz" is an archaic form of the Spanish word for teeth, "dientes". This continues the discussion about dental surgery, which was one of the main topics in the original medieval medical text.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the surfaces of the teeth on both sides of the root and those in the foramen (a cavity in the jawbone) are rough, hard, sharp, and sometimes darken and decay, they may become inflamed or infected and form cavities that rot the gum, eventually causing the tooth to decay. This sentence continues the discussion about dental surgery by describing the potential problems that can arise when teeth have rough or damaged surfaces, including decay and infection. The use of medical terminology such as "foro" (cavity in the jawbone) and "gingiva" (gum) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary that you hold the patient firmly between your hands and support their head on your lap, extract the teeth in which the roughness and causes similar to sand appear, leaving no cause remaining, and remove the decay and discoloration and other impurities until they are cleaned. This sentence provides instructions for performing a tooth extraction, advising the practitioner to hold the patient firmly to prevent them from moving during the procedure and to carefully extract any affected teeth while avoiding damage to healthy tissue. The use of medical terminology such as "negror" (decay) and "citrinitat" (discoloration) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If the reason for the extraction remains at its beginning, it is good; if not, you should continue the extraction on another day and the second and third days until it reaches the desired result on the fourth day. This sentence suggests that a tooth extraction may need to be repeated over multiple days in order to completely remove the affected tissue and prevent any remaining infection or decay. The use of medical terminology such as "razio" (reason) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that teeth have various types of movable forceps with different shapes depending on the nature of your operation. This sentence suggests that there are different types and shapes of forceps used for tooth extractions, depending on the specific situation and type of tooth being extracted. The use of medical terminology such as "rezoris" (forceps) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Because the forceps used to extract teeth from the root are different from those used for removal between the teeth in other ways and have various shapes depending on the nature of the operation, you should prepare the types of forceps that you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx refers to chapter 30 in a book or treatise. In Roman numerals, it would be written as XXX. This suggests that this is the beginning of a new section or topic in the treatise. The previous sections have focused on dental surgery, but it is not clear what the next section will cover based solely on the chapter number.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the extraction of teeth. This suggests that the next section of the treatise will focus on tooth extractions and possibly provide more detailed instructions or information about this procedure. The use of medical terminology such as "d'eradicacio" (extraction) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary to care for the tooth of its pain with every caution and to delay in all extraction of it, because there is no reason to replace the observation of it when it is extracted, because it is a substance that rises during the extraction of it. This sentence suggests that tooth extractions should be performed carefully and cautiously, as there may be complications or risks involved in the procedure. The use of medical terminology such as "eradicacio" (extraction) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine. It also indicates that the author believes that it is important to observe the tooth during extraction in order to identify any potential problems or complications.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	However, when the patient is certain that the painful tooth must be extracted, you must definitely be sure which tooth is causing the pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been extracted, as we have seen through barber surgery. This sentence suggests that it is important to accurately identify the source of tooth pain before performing an extraction, as there may be instances where the patient incorrectly identifies the affected tooth. The use of medical terminology such as "barbies" (barbers) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine, as barbers often performed basic surgical procedures in addition to their traditional duties of shaving and haircutting.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, since you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain and know this with certainty, it is necessary that you scratch around the tooth with spittle in which there may be some virtue, until it dissolves the tooth from the gum on all sides, and then take hold of it with your fingers or with delicate forceps, gradually pulling it out as it becomes looser. This sentence provides further instructions for performing a tooth extraction, advising the practitioner to use spittle (saliva) to help loosen the tooth before attempting to extract it. The use of medical terminology such as "gingiva" (gum) and "forfexs" (forceps) indicates that this is a treatise on medieval medicine.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Approach the mouth of the patient carefully, holding large tongs for good communication or structure, and place the patient's head between your thumb and index finger gently so as not to injure it, and approach the tooth correctly in a manner that neither breaks it nor causes more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	Therefore, if not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it all around the area with ease and effort to remove it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	However, if the tooth is fractured or corroded, you must bind a cloth around the fracture and tighten it at the end of the root to prevent it from being crushed during your compression on it with tongs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	You must work carefully with incision around the entire area of the gum and be careful not to break it and leave it split, but rather return over the patient to alleviate the pain that is greater than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers often do in their surgery and recklessness during tooth removal, since they do not administer what has been recommended; for many times they bring upon men painful diseases which are difficult to treat, and the roots of those teeth remain rotten, or all of the roots rot away, or that tooth is extracted with some bone from the jaw as many times has been testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then wash the mouth with warm water or salt water before the tooth removal.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If bleeding occurs during this process, as has been observed many times, take some vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound, and if the vinegar does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tongs with which the tooth is initially held should be long in the handle, short in the jaws, and thick, to prevent them from bending when working.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	They should be so that the thick handle does not bend when they are tightened at their ends, and the jaws should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of good quality Indian iron, and the jaws of those tongs should fit tightly together with a firm grip, and in some cases the shape of their ends is that of a stork's beak (called ciconia), which has a strong grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On tooth extraction and bone fracture removal from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured, it is necessary to wait for the area to become soft for one or two days; then approach gently with tweezers whose ends are shaped like a stork's beak (called ciconia or guanta) and hold the forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of those tweezers are made concave, like a file or an alfajal (a type of dental instrument).
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of forceps or tweezers, it is necessary that you be careful with the root and remove all the tissue around it and insert a small instrument called an atali (small lever) whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should have a short thick handle and not be bent to prevent it from breaking.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is lost, it is good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first instrument is a triangle with some thickness in the handle.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument's shape is also a triangle but with a very thin handle.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	Now you are helped by this instrument, which has two arms and the shape as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments that I will mention for dental care; because this instrument is also useful, which resembles an elephant's tusk, and its shape is as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It has a twisted or short triangular handle with some thickness and should not be bent to prevent it from breaking.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you must know that the tools for teeth are made of bone and similar to other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Wise and skillful artificers, by themselves understand the operation and various diseases; for they are diseases about which the ancients did not know or use specific instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is fractured, or powdered, then place a weight on it in its place with whatever is appropriate for the instrument and forceps mentioned during tooth extraction, and follow the steps of the person skilled in this procedure. Here follows the method:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Let the meat be gradually reduced in size, and keep it closed with the mouth so that it does not dry out or escape before the bone is completely healed; and then restore the area with appropriate medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, then remove that piece of bone and its blackness, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent due to their natural shape and especially when they grow in women and the pious, it is necessary to consider: if one tooth is not close enough to another tooth and cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has a shape similar to a pig's tooth, made of sharp Indian iron.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Make the incision with which you will cut the tooth in small daily portions due to its hardness and avoid cutting other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is worn down by grinding, then grind it with an Indian iron file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	The entire file should be made of Indian iron and the edge should be sharp; it should have small pointed teeth like a drill bit with which the tooth can be ground down gently in small daily portions to avoid damaging other teeth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then straighten that end and remove it with another razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If the tooth has been broken off and the tongue is injured, it is necessary to smooth out that part until the sharp edge is removed and sealed, so that the tongue does not become inflamed or the speech is affected.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the repair of damaged teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When a tooth is knocked out by striking or hunting and the patient cannot bear to eat, and you have treated it with medicinal poultices but your treatment has not been effective, then fill in those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, because silver becomes soft and can be dissolved again within a few days, while gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The wire should be as thin and thick as the space between the teeth can allow; the shape of the repair is to take the wire and place double the length between two healthy teeth, then let the wire grow twisted between two damaged teeth, or one or several, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply the tissue repair to the damaged area and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is healed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Your stitching should be tight enough to keep the gold or silver wire in place between the teeth without coming loose.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Cut the excess wire with forceps or scissors and insert it in each place as necessary, then bend and hide those areas between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth to avoid injuring the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Approach that narrow vessel as if it were a rope (or string).
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is unraveled or broken, tie it or them together in such a way that it remains (or they remain) joined at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the positioning of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two unhealthy teeth, like this:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When returning one tooth or two to their respective cavities, they should be repositioned in such a way that they grow back and heal properly.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only skilled and wise individuals should do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	In some cases, cow bone can be used as a replacement for teeth and shaped like a tooth, placed in the place where the tooth is missing, tied together as mentioned before, and remains useful for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament that is found in the tongue and the prohibition of speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is found behind the tongue sometimes or naturally belongs to one person, or it may be accidental and occur due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The procedure involves opening the mouth of the patient, exposing their head within your hands; elevate their tongue and make an incision in the ligament nerve according to the length that is needed for the tongue to be completely free from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or stiffness and it is due to consolidated injury, then you throw vinegar on it and cut through the ligament to the length that you have incised it, removing the stiffness.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be careful not to make a cut or fissure in the flesh of the incision and that you do not cut through the arch, causing bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the remnants of the incision with water, vinegar or cold water, and let the tongue rest for a short time; this is a mucus that the patient should not keep their tongue in every night to prevent further injury.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, press a piece of wool soaked in vinegar over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a light cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some swellings occur under the tongue, resembling a pimple that hinders its normal operation; and it is better to treat it while it is still small.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure for this involves opening the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun and considering the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see one that is dark or black, hard, and which the patient does not feel any sensation from, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is white and contains moisture, then you put vinegar on it, and cut into it with a subtle spatula, and cut it off from all sides; and if blood comes out during the operation, pause over it with a cloth soaked in vinegar until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have dealt with it completely, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and take care of it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of a pimple on both ears and that which is not in the ear canal, and other pimples.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a pimple forms in the ear canal, they are glands that resemble boils; these occur outside and are commonly called "two ears," which if you treat with what has been said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the pimple is hard, dark colored, with little sensation, then do not touch it with an iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with an iron because of the flow of blood; leave it alone until it ripens, and then either remove it or let it break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white, round, and the root of it is subtle, then that one should be cut out.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure for this involves considering whether the pimple has already rested after being cauterized or if it has diminished in some way; then make the patient lie down facing the sun, and hold their head with your hand, open their mouth, and the servant should grasp their tongue from below with a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or iron and be as thin as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press the tongue and show the pimple to you, cut it with your instrument over that, then take vinegar and apply it to the opening, and pull it out from all sides as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull out is caused by the membranes, and then cut it with an instrument of this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is opposite the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron and then polished.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	However, if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula of this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then have the patient rinse their mouth with warm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	However, if bleeding occurs, rinse with a decoction of common sorrel or myrtle leaves similar to that for stopping bleeding until the bleeding stops, and then take care of it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes other pimples appear in the ear besides those two ears, and cut them as I have said in the cutting of two boils.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have treated a woman with a pimple that was born in the ear of hers, which pimple was dark in color, with little sensation, which had closed the ear of hers, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and was near death if it lasted for one or two days more.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The pimple had grown so much that it burst through two tracts within three months.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I will treat it surgically and place the vinegar in one of them, and remove that one, and take out a large piece from there, and then I will cut the other tract from where I can see it, and hold open the mouth of hers, and compress her tongue, and I will place the vinegar in that pimple.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I took out a large piece from it, but there was only a little blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the woman's ear was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and I prescribed food, so I did not continue to cut that pimple for a long time, and another pimple appeared in its place, which I treated until it had subsided.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I put oil and cauterize the woman's ear, so it was completely healed; and I continued to walk around and did not know what God had done for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the cutting of a bladder when it becomes pimply.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr appears in the nasal cavity and is thick and long, it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the posterior region, large and round, it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the wound that we have spoken of in the division heals, and it does not conform to your treatment, and sometimes even cautery has already been applied and is still present and thin, you must incise what has grown round; if it is along that length, and is bleeding, of dark or black color, and it is not draining properly, you must be careful with the incision, as there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it as I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument for shaping it and place the spoon on the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments that are called scissors in incising the two sides.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	It is necessary not to incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term, for if you incise more of it, you harm his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two sides, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of the cautery in him is not with anything other than sharp water, and you should hold his head in your lap, press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take a small amount of the water that was said in the chapter on cauterization, and heat it to a live state, and stop it from thickening or thinning, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the outside of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon and let the instrument with the medicine rest on the tongue, and let the patient yawn over his throat so that saliva or mucus from his mouth may pass through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to the wound of him and burn it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the tongue for a long time until you see it become darkened and numb from the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cotton in the medicine, insert the ray into the cotton in a canula so that the cotton adheres to the canula, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it for about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and cauterize the area around the uvula with a cotton swab dipped in antiseptic solution, clean with that what is in the area of the medicine, wash with warm water, and cure outside with ointment, and internally with lozenges until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is healed with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision, as it is cured by subfumigation in this way: take calmly, hyssop, origan, rue, scilla, camomile, crushed plants similar to those of the herbs, and arrange all these causes or some of them in a bowl, submerge them with vinegar, boil; let the water be well strained, and place a stopper at the bottom of the bowl over which an instrument is placed, concave in shape, made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	Place the end in the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the uvula through the instrument, until the uvula is well obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this treatment as many times as necessary until it is dry, and be careful not to apply this treatment at the onset of an abscess, for it would overheat the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather make a surgical incision of the abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument, take a cane and make a hole in the end of it to enclose oil, so that the patient's mouth is narrowed, as the closure of oil prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and what adheres to the wound, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Sometimes things adhere to the wound or a thorn from the foot or another cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must extract what is obvious from those things, looking carefully at it, as you press the tongue with an instrument to reveal what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not obvious and is concealed in the mouth, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, as powerful acids from the stomach will release the cause that adheres to the wound; or you may give him a piece of soap or salted fish or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and push it forcefully against the teeth, and make the patient swallow it, as when it reaches the location where the thorns are, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take a live eel and tie it securely, put it inside a dish, then extract it slowly; or take a pig's bladder and place it in the mouth, then draw it out slowly.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If those causes mentioned above are not forgotten, then use an instrument made of lead in the following manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Let it be either large or small, but at its end there should be a cavity which you insert into its mouth with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Lift its head upward, and be careful that the tip of its bone touches the cavity, to ensure it fits well with the bone or the spine, or that the doctor holds it with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Nevertheless, it is better that the patient inserts it himself, because of his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and peels it off from below, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all according to the quantity prepared before forgetting.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of pus attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the pus in the throat is treated with the medicines mentioned in the division of cure and does not improve, consider placing it on the tongue of the patient alone, since you have recommended an instrument for this purpose.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see pus, extract it with a small tool or gentle instruments as appropriate.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula. Repeat this process as many times (until the pus has died off and come out from the throat) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Place a syringe filled with water near the patient's mouth, open its mouth with it, wash the mouth with it; do not allow any cause to interfere and discard the water after an hour with your hand, because the pus immediately feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However, if the remedy mentioned above is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do it, and be careful that it falls. (This is a general command, not related to any specific treatment.)
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation is to take a bowl containing ignited charcoal and cover it with a lid with a hole in the middle, and place the tip of the instrument through the hole. Then hold the patient's mouth near the bowl, and have the patient open their mouth over the end of the cannula, and close the patient's mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the pus, because the pus will immediately fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't fall, repeat the fumigation multiple times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and garlic, and do not drink water, and thus this regimen should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the shape of the instrument used to treat throat pus when it is visible; and it resembles forceps in some ways, but there is a certain curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The instrument should be flat against the throat, and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is concave, so that when any cause is compressed, it does not slip away.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter forty.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the conclusion of the sermon on the opening and treatment of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are various species, with various methods, as remembered from their description in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are divided into two categories based on the perforation and treatment of them through two methods: one is for the species of abscesses in themselves, and this method addresses the moisture that accumulates in them.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the locations in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from an abscess that occurs in the anus; and an abscess in a meaty location is different from an abscess in a joint. Each of them has its own treatment method through surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	However, some abscesses should not be perforated unless the healing of the wound has occurred in them or they have been completed.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some abscesses should be drained when they become hard, and not allowed to heal according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints, because an abscess that is located near a joint will last until the surrounding tissue is purified, and the ligaments or nerves of that joint are damaged, causing contraction of the affected limb; or it is an abscess associated with a major member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it may affect the main member; or it is located in the anus, so do not drain it unless it has not matured. Do not cut into a hard abscess before completing the digestion, but only drain that associated with the anus, because you can avoid opening it and prolonging it to the fissures inside the anus, creating a fistula or making it incomplete in its term, and it will not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It should read: "However, you must know the time of the abscess's rupture, and that is when it has matured."
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And you should know that it is matured when the pain subsides and fever ceases, and there is a decrease in redness and pulse, an increase in the abscess head's sharpness, and other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And you must know that the rupture should be made in a place lower than the abscess, and allow the pus to drain from the healing of the prominence."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"The rupture should be performed along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the buttocks or feet, and in places like tendons, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all other areas where there is no reflection; because in reflected areas, use the rupture according to that member."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"However, if the abscess is in fleshy areas, it is better to delay the rupture until digestion of the pus has been confirmed as complete, as mentioned; because if you perform the rupture before that, it prolongs the course of the purulent discharge and makes the edges of the abscess hardened and deep."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"However, some abscesses should be ruptured according to the depth of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to which member requires it."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And you must administer small ruptures, and large and wide or many small incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And others are abscesses in which the cavity should be hollowed out and incised when it is done so that bread and food can pass through, such as those that occur in piles and buboes."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And those are the incised abscesses with three angles, and those are the ones that are incised as if in the form of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of gout."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And those are the ones to which round and crescent-shaped incisions are administered, resembling these."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"However, those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, must be ruptured with a superficial or flat incision."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, it should be ruptured but do not rush to extract all of the purulent matter at that time; having extracted a part, leave the abscess for another day, and extract a larger part later, and make small observations until it is healed."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"Moreover, if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, a young child, or an elderly person in decline, because animal spirit dissolves with the exit of pus, and it makes the patient die, so be careful."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"Take great care with this chapter, and when you perform the incision for these abscesses, avoid any contagion and consider if the abscess pus is little, or it is a flat section; in that case, administer some of the lime or ancient remedy; but if the abscess is large, and the ruptures of the incision are many, then you must pause every now and then until they all heal together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if a part of the abscess cavity is cut out or hollowed out in the perimeter, you must plug it with old lime or thread made from fabric, like when you stitch bread or razors, without moisture; and strengthen it for three days; and process it and care for it with the remedy for mouth sores until it heals."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"However, if bleeding occurs during your operation, you should administer warm water and wine in which a piece of fabric is steeped, and place it on the location of the bleeding, watching carefully."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"However, if the bleeding persists, you should administer treatment and care and apply the powders that I have recommended in various places of this book and section."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"However, if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you should apply powders in wine and warm oil, and leave them on those locations."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy, you should leave powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of that should be warm until the third day, as mentioned, and then you must lance the abscess and clean it and administer to its healing the appropriate remedy until it heals."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of abscess treatment universally, but according to the distinction I have mentioned, I have discussed the treatment of each type of abscess separately in individual chapters."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter 40."
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	"On the incision of abscesses that appear in the skull."
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	"Small abscesses in the skull are of various types that contain tunic-like structures; and their types are many."
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	"And some are blisters, and from those that contain moisture similar to lime."
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture similar to powder and resemble them; and of those are the hard, stony ones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section and in the extraction of those, there should not be fear, as removing the outer casing of those does not oppose the archer's bow.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The procedure in the section of those is that you probe them with an instrument of a shape that resembles this one, which is called an intromesse, before you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it contains moisture, then you shall cut it with section according to its length in the following surface manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from the line of B to the line of G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, you shall remove that part which contains it, and do not leave any cause at all, because many times it returns if there remains any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, or else in water and salt; fill the wound with that and leave it for another day, because with that it will dissolve everything that has been destroyed from that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And apply the Egyptian ointment over the wound secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no more cause for that skin layer to be destroyed; then treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you shall cut it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	With the section having the shape of a cross, make an incision between the two lips of the section and cut it through all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunica that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if it opposes your bowstring, then do what I previously told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And do the same with the stony abscess in section and care as I previously told you; sectioning an abscess is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Sometimes these abscesses are in the head of some men who do not have any moisture; this occurs because I made an incision on an abscess in the head of an old woman and the abscess was hard, rough, white, which could not be pressed, and if someone had touched it, they would be injured.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not the topic; for example, abscesses that come to the heads of children and you must lance the ears, but the section of all of these should be a surface section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And halt the perforation of those from the lower parts of them, in order to alleviate the pain at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat them with what is appropriate for their care.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses recur in the neck and the ears and the angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are those that are generated between them, and every scrofula of these is filled with its own pouch, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we previously recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofulas are boils, because some are stony, and of those that contain moisture, and of those are the malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one which you see with good disposition in the palpation, of which the color of that which is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and it is harmful all over, and not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archer's bowstring, and not protruding, you should make an incision on the surface of the part above the body from the line of G to the line of B, and cut it through all parts, and separate the two lips of the skin with a knife or a boil knife if necessary, as we said in abscesses of the head, and remove it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that you do not make an incision into the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be sharp, that does not fit your hand in incision or disturb the patient, and do not make an incision where it is not necessary to incise; because if you make an incision into a vein or archer's bowstring and forbid yourself from your operation, you should stop the wound with vitriol ointment or other powders that cause blood flow, and tighten the wound, and leave it until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the abscess becomes softened and begins to break open.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation when you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And ask the patient if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, so that you can incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if the scrofula is being lanced due to a large vein, then you should be careful not to incise that scrofula from its lancing.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Advance carefully, ensure the patient is lying flat and let that area fall naturally on its own without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the ulcerated wound with old lard, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you incise the entire scrofula (tuberculous nodule), then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew it as soon as possible, without leaving any surplus.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is surplus due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary that you understand to incise its root, extract it and provide suture and whatever is said in this matter.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, perform a superficial perforation at the place of maturation of it, and stop the perforation with the basal pus of the body in this way as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the perforation, use lard and similar substances for this purpose, so that it rots what has rotted from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with generative meat until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the abscess in the ulceration of a scrotum (swelling or tumor in the scrotum).
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They used to incise this in the scrotum, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their saying.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with hernia (scrotal protrusion), it is necessary to avoid the incision of the scrotum, since this would not be beneficial because all the veins and the largest ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses or hernia or two ears (possibly a misinterpretation), when the disease is not in the neck, it is necessary to incise the scrotum to avoid the danger of death caused by strangulation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, incise the scrotum just outside three circles of the scrotum or four with a small incision in the middle between two circles depending on the size, that the incision be at the top, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are accessible.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is poor (inexperienced), then extend the scrotal skin with one finger and cut the skin to reach the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you notice any cause of them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And make the incision as we have recommended; and it refers to the incision of the channel above the scrotum, which is of that place from which there is a discharge and due to the abscess of the penis (misinterpretation).
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Since the time is long when perforation is feared, take two lips of the scrotal skin and sew it alone without the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And administer medications that cause the flesh to heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Zahrawi says that the summary of our saying (the recommended procedure), is not to expose veins, but some of these abscesses have already caused the scrotum of the patient to die and the patient has died, and the ailment is cut off, and some people will incise the epiglossis (a part of the tongue) so that the patient can breathe through the wound, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason we command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and therefore we command to sew up the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my practice, is that a maidservant took a knife and cut her scrotum with it and made an incision in one part of the lung canal (possibly a misinterpretation), and I was called to treat it, and she moaned like the dying, and I uncovered the wound and found a small amount of blood.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you were confessed that she had not cut a vein or a guideline (artery), and the wound bled, and I treated it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the maidservant did not die if it was not in the penis (misinterpretation), and then return to recovery of her condition after some days.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in incising the scrotum.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the incision over abscess that occurs in the scrotum outside, and is called a hernia of the scrotum.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, which is called hernia of the scrotum, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is a danger for women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can be two ways, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is of two types, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other type is similar to an abscess that is made by nodules of an artery, and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make a presumption about him unless he is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should examine him and probe him with the indicated tool, and if you find it resembling a fat nodule, and not suspended from any of the veins, then you shall cut it in the same way as you would with nodes, and remove it along with the fluid under the skin and bursa; otherwise, you should search his entire being, and cover the location with something that requires healing before it gets better.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Title: On the section of types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are many species and I have already told all their species in the classification.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	It is necessary that I distinguish between the difference between a node and an abscess as if there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain before the boiling of the superfluity is stopped; it is a putrid mass that eventually stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node does not have heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a cold substance that is in the sac itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And depending on the color of the body, it starts like a pimple and is treated similarly to a boil, whether large or small, and they are of two types: either fatty with moisture inside, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I mentioned in the classification.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, extract it and examine it at its beginning with a probe, which is called an incision, according to the form that will appear in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	The method of examination of abscesses and all nodes is to take this probe and make an incision in the location where you find it moist, which is inside the abscess; then, you rotate your fingers little by little until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you place your hand as per the measurement of the size of the abscess, and extract the contents and consider what comes out as evidence of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the running moisture is missing, no matter what its color may be, then you shall cut it with a superficial section, as I mentioned for other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the contents of the incision, then you will know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	You should dry it on top with a section having the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	in the same way as you were taught, and hang it up with a thread, and cut off the capsule from all parts easily, and keep the skin or sac if possible on top of it and extract the pus along with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the pus; however, you should remove the affected area until there remains no cause for it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, either a little or too much, the node will return; therefore, you should cut off more of the affected area to prevent its recurrence.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and strengthen the wound; then cover it with an ointment to cure it from gout, until it gets better.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If the node is large, you shall cut both lips of it and treat it with whatever ointment suits.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the vein is pulsating on the opposite side or not pulsating, you shall cut and fill the area with zinc ointment that is vitriol and let it rest for two or three days until the wound heals and stops the bleeding; then return to incise what was broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these there are three types of incisions, namely large, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of the large incision is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The shape of the medium-sized incision is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small incision is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make the incisions with a pair of scissors, from the base to the tips, well-aligned, so that the incision is made in the abscesses finely.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the shapes of the experts, and they are called lances, and one of them is called lancet.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It has three parts, where the largest is the middle one, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large expert is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized expert is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small expert is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is necessary to use these tools for abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes because some of them are due to bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Redondas, grosses, leones and assi como grandes agujas con las cuales son cosidas las hojas, son hechas de ciruelas, o de madera, o de hierro, o de plata, Y las mejores son cuando son hechas de ciruelas.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these are the instruments made of black feathers, which are used to close the cavities of the fistulas by directing their reflection onto them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of the three species, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Mold a large quantity of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Mold a medium-sized quantity of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Mold a small quantity of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of onions are of many species, for some of them are simple and have only one curve, while there are three species: large, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	For some of them are hollow, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	For some of them have two curves, and there are three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	For some of them have three curves, and there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Mold of a large simple onion:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Mold of a medium-sized simple onion:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Mold of a small simple onion:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Mold of a hollow large onion:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Mold of a hollow medium-sized onion:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Mold of a hollow small onion:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The formation of an uncus (or beak) has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The formation of a large uncus (or beak) has two curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The formation of a small uncus (or beak) has two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The formation of a large uncus (or beak) has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The formation of a small uncus (or beak) has three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The formation of a large uncus (or beak) has four curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of scalpels with which one cuts and scrapes nodes and abscesses, and there are three types: large, small, and medium.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a medium-sized scalpel is as follows: it has one straight line, followed by two curves that meet at the tip.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel is as follows: it has one straight line, and then a single curve that ends in a point.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The incisions made on those areas where a section is to be performed are sharp, while the other areas are not punctured in such a way; rather, it should be done carefully during the incision of nodes, taking care to avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and for this purpose it will heal the patient and bring about some tranquility through the cauterization which is necessary due to the cauterization of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the shapes of lancets (or almagidas), and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large magda is as follows: it has two curves that meet at the base, and then a straight line that extends to the tip.
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a medium-sized magda is as follows: it has one curve followed by a straight line, and then another curve that meets the first at the tip.
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a small magda is as follows: it has one straight line that extends to the tip.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are made of ivory and resemble the handle of a razor with which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	In the area with a punctured edge and hidden spatula, and in the other area go to the sides inside and outside, as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are concealed beneath the pointed edges during the incision of abscesses and do not harm the patients, come in three types: large, small, and medium.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the shapes of those (instruments):
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of ventoses used for draining blood are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are made of citrus ivory, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	It is necessary to use these types of ventoses: large, medium, and small, so that blood can be drained quickly in case of necessity, and at the beginning it is not medication.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them for draining blood in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas such as the armpits, thighs, chest, breasts, abdomen, and groin, and similar to these on fleshy areas that are moist.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some of these tools are small and resemble fish scalers, as follows: they drain blood when used for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some of these tools are round, as follows:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of male breasts resembling female ones.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some of these tools are used to inflate the breasts of certain men for the purpose of sleep, and they should be inflated like female breasts, and they produce abscesses, which are hard.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who want to use this method, it is necessary to incise them with a lunar section as follows: from the line B to the line G, and then excoriate the entire groin area, apply the plaster of carmine-colored medicine, and adjust the two lips of the plaster with stitching, and treat the area until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple sinks towards the breasts and becomes soft like it does in women, then it should be cut into two halves horizontally, with two incisions resembling a crescent moon shape, each of which should contain the other in its end until the larger line contains the smaller one according to this B line and G line shape. Then remove the skin that is between the wound edges, remove the pus, administer what has been said about suturing and powders necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the discomfort of the patient and blood flow, then it is necessary to cauterize the wound with hot iron and let it heal until the corrosive burns away the remaining fat tissue, and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that are caused by the itch.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These are boils that arise from the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a hair that must be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	Some of them contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section as shown in this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything within the boil is evacuated and drained, cover it with thin cotton cloth and allow it to heal on its own the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then keep the wound covered and let it heal properly with suitable care until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the boil of the lymph node or scrofula species occurs, then you should cut it open in the same way as was described in the section on scrofulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the ulcer is extended to become pustular, then administer cauterization as was previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on boils that occur due to an arrow wound or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the string that covers it is consolidated, a boil can occur at the site, and there are signs to determine whether inflammation and boils are due to an artery or vein: for when the boil is caused by an arrow, it tends to be long along the length of the body; and if you squeeze the boil with your fingers, you can feel a grinding sensation.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And one that is due to a vein is round in shape like the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	The section on this boil is an error, especially in the armpits, groin, neck, and various parts of the body; it can be large, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and those that are in the external parts, such as the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Concerning that which is caused by an inflammation of the opening of the arrow wound, cut open the string section lengthwise; then, carefully incise the incision with scissors and remove the arrow, as well as its sheaths until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place the needle on top of the arrow and make it pass through the other side, then firmly twist the arrow in two places - which will cause the wound to open slightly during the extraction of two arrows that are within the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Place your finger on the site between two ligaments and use a sponge to draw out all the blood that is present in the area until the boil is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Apply treatment that promotes pus formation until the ligaments fall apart, and then care for it with suitable care until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the boil is due to a vein section, you should have your hand on the boil and the string, and then carefully insert the needle next to the location that you have your hand on, making it pass through; and use double thread until you withdraw it from the other side, and then tie the boil with a strong ligament as described in the uva4 ligament of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	However, if you fear pulling out the thread, insert the needle into the boil after making an incision with the first needle, and firmly twist the threads four times.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Carefully cut the boil in the middle until everything within it is evacuated, then incise the excess string and leave what remains attached.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Place a poultice of pulverized material that has been soaked in wine and oil over the wound, and apply the appropriate treatment with heat and suitable care until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 on boils that occur due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Boils can occur in the same way as those that occur due to an arrow wound or a vein, and also in nerves when they are struck or subjected to excessive labor, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The main cause is found in the locations of joints or the ankle, or any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	The boil is severe and resembles the color of the rest of the body; it is in the larger parts of the body and becomes constricted with great pain, causing the patient to feel faint or dazed.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess added in the neck of the body, and therefore the bandage is removed, and it is bad all over and does not go to either the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	And what concerns the joints should not be wrapped tightly, for this will lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or forehead should have the bandage with sponge.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	However, if it is a small abscess, then cut it and open it to lancing.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, you should suspend it with oil, and excise it, and place a dressing on it; and adjust the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In some men, many pimples appear in the abdomens of those and in other parts of their bodies that are called fungus because of its similarity to those with fungus; the root of these is subtle, while the head of it is large; and the lips of these are already converted, and these are small ones, and these are greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have also seen one (patient), and in his abdomen there were two small pimples that resembled fungus, and they were not distinguishable from the white roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed out of it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise them (the pimples) and stitch one in the foot with eighteen oil. And the other (pimple) with five oil.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in their incision is that you consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of it (the abscess) is white, moist, with subtle roots; then you should lance it with a lancet, and be cautious to have a fire nearby, for many pimples are expelled without bleeding; if blood comes out, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is weak and fearful, do not lance it with a knife; instead, take a fresh leaden pill, and press it against the abscess, as I have said before; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the string of lead; therefore, you must not press too hard on the large piece of lead until it is excised and falls off by itself without labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if it is a large abscess, the incision of it should be done with some cause of fear and dread, especially for one who is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you incise the depth of it (the abscess), and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And heal it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to lance an abscess that is of dark color, with little sensation, and has a regular shape, for that one is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	I will come back to the subject of cancer soon.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of swelling in the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Swelling of the navel is caused by many causes; either by fissures in the ciphus (the pubis bone) that occurs on the abdomen, and it contains the intestine or hernia as with other ruptures; or by bleeding which flows from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier, or by compressed air (gas) in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's due to a wound in the scrotum and a simple tear of the fabric, then the color of the abscess is similar to the body color; it is lion-like in pain, and it appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then you should locate the site where the intestine has protruded, with more severe intensity, and when you press that area it is hidden, and you should gently return it; and a strong cold is on that spot, and it needs to be introduced with great care and vigorous washing.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if due to moisture, it is lion-like and not hidden when pressed with the hand, neither constricted nor contracted.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it's due to bleeding, the abscess shows black spots descending.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it's a piece of flesh, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it is filled according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it's due to flatulence, the touch is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in that area is to consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to bleeding from an archer's wound, a vein, or flatulence; it is necessary that if you diagnose it as such, you should be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and dread as explained in the chapter where apostemas due to an archer's wound and veins were discussed.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or fabric, you should command the patient to lie down with their back exposed; then hold the tent on all sides around the entire navel and order them to lie between your hands facing upwards, and encircle the space around the navel with a broad spatula; extend the maturity of the abscess towards the upper parts by one inch or more; and tie it in the circuit firmly but gently, using the proper tying method.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And you should cut the edge of the extended abscess over the wound and insert your finger in that opening to locate the intestine; if you have not found or preserved it with the dressing, then you extract the feces and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the fabric, you take it with an inch; and cut off the excess from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your arrow wound or vein, you should encircle it and return to your operation; take two needles and put them through the fabric firmly and insert the needles in the circle that you made around the abscess in a cross pattern, which you will make penetrate; and tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh may fall by itself; or cut the one that is thin and soft, and care for it with the medication until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to a piece of flesh or moisture, you should cover the abscess as previously stated and drain the blood or moisture, which you will preserve in it, and care for it with the medication and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancers.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already stated in the division, the species of cancer and in what way the treatment of it is to be done with medicines, and that it is unsuitable to cure it with iron because it should not be ulcerated; and we have also said that cancer arises from carelessness and caution in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can be eradicated in places where this is possible, such as in the head, which is located near the breasts or its similar areas and it is advisable to remove the entire area, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it becomes old and large, it is not advisable to treat it, for I cannot heal it or have seen anyone else do so, nor has it been achieved in any way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation in that area is as previously stated, that you proceed and prepare the patient and purge them of black bile for some days, and fumigate it, if a clear repletion is evidently found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	You should prepare the patient with a preparation suitable for surgery, and you should warn them of the possible side effects of the operation; and you should also make sure that the wound is closed well with good surgical sutures until there remains no cause for the recurrence of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow freely and do not abscess it lightly, press the areas, and wipe away all thick blood from it with your hand or an instrument that is available to you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is contrary to the thick blood flowing from an artery or vein, you should cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and care for it with other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 40.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of edema (dropsy).
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the species of edema due to water and the signs of each species, as well as their treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The one that is treated with iron is only the species of lithiasis alone, and it is not advisable to use iron for the species of tympans or the species of hypoarachnoid cysts, as this is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this type of tympanic edema with medicine and it does not improve, then consider, for if the patient has become weakened, or is suffering from another form of edema, such as in the lungs or abdomen and similar cases, then be careful not to treat with iron, for there is fear regarding that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If the patient is healthy and not suffering from another disease but just edema, and they are neither old nor young, then the procedure for treating them is to lift the patient with your hands and place them on their back, then press the abdomen of the patient with your hand, directing the water out of the bladder through the penis, and take a sponge with thorns according to this method:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The instrument should be made of two sharp points, with a pointed end like a sponge; but it should be of some short length, so that during the operation it does not enter the intestine and damage it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Then consider if the production of edema is from the intestines, for in that case you must be at a distance of three fingers below the navel on the right side above the penis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the production of edema is due to a problem with the kidneys, then your incision should be on the left side below the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your incision is over the side where the patient wants to lie, so that fluids do not accumulate in that area unnecessarily.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate the bladder entirely with the instrument and enter that incision, and lift the sponge between the bladder and the scrotum and remove it; and if there is a quantity of one nail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the scrotum until the sponge reaches the location of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And remove that and insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a silver thin cannula; it is made of silver or iron or leather, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. The tip of it is inscribed like a feather, as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the upper end of it is an arm, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately close it over the instrument, thus evacuate as much water as possible, for if you evacuate any more than necessary, the patient may die from resolution of their animal spirit, or they may suffer convulsions which are a precursor to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate according to the strength of the water and according to what the condition of the patient indicates about the quality of their pulse and the goodness of their complexion.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument and retain the water that caused it, which should be held by the bladder which retains the hole in the scrotum of which you are recommended to perforate in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And if the patient tolerates it, repeat the procedure with the instrument on another day, removing a small amount of water, and do so for several days out of fear, and be careful not to leave any water but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient and let out a large amount of water, then care for them with burial in hot sand, rub them with warm water, and wait in the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medications until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the spleen and kidneys during the removal of water, as I have previously reported in that which was mentioned before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 51.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose places for urination are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's abdomen and the head of the umbilical cord is not perforated (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, you should immediately cover the area with a thin sponge in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a small leaden plug soaked in wine over the wound and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the need to urinate returns, let him empty it again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the lead plug, it is possible that the urine overflowing in that area does not close this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the wound that has been made should be treated with a lead plug as we have said for many days until it is expanded.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But the wounds that are not in their proper place cause problems such as those who have had this surgery are unable to urinate at the parturition until they lift the penis with their hand towards the parturition; it is not due to generation since the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should, and it is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method for the operation is that the patient should be turned onto their back, and you should stretch the penis with your left hand using strong extraction, and incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp instrument such as a feather or whatever blade you have available so that the tip of the penis will look similar to its original shape, and then cut it off so that it falls into its proper place as required.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be aware that in your operation for bleeding, this often happens; and stop the bleeding with the necessary means and take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 64.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the whitening of the foreskin that occurs in the head of the penis due to inflammation, blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this whitening occurs in the penis and is an area of dead flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these types is malignant, while the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it should be suspended with a thin thread and removed as soon as possible until the entire area is cleaned; then place a mild Egyptian ointment on the area submerged and use the specific Egyptian ointment to cure it for several days until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the whitening is malignant and discolored, you must administer cautery to the incision and remove it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whitening is in the foreskin of the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, you must remove the internal whitening first until it consolidates; then cure the external area because when you treat the foreskin at the same time, there is no guarantee that it will not become infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And you often encounter blackness and corruption in the genitals and foreskin, therefore it is necessary to remove all the already damaged areas that are about to rot or have already rotted; then apply liniment over that area with honey mixed with flour of oats, crushed walnuts and hulled barley.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And cure it with the other remedy until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, administer lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cauterization helps in two ways at the same time: for bleeding and when an ulcer is rotten.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, you must insert a lead pipe into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision has not been required; and when adhesion occurs due to an ulcer or abscess), you must cut with a dull knife until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to detach them exactly, you must cut with a knife of some sort on the head of the penis and the foreskin; this is because when the foreskin is thin, it is easily perforated due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Approach separating between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin knife, which has been softened in warm water to prevent it from sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then be cautious to cure it when it is stiff and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capital, Chapter VII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the cure for those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a continuous plague like other diseases; however, since it comes from our action and our will, and that of children is inherently required, it is necessary to assign the best operation and way to perform it with least risk to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it according to their laws, and only acquired it through experience, which is due to the fact that I have discovered most craftsmen and barbers using circumcision with a knife and torch; and they use lime and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and do not find a better purification with forceps, lime, or incision with the nail, because more often the skin is torn above, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, which is easily exposed to further incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is performed by an apothecary, and is called "digital," which is used by cobblers, is not assured of the incision at the end of the male organ, because deep cuts can enter it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However, in the operation with the nail, deep wounds can easily spoil your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the skin of a child is naturally short, and many times it does not require purification in this manner, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	However, the purification performed with forceps and lime and the nail has been found beneficial by experience, because the forceps are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand proportionally in two areas, and make an incision accordingly according to a comparison in one time; and it causes compression of the lime on the penis with a shape containing the skin of the entire area, from which no error can occur.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is to keep the child more if it is of those who can understand a little, that you do not let him put lime on his penis except for one day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And approach him in every way possible that is within your power regarding the understanding of the child.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And approach him and make him stand between your hands, but do not let him be agitated; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see it nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And approach your hand to the penis of the child and blow on the skin, then pull it back until the head of the penis is exposed, and proceed with purification of that which is accumulated in the foreskin due to dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And approach the designated area with the lime, and apply it below the penis, and then apply a small amount of lime over it; then take your finger and hold it at the base of the penis, pushing down on the lime and keeping good grip, and make an incision between two layers of lime.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And approach the skin slightly and stretch the foreskin upward, and let the blood flow slowly, which is better; then sprinkle powder on it and over the powder lay a cloth in which is spread mustard oil recently made with fresh hops boiled in water; leave that on for another day; and cure it with medicine until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for purification, this is its shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The outer parts should not be sharp and the inner parts should be, that there is no projection of the handle, and the length of the two points should be equal to the length of two handles joined together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	However, the error in purification is that deep wounds can tear the entire skin, or if you make an incision it must be partial.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should stretch the skin at your discretion with your nail before the incision and make the incision accordingly.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with oil and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	However, if it has been three days and the inflammation remains at the base of the penis, you should remove it with care and cut the inflammation cautiously, then excise it easily and make an incision according to your discretion.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, as that will not help you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, cure it with what has been recommended for the inflammation in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the skin is incised too much and opens up at the edges, that will not help you.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	However, cure it with what has been said until it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Capital, Chapter VIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Treatment for retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or clotted blood, or poure or meat, similar to those mentioned in the methods of treatment division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and the retention is due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over on all fours.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on their back and extend their belly from the area above their waist, and have the patient strain as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Thus, the neck of the bladder is compressed to expel the stone at the back parts so that the urine can be released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the above remedy is not effective and the cause is severe for the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a conical shape, like a bird's feather cannula with the same fineness as a long ray in the shape of a palm and a half, and at its tip, it should have a fine tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of emptying the urine with the syringe is to fold the thread and place it in the wool or cotton, ensuring good lubrication; then insert the thread into the part behind the syringe, and cut off any excess wool if necessary, but introduce the thread into the cannula with vigor. Next, move the syringe towards the body and the albumen of egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Have the patient lie down on a bed and compress the bladder and scrotum with wet oil cloths, olive oil, and egg whites.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe gently into the scrotum until it reaches the bladder; then fold the scrotum above the anus; push the syringe through that area; push the syringe towards the bladder, ensuring that the patient is positioned correctly and not twisted.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then stretch the thread little by little until the urine soaks the cotton.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove it and treat the urine, using a syringe, and continue to press and use the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of clysters for the bladder with a syringe and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or boil occurs in the bladder, or blood clots within it, or there is a hardened pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then use an instrument called a clamp, which has the following form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If outside of it is silent, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three holes: two from one side as sometimes happens.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning there is a hollow place where something is hidden and in accordance with its quantity, it should be added to it until some cause is pulled from the humidities, and when it is expelled, it should also be pulled back, and when it is expelled long, as happens in clamp shells made of a substance called naphta used in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you want to stop the humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp shell into the humidity and pull with it whatever is hidden inside the parts above, as the humidity is expelled into the hollow of the clamp shell.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the clamp shell into the anus as we have recommended in the syringe; and pull with it the humidity as you pull it, since that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient suffers from it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of a subtle cyst with which the bladder is cysticized, and that is the shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with a head shaped like a small feather and the body canning inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder by hand and stop the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double stitch, and heat up that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the cyst into the anus.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And hold your hand on the bladder with the humidity and the structure until the patient feels that the humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate it completely around its entire circumference; and insert a strong thread through these holes in such a way that they are turned around; and apply the circle also in this way so that it is attached as in an amulet, since you stop there whatever you want from the humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie it with the instrument in the same way as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capital LX. (This is the number for the 60th chapter)
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the types of stones and their cure with medicine, as well as the difference between stone produced in the lungs and stone produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said which type of stone requires surgical operation and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone produced in the bladder itself is that which is embedded in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And we will tell it with clear exposure and concise language.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, we say that stone produced in the bladder is most often seen in children; and among its signs is that the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; the patient scratches his anus frequently, and moves up and down a lot, and his buttocks are swollen, and with that, the feces come out.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	Child healing is easier before they turn 14 years old; it is difficult to cure the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young ones, healing is more easily achieved; it is difficult in the old.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	The larger the stone and the easier the healing; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when treating that condition, at the beginning we must clean the patient with a clyster which extracts all the crevice within their intestines; for that crevice sometimes prevents the stone from appearing, you should investigate for it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then place the patient with their feet and have them sit in a warm and comfortable position to encourage the stone to descend to the bladder's opening or to pass out of the body at some point.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then prepare the patient's bladder using your hands, and remove their clothes from that area so that the entire bladder is exposed at the sides.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then pierce it completely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space (i.e., if you can locate it), cut through it immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you do not feel it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint it with oil using the index finger of your left hand (or right if the patient is a child or young person), and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then pierce the stone that was inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your finger and expel it outwards from the bladder at the location where you pierced it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; command another assistant to extend the legs apart using their right hand, and use their left hand to remove the covering that is below the legs, in the area where the piercing was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a spatula with a sharp edge into the area:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Cut the area between the anus and the genitals, not too deep, but along the left side; make the incision on that stone and your finger should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside, according to the amount of the stone that can be exposed there, and not too much, for strong pressure on your finger pressing the stone during the incision is necessary, but it should be done without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Know that some stones have an angle and edges, which makes their removal difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of this type is one resembling a walnut, round, and easily removed.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it has an angle or edges, fit it into the groove (i.e., place it in the channel formed by the pelvis and pubic bones).
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If it is not easily removed or cannot be grasped, then press on it or squeeze it gently with appropriate pressure, the end of which should be like a file against the stone, and do not let go; or insert a sharp, curved instrument below it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press on it, expand the opening a little and if you see blood flow, cauterize it with diluted vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stones, first press your hand on the opening of the bladder and then pierce it; then press a little on them; proceed similarly with larger numbers of stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is very large, ignorance is that you pierce it with a large incision, because the patient may suffer from one of two causes: either death or continuous urine discharge, due to which the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer an emetic to expel it out of the body if possible, or use forceps to extract it through the fracture once the bladder is broken open.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	When you have completed your task, fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood (a type of resin), and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar or rose oil and water on the wound, to allow it to heal without an abscess.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then reposition the patient on their back and do not remove the bandages for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When you have removed the bandages, apply warm water and oil to the area, and treat it with antibiotics and antiseptics until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If an abscess forms in the wound, apply cautery and caustic substances to it, similar to if blood is present in the urine (and this is known as hematuria), then insert your finger into the wound and drain the blood, for if it remains, it causes the bladder to decay and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and use appropriate antibiotics until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	It is essential during the entire healing process that you watch over them and adjust the medications applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and lodged in the scrotum and urination is prohibited, treat it with what I have previously recommended before piercing, for this treatment is often accused of causing piercing; and I have already explained that you should use a sharp, pointed instrument like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of a triangular shape, sharp, inserted into a wooden rod.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take the file, and bind it to that part behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the stone with ease, piercing through it until the piercer reaches that pebble.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Rotate the piercer in that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation on it until the other side is able to penetrate; for urine will be released soon.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Place your hand on the fractured part of the stone that is separated from the bladder, for it is closed and forgotten by the urine, and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not suitable for some reason that prevents it, then bind a file behind the stone, and another file on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then strike the stone in that bladder between two layers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the ligaments and unclot the blood in that wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	No, it is not necessary to bind a file behind the stone, but only for preventing its return to the bladder; and another ligament on top of it, for when the file is loosened near the exit of the stone, it returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, when you bind the file on top, you should raise the patient's thighs or else it will not work and the wound will heal in this manner as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone (peyra) appears in any of those [parts], then the cure is difficult and forbidden due to excessive methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one who has a female and is weakly built is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is because you do not find a woman who knows how to keep herself chaste or is married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is because you do not have a woman skilled in this art, especially when it involves surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the location of the incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, requiring deep incisions and causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do it, then you must take a woman skilled and obedient.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of the former, then seek one skilled and discreet, or present a married woman knowledgeable in the affairs of women, or a woman who is proficient in this art to some extent.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore present her and order her to do everything you command, from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; for this reason she is to examine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case she must place her hand on the woman's stomach and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, separate it from her, and then order her to incise it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, order the married woman to insert her hand into the patient's vagina and search for the stone; then place her left hand on the bladder, and press it firmly with good judgment.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she finds it, you must carefully draw it out of the urinary bladder through the vagina, until its virtue reaches the place where the incision was made.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And you should insert the incision into the location of the woman's cervix; find the stone in that area and make a small incision there. The incision must not remain unattended without being removed from the stone extracted from the vagina.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The incision should be small at first; and then insert the scalpel into the incision. If you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to its size, for you know how large the stone is from that location.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are motes (pebbles); some are small and large, hard and sharp, and round and elongated, and some have grooves.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know the number of types there are for this purpose, regarding what you wish to do.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see bleeding, adjust the location with a cauterized metal and hold it there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation as soon as the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Make preparations with yourself of the instruments that are mentioned in the treatment of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see bleeding, and you know that the evacuation of blood is from the archery that is incised, then you stop the powder on the location and tighten it with pulvis and stricture paste, but do not repeat this; leave the stone in place and do not extract it, for a weak person will die from it.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Once the acuity of the blood has subsided after several days and the location has healed, then return to your operation as soon as the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for a hernia in the scrotum.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia in the scrotum is not anything other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cyst that lies below the cord of the testicles containing the semen, and it is called a cyst.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes the accumulation is in the proper abdominal tissue that nature has prepared in the testicle area until it becomes another testicle; and it is the cord of the testicles between the white cyst, which we have said is not true but false.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the testicles, so that this material accumulates there; and sometimes it happens from a blow made on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has stones of various colors; the color of it can be declining towards citrine or blood red, or brown, or black and slimy, or water white, and that is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are as follows: if it is in the white cyst that we have said, then the abscess becomes red and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg, and the testicle appears, for the moisture contains it entirely.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper abdominal tissue, then the abscess becomes round with the testicle area and from this it is believed that it is another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the testicles and the white cyst, then you must cut under the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	In order to know the color of the moisture, you should express the color of the moisture from within the abscess with its shape removed; and according to the evidence found in the interior, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him who is ill, it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and often empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then raise him on his back due to some cause, and place warm cloths over him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow the right side of him, who will extend his leg from one end of the bed to the lower edge of the genitals and the border of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a thin stick and cut the groin from one end to near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision straight and at equal distance from the line that should be the pubic hair, up to the white area containing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise it, observe, and be careful not to cut too deeply; and your excision with which you are excising should have an opening that is suspended by the mouth more gently and subtly examine the excision according to the amount possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then perforate the bladder full of water with a large perforation, and drain all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the labia majora of the incision with sutures, and stretch the bladder to the edges; do not touch the region of the genitals, and cut the bladder in that manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Cut it all or in pieces, and especially its thin part, because if you do not examine the incision of him closely, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	However, if the wound is processed from outside the genital area during your operation, when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside and then adjust the two labia majora of the genital opening with sutures, and care for it like other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the wound becomes corrupt due to another illness, it is necessary that you remove the instruments used as support and extract the bladder, and then care for it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if the water is divided into two parts, you know that they are hernias; therefore, cut that part as you have done in the other case; and if it appears to be a rupture, you should perform the operation.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should abstain from blood, and enter into the wounds with wool immersed in oil or red oil; and put another wool that has been soaked in wine and oil over the genitals and abdomen; and place damp cloths folded and powdered on top of it, and let them dry in this manner:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and apply two cloths soaked in carmine-colored wool as described; and the ends are pressed with cotton or moist wool, and they are tied together with twine in the undergarments, one end of which takes hold of the buttocks to the back, and the other to the anus, and two ends on one side and two ends on the other side on the thighs, and the entire construction is adjusted in the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision and bleeding; you should take a subtle cautery knife and cut the genital opening with it, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white area containing water is exposed, and then you should take caution as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then perforate that bladder, and let it burn until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then stretch the bladder with sutures, excise it with scissors, and excise it with a thin cautery knife ignited; cut it as possible for you until you have removed all of it; and be careful not to let the fire touch the skin.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You should know that this operation is less risky and longer lasting than an incision and bleeding operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	However, if you encounter a contraindication such as an abscess during incision or cautery, or bleeding, it is necessary that you treat the contraindication as appropriate for him according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	However, if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its severity, you should perform the perforation as we recommend; and it is when you are sure, according to what has been said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	It is necessary that you elevate the patient on some high bed, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a thin stick, and let the perforation be according to the length of his body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	The opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Place a cloth over the area and let it soak up the remaining water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for the wound once the sore is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If the swelling occurs against the expulsion of water in that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except if white pus appears in the wound's orifices, causing resistance and preventing the flow of water, then it is necessary that you put a pen or instrument with which to extract the water from abscesses, its shape being preceded; or adjust on the pressure of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is accumulated for about two months or less; and when it is accumulated, then it should be perforated according to that method, because the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter sixty-three.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision for fat hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision for this hernia there is great danger of harm in the largest preparations, because I have seen the dismissal of it and being saved by the better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that case, and the properties of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that abscesses are born in those bodies whose genitals are composed, and this occurs for various causes: or due to acute sharp anger, which is poured into the genitals, or due to a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A large abscess is a lapified abscess, whose color is dark, and it is not felt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Sometimes it is made by the thickening of the arteries and swelling of those same, so that the memory of it is already perceived or by the swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by swelling of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when it is compressed with the fingers, and it is not necessary to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what is caused by swelling of a vein should not be dispersed in any way due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that a section may be made on this condition and on the other flesh; and you insert the cavity of the genitals, and place the oil on the upper parts, and remove that from the white cloth, and release the suspenders of the organs, and tie them, and insert the suspended organ in the cavity that you released from all parts of the upper part of the oil.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the hernia is already consolidated in that area, then you must remove and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion due to some cause between the organs, or that which lies between the bladder and intestines, then you must remove all of this adhesion and insert it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the flesh is native to the location of the adhesion that is behind it, then you must insert all that is there, and remove the hernia as described earlier.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Once the operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and take care of it along with the other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of the hernia that is from wounds.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A wound is an abscess enclosed by some similar covering like a boil with softening of the testicles, making it difficult for exercise and walking on the part affected by the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease there is recalling of what was beforehand feared.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to say that the operation should be performed as described earlier.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that you must put the patient on an elevated stretcher; and spread out the suspenders of the testicles to their sides; and place the genitals with the thighs apart, using proven instruments in the area of the backside; and have another servant to hold them with great tension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And place a sharp long spoon across the transverse section of the organs, exposing them until they are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And scrape all parts in the same way as you described earlier, when removing arteries from the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And insert into that a double-pointed needle, and pierce the first of the places where you previously found the wound, and pierce the other place later on.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And incise them in the same place by a straight section according to the length of the body, and remove that which has been accumulated from fetid and corrupted moisture.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And take care of the wound along with other wounds in which you want to promote healing for the purpose that the organs which are not nourished by one or both testicles may fall out, as it is not harmful for this reason.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the wound occurs in all the organs, it is necessary that the testicles are removed or that the testicles are deprived of nutriment through the incision of the organs, and become atrophied, or blinded to prevent them from being helpful for this reason.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of inguinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision made in the expanded intestine that extends over the abdomen from the angles of the navel, causing one or more hernias to protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	The rupture can be of the intestine or an extension of it, and this occurrence is due to multiple causes such as trauma, pressure, strain, heavy lifting, or similar factors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this condition, when it is due to extension of the intestine, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it appears as an abscess near the inguinal area because the intestine compresses the hernia sac.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The first sentence is: "The sign of it (gout) is when there is a section of the ciphac, as at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it appears as an abscess different from the ordinary one, but it is actually related to the intestine, and its body parts are outside the ciphac."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Here is the translation: "In some cases, the intestine herniates through the tissue and is called an entestinal hernia known as a zirbal."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Here is the translation: "In some cases it occurs with wind, in other cases the intestine tears and is retained, causing serious danger to the patient, and in some cases it causes bad and severe pain, especially when it is pressed."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	Here is the translation: "And in the treatment of this disease with spices, there is fear that it may cause traps (or ambush), so it must be avoided."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here is the translation: "The method of operation for this (hernia) is to make the patient return the intestine with their hands into its cavity, and then wrap it around its neck with a bandage, and raise the legs."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here is the translation: "Then, stitch the skin that connects the scrotum at its edges, and cut open the scrotum completely; then insert the fingers into both sides of the incision as necessary to divide the incision with them."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	Here is the translation: "And if the incision is made according to how much it is possible for it to be retained (or closed)."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Here is the translation: "Then remove that hernia which is below the scrotum, until the white hard cyst (or fibrous tissue) of each part is discovered."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Here is the translation: "Then you insert your finger into that which separates the testicle, where there is white fibrous tissue below the scrotum and between the cysts, and release any adhesion in the area behind the testicle."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here is the translation: "Then grab the scrotum with one hand and with the other hand pull out the white fibrous tissue from between the cysts, raise the testicle along with the cyst to the incision site; and command the assistant to extend the testicle beyond it and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it using a complete solution."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Here is the translation: "And look for any other causes of the hernia being trapped in the white hard cyst."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	Here is the translation: "If you find any cause (of the hernia), remove it from the abdomen."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here is the translation: "And then take a needle with a stitch that is five fields wide and insert it into the lower part of the cyst, which is below the scrotum, where the incision is; and then make a hole in the edges that protrude from the five fields until four fields are exposed, and compile some thread on a figure similar to a cross; and tie the cyst of which we have said that it is below the scrotum firmly with two knots."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here is the translation: "Then roll up the ends of the fields and tie them firmly with strong thread until none of the instruments that irrigate those (areas) can cause any abscess to form from this."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Here is the translation: "And pause for three days after tying the first knot; and leave a space of the size of a finger from the cyst that is below the scrotum, and cut out all the remaining tissue in a circular manner, leaving only the testicle."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here is the translation: "Then cut into the area below the scrotum along the incision that runs with blood and pus as we have recommended in what has been said."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here is the translation: "And apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and let it rest for a while; then apply the thread that we have recommended (and in some cases the white fibrous tissue is cauterized, which has been said to prevent bleeding, as this often occurs), and leave the thread until it falls off by itself."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Here is the translation: "If the trap (or ambush) is delayed, let warm water be soaked and placed on it until it falls off as we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation: "And cure the wound with other wound treatments until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvi.	This line seems to be a heading or title for the following text, so it can be translated as "Chapter LXVI."
De hernia ventosa.	Here is the translation: "Of the windy hernia."
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	Here is the translation: "In this hernia, there is no one who has been cured by fear (or frightening them)."
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Here is the translation: "And at first they said that it should be treated as we have recommended in the hernia caused by wind; that is, place the instruments near the incision with ease and dry it there, around the abscess with what opens it, until the instruments fall off."
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation: "Cure the wound as we have said until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvii.	This line seems to be a heading or title for the following text, so it can be translated as "Chapter LXVII."
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Here is the translation: "Of the disruption that occurs in the anguons (or ankles)."
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Here is the translation: "Sometimes a rupture occurs in the ankles as we have said, and it (the ruptured area) opens."
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they should not give any reason for hernias to the genitalia; and if they do, it is little; and return them to their place in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If it persists for a long time, a small incision is made in the scrotum before the hernia appears in the scrotum; and this occurs due to the extension of the scrotum as has been said earlier, which causes the scrotum to be stretched out, softened, and exposed, and protruding.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The cure for it is with cauterization as described earlier.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: the patient must hold his genitals between your hands, and dry the area of the rupture of the protruding parts with a piece of linen three fingers wide.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then, pull the white scrotum (the testicles) out from under the abdomen until they are exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then, take the thread and place it on the protruding part of the scrotum, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then, sew together the two protruding parts of the scrotum at its extremity with the thread.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then extract the extremity of the thread, and do not open the scrotum completely, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause as you know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Then, treat it with the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the scrotum, clean it and return the ulcer to its place until it is consolidated; because the scrotum is constricted and the protruding rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this case, as it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened by this, as the flesh that is between it is softened and the diet is taken care of.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for him who is being treated to place the patient in bed according to his genitals, and to incise all the scrotum that is softened over the natural scrotum; and then sew together two labia with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, sew at the beginning the redundancy of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then incise between the stitches; and treat for the treatment of other ulcers until they are healed and the wound heals.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is condemned, but by reason of this I remind you of it in this book; and its remembrance is not necessary except for two reasons, one of which is so that it may be known by the physician when he is questioned about it, who knows the treatment of such a case; and the other reason is that we sometimes have to castrate other animals for our benefit through them, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by strangulation, or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the one that is done by strangulation, the method of the operation is to seize the animal in the anus until its testicles are softened and lined up and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And place those with your hand inside until they are resolved and do not reappear again.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in a castration performed by incision, you must hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the sutures, and make an incision on each hole with one cut as it processes through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make an incision where each abscess has been scratched.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause for the bladder, but rather cauterize it on the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration done by strangulation is better because strangulation leaves no cause for the testicles, so that the animal desires coit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter .lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men are of two types: the first is when it appears where there is a gap in the cord of the testicles, and in this one that is between two testicles there is a vagina-like structure which has female genitals.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some cases of the cord of the testicles where urine flow occurs.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, it is a special case: and it is that the vagina above the cervix is like two testicles of a man, with a little less below, similar to the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must incise the flesh adjacent until the emission of that one ceases, and then cure those with other treatments for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men where there is urine in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xx1.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the swelling and prominent flesh due to reasons from women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling is adjusted naturally to a certain extent and treated accordingly with regulations, but in some women it becomes magnified to such an extent that it spreads like in men and enters the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must remove the excess swelling with your hand or scissors.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not make incisions, especially near the vein of the artery, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And heal it with treatments for other wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Born flesh is flesh that is born within the mother's abdomen until it protrudes, and this is called hernia (and for this reason some people call it "abdominal disease"); therefore, we incise and treat it as we would incise swelling, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter .lxx2.
De curacio de alratica.	On treating the prolapse of the uterus.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Prolapse of the uterus is when the cervix is not perforated or small.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has occurred previously, and this is done either when the flesh is not properly adjusted or by cauterization that is too hot or cold.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is done either in the mother's abdomen, or on her hips, or above her pubic bone, or below her pubic bone, and it is forbidden to have coit, engage in sexual activity, and procreate; and severe prolapse prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of this is obtained by the use of a metron, if the opening is visible, it is dilated with the fingers or the ray; but if it is not visible, you must search for it with your eyes or the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If obstruction is subtle and close to the two lips (labiae), then you should cut and separate it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	It is necessary to place pressure on the two lips (labiae), and hold those indicated marks in place with both hands.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be on her back, her legs spread open, and stretch out the affected area with force until that subtle obstruction is broken and the obstacle is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Take wool and dip it in oil, place it on the affected area, and press firmly for a day to prevent the wound from hardening.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the obstruction is large and thick, then it is necessary to incise it with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is due to a cord, then suspend it with a hook and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop bleeding without cutting it, such as opium, dragon's blood, and styrax, mixed with alum of yew.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Place a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer warm baths.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Let it be healed with the other treatment of consolidation until it is cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes during childbirth, other organs are affected, and then it is necessary to incise it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is due to cancerous abscess, do not apply iron in any way to the cancerous abscess during childbirth.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of diarrhea and red piles or boter rojo that occur in the female's womb.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Diarrhea is recognized when it flows continuously from the openings of large veins, and when chronic diarrhea occurs and it becomes purulent.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already mentioned the types of these (diarrhea) and their symptoms in the previous section, and here I will say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So I say that diarrhea and purulent discharge when it occurs in the cervix and is not felt, then no treatment with iron should be applied.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the cervix and can be felt, those are the ones that should be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to make the woman lie down with more heat and extend the thighs with hot blankets or rough cloth, and incise it (the cervix) with sharp instruments.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And apply powdered dragon's blood or another non-cutting incisive powder to the flow of blood from those (cervix) without cutting it, such as opium and similar powders.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Wrap the feet in wool for an hour and place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the bleeding continues, then seal it in a decoction of sumac, mustard seeds, and onions and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Take barley flour, mix it with honey, wine vinegar, and fat and make a plaster on top of the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the bleeding is separated (clotted), it is good; if not, cause it to adhere with two leeches and do not scarify the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander, armaglosa, or garruvera with repentine (penicillin) vinegar and apply to the affected area to promote adhesion. Treat the wound with honey until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	If the yew wood is hard to find, incise it according to what has been said earlier under the guidance of an expert.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Let it heal.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of a cervical accident in childbirth.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as cancerous, lapidated abscesses, ulcers, adhesions, erysipelas, fistulas, diarrhea, rags, thyl and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already mentioned these diseases, their types and symptoms, and their treatments in the previous section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	It is necessary for me to explain in this treatise the treatment of cautery for an abscess that occurs in the womb when it is associated with a discharging abscess, and if you wish to know how to perform the operation with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you should consider if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp and throbbing with fever, and sometimes it swells and can be felt, in which case do not cut into it, and treat it with something that promotes maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then it is necessary for you to make the woman lie on a bed with two beds; recline her on her back and place her feet at the edge of the bed below her abdomen, and her legs should be spread open, and her arms should be placed on the sides of her head as appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Approach the midwife following the straight path and administer the instruments with which you will open the mother's orifices, the shape of which will be needed in those cases that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you wish to administer this instrument which penetrates the mother's cervix of the woman, ensure that nothing but the cervix itself enters the woman and the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the cervix, then you must place powders on the texture of the cervix to prevent any instrument from entering the cervix.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	You must place the oil that runs in the instrument of the forceps above and let the one who ministers have the instrument, rolling the oil into it until it is inserted into the mother's orifices.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the expulsion occurs and is touched with the hand and squeezed, then you must cut off that part with a spatula of linen.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the pus is evacuated, then you must place a plug made of wax immersed in rose oil or olive oil with some antiseptic properties on the wound, and hold the plaster on the cut in the cervix of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Place a clean wool padding soaked in water where bad odors have arisen around the mother and on the loincloth.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be healed for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	After some days, the mother and the wound are washed in this way so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and with water in which is boiled rosemary or long-term aster root, and then return to the enema.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is inside the mother and swollen, then you must refrain from treating it with iron, having care for it in the way that has been said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies according to the figure that is not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and when you see the woman pushing at the opening of the birth canal and wanting to smell the air, and above her is cleared by what is on top of her, and she rushes out the membranes of the ectopic pregnancy, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it comes out above its head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's abdomen be compressed to make the ectopic pregnancy come out easily because when it comes out above its head, it releases the second one, and it is cleaned of superfluidities with good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is other than this birth is not natural and unlawful because when the ectopic pregnancy comes out on top of its feet and the body of it is expelled in front of its head and its feet are protruding from it, and the hand of it is one, or at the foot of it... or at the head of it and the hand of it, or at the abdomen of it, and if it is strongly turned on its neck, resembling the figures of those unlawful pregnancies.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to avoid mistakes and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And we are showing the entire figure of them, and the method is in them for it to be understood and to be done over them.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the delivery is on top of its head due to a natural labor, and it is difficult for the woman and painful, with the vitality of it already debilitated, then do that incision or what women have, and evaporate the congealed blood from it with fenugreek oil and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife enters between her fingers with a small spatula and cuts the second one or severs it with her nail until the moisture that is in it comes out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the woman's abdomen until the fetus comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then the woman should be cleansed with the mucus of a peacock and the mucus of fenugreek with scissors.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command it to expel itself, cleanse it, compress it and make it vomit with a mixture; open its mouth and nose for an hour because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then you must gradually reduce them with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the instrument does not enter, then have the woman lie on a couch and raise her feet up, and strike the couch with the heel; have the woman held so that she does not fall forward during the blow.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the more are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then incise them and separate the membrane of the fetus or pull its body to the midwife's hand with a cloth and separate it because that will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the subject of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is on its feet, it is necessary to press and turn it gently, make it smaller, take hold of it and pull it out little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If the child is still inside the vagina, you command it to come out, and make it turn around with caution, as forgetting this will result in complications if God wills so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if this recommendation is not forgotten, you return the child little by little into the position it was in naturally, as forgetting this will cause an easy delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If all the previously mentioned recommendations are prohibited, you prepare alum and dissolved gum, grind everything thoroughly in a mortar, and apply it to the woman's cervix with cotton soaked in the mixture at the bottom of her stomach.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cessation happen in hot water until the hips are reached.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when labor pains have subsided, you make the woman inhale mirtle smoke and cause her to rest.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the smoke has been inhaled for an hour, you make her vomit on a pan, and then cause her to cough forcefully and open her mouth wide, remove that, and press the afterbirth gently at the bottom of her stomach with compression, as the child will soon be delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	On the subject of the child on its shoulders and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child is delivered in this manner, you carefully introduce your hands into its body bit by bit; and have the woman sit on her heels, with her legs hanging down, and the feet should be placed on a bed or cushion, and complete the delivery.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the child's stomach bit by bit and extract whatever is between its legs until it is prepared for delivery.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not forgotten, take hold of its feet and move them violently, then press gently on the area above the hips bit by bit until the child can be delivered through the birth canal.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then carefully insert your hands into its body bit by bit and gently pull the child out until it is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	On the subject of the retained placenta hanging from one of its umbilical cords.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Try to reduce the size of its head, but if that cannot be done, lift the woman and have her walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If walking is not possible, lay the woman on her back and apply violent pressure to her hips while administering liniments as recommended by me and others for mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	When the childbirth is completed, make her vomit on a pan and study how to reduce the size of its head, then gently pull it out following its natural position, have her cough forcefully and compress her until she recovers.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	On the subject of the child expanded on its mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The woman must hold the object (probably a small object or instrument) and gently turn it (the object or patient's body part), making it easier to move.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when that (the affected area or instrument) has been held and turned, pause over the wound with the recommended oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then gently tug on the affected area (a small object or body part) little by little, and when you have it pulled out, place a pair of forceps over it and command them to be inclined straight, and then command someone to compress it; and make that thing shake with a gentle movement.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare the infant (or fetus) on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother has given birth (or is experiencing labor) according to this method, consider, and then you shall incise the second (child or afterbirth) with your nail up to where it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the infant (or child) is suspended by the face and neck, you shall incise the umbilical cord to ensure it does not become trapped and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently push the infant (or child) into the birth canal until you feel resistance, and command the woman to compress her abdomen, and let it out easily if possible, if God wills it so.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Be aware that twins are often born with a difficulty in the abdomen, and sometimes there may be three or four, but this is unusual and rare; however, this happens due to nature, not living beings.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And when these (afterbirths or placentae) are multiple, separate one from each other, dissect the ligaments near the umbilicus of each one, and some may be expelled easily like a normal delivery, while others may not pass due to unnatural difficulties, as we have previously recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them (the babies or placentae) are difficult to deliver, and you encounter abnormalities as previously mentioned, then care for those accordingly.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the woman is subtle and skilled at making things easier and less complicated, and experienced in dealing with both speed and slowness, she should be clever according to all figures as prepared by the ingenious method for healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it forms within the womb from embryos and is expelled (aborted).
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes a woman gives birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and even more children at once, which must be verified that a woman aborts five or ten times in a row, the cause of this was determined by the measurement of the wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And it is necessary in the midwife's knowledge to discern whether that mass appears hard or soft, and then touch it accordingly. (This means that the midwife needs to examine the baby's position and feel its head to determine if it is ready for delivery.)
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 66. (This indicates a continuation of the text or a new topic in the treatise.)
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus. (This suggests that the text is discussing what to do when a fetus dies during childbirth and needs to be removed from the womb.)
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as I have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet been expelled, you should use forceps if necessary. However, you must first consider whether the woman is of good health and not suffering from any of the conditions for which delivery could be dangerous. (This means that the healthcare provider needs to carefully evaluate the mother's condition before attempting to extract a dead fetus.)
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on a bed or cushion with her back inclined downwards and her legs raised. (This is a common position used during childbirth to help facilitate delivery.)
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The attendant should hold the woman's legs together or tie them down on the bed to prevent the body from stretching during the extraction of the fetus. (This helps control the mother's body during the delivery process.)
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and honey, aloe vera, fennel seeds, and linseed. (These substances were believed to help lubricate the birth canal during childbirth.)
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And you anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and ointments, and insert her hand into the mother with ease, and surround the area where the fingers will grasp the fetus. (This is done to prepare the midwife's hand for the delivery process.)
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And when the time is right, you should determine if the fetus is positioned correctly for delivery by examining its head. Then you will grasp it with your fingers in one of the following areas: on top of its head, under its chin, inside its mouth or palate, near its jawline, at its shoulders, near the ribs, or just below the breasts (hypogastric region). (This means that the midwife needs to carefully examine the fetus' position before attempting to extract it.)
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	However, if the presentation is breech, you should try to turn the fetus by rotating its feet or hips. (This means that if the fetus' feet or buttocks are presenting during delivery, the midwife needs to attempt a maneuver to reposition it correctly for delivery.)
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	It is necessary to hold the fingers with the right hand and bend them in the area between the thumb and index finger of the left hand, and insert the hand into the mother with ease until you reach the cause of the problem. (This means that the midwife needs to carefully manipulate the fetus' body during delivery using both hands.)
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place another finger or the third one if necessary on the opposite side to provide traction but not extend it beyond its normal position. (This means that the midwife needs to use gentle yet firm pressure during delivery to help guide the fetus out of the birth canal.)
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	This should be done carefully on all sides to ensure that the fetus' passage is eased as much as possible, just as it would be when pulling a tooth during extraction. (This means that the midwife needs to exercise caution and gentleness during delivery to avoid causing harm to the mother or fetus.)
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	It is necessary to soften the extension between them; if any part of the fetus remains stuck, you should anoint the mother's fingers with oil and insert them expertly into the area that is obstructed, gently rotating it to loosen the blockage. (This means that the midwife needs to use lubrication and gentle pressure to help extract a stubborn or obstructed fetus.)
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the fetal passage is blocked, you should grasp the fingers inside and gently pull them towards the perineum until everything has been expelled. (This means that the midwife needs to carefully extract the entire fetus from the birth canal.)
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	However, if the vagina is wider on one side and cannot be reduced due to constriction, you should wrap cloth around it. Then extract it gradually until everything has been expelled, and incise it either at the vaginal opening or in the perineum. (This means that the midwife needs to take extra precautions when delivering a fetus that is too wide for the vaginal canal.)
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so you should make an incision in the other vagina and both feet. (This means that if the first attempt to deliver the fetus is unsuccessful, the midwife needs to make a surgical cut in the other vaginal opening and carefully extract both feet.)
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	However, if the fetus' head is large or it becomes stuck in the birth canal, or water accumulates around its head, you should insert sponges between the fingers and split open the skull and drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," which will be described in the following chapter. (This means that the midwife needs to take special measures if the fetus' head is too large for the birth canal.)
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, if the fetus has a large head by nature, you should incise it with scissors or grab it with forceps as described earlier, and remove the bones carefully with forceps. (This means that the midwife needs to take special measures when delivering a fetus with an unusually large head.)
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is swollen and stuck at the neck, you should make an incision until the fluid that is in the feet is drained. (This means that the midwife needs to release pressure on the fetus by making a surgical cut at the neck area.)
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	However, if there are no complications or obesity, you should make an incision in the head as soon as possible. (This means that in an uncomplicated delivery, the midwife needs to quickly extract the fetus' head.)
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abdomen is protruding or watery, you should make an incision into it to release the fluid that is inside. (This means that if the mother's abdomen becomes distended due to amniotic fluid leaking out, the midwife needs to make a surgical cut to relieve pressure on the uterus.)
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the procedure is performed on the feet, then the pull and direction towards the mother's mouth is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	However, if the procedure is to be performed on the abdomen and feet, then you must extract that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and you should open the abdomen and feet as far as what is inside runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	However, if the other members are stopped and the head turns, then you must insert your left hand into the uterus; however, if the mouth of the womb is blocked, then you should enter your hand into her privates, seek out the head, pull it with your fingers towards the mouth of the womb, and insert a finger or two and pull them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the womb is obstructed by an abscess that occurs on the vulva, then you must not be too rough on it; rather, you should administer a solution of moist fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply poultices and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the procedure is on the side of the patient, then if possible, it should be incised; and administer the solution mentioned in the living creature.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	It must be ensured that no cause remains inside the second one (the fetus).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your entire operation, then administer the solution mentioned for healing in abscesses caused by the womb.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If there is bleeding, then you send it to stagnant waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have already seen a woman in the abdomen who was dead, and on top of that fire another watched over her, and her death was caused by that other fire.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	In the man there was an abscess in his navel for a long time; it inflated until it opened fire, and it began to emit pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I put strong adhesive plasters on him for some causes, and extracted a bone from him, and after some days another bone was extracted; I was greatly amazed because there is no bone in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, I cauterized the wound, extracted many bones from it, the woman who was in her milk, and lived in such a manner for a long time, recovered from it a small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not think it was strange, but rather that there is knowledge and help in such things; for a doctor works with his hand to administer healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of a lever with which the uterus is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a brace to which the free ends are attached, in which the braces are located at both ends of two rods.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this brace must be subtle thread from a suture, made of yew or oak wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Each rod must have two grooves, and each groove one tooth, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of two rods are two adjustments of that same rod, which are already fixed, the length of each is the width of a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two teeth or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it can be opened with those two prescribed braces when you turn them.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape resembling that thin and light thread:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Made of yew or oak wood in the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of it (the affected area), there are usually two additional parts, and the length of these additional parts is about one palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you want to open the larger area (the incision), you should place a woman lying on her back with her legs hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then you should open your hand with the tool (scissors) similarly to how you use forceps, according to the amount that you wish, based on the perception of the mouth of the incision up to where the ligature will be made so that it fits.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The turning movement which the ancients called "vertegge":
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The thrusting movement that is called impellent:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of amputating the large head, which is called amisidado:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	It is similar to forceps at the end (handle), sometimes, and some cases are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, at the end of which it resembles forceps's teeth used for cutting and crushing bones.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The method of partial amputation (amputatio parziale):
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The method of extracting an ingrown nail with a splint (oncia con spina):
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The method of extracting an ingrown nail with two splints (oncia con due spine):
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The method of using forceps with teeth for crushing the head of the affected area:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spatula has two extremities, one of which is detached at its tip:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spatulas (or plasters) has two extremities:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments should be handled with care, and when there are many of them, and their types multiplied and prepared, the artificer should consider ease of operation and their quantity in people.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not work on those instruments without preparation, for the need for them is not an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Extraction of the second part (or stage).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second part is retained, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze by stimulating their nose and nostrils. If this causes them to expel air, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If the above method does not work, then you should take a cloth, pierce it with a hole, and place herbs such as calamint, wild rue, anise, camomile, Arabian scidads, cassia wood, and sweetgrass in the cloth.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All or some of these herbs should be soaked in water within the cloth, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Place a reed tube in the mother's mouth and hold it so that the vapors emerge into the mother's cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Make the patient sneeze again in the same manner as described earlier, and the second part will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment persists without effect, then you should command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of olives or millet oil and insert it into the cervix and uterus while searching for the second part. Once found, take it out a little at a time, but if it is attached to the mouth of the womb, insert your hand as recommended earlier, and when you find the second part, extract it gently so that the mother does not suffer excessive bleeding.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	The ribs should be tightly bound on both sides (right and left) with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	It should be adjusted in the amount of pressure, for it will obey and evacuate without adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and herbal oil remedy.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be cautious not to cause further irritation during attempts at extraction. But if what has emerged from the womb reaches the female opening, you should clean it with warm water and tetrafarmacon; for this will make it soft within a few days and will dissolve and expel it.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is ripe, it raises bad humors to the head and stomach, causing harm to the patient; therefore, appropriate remedies should be administered to alleviate these effects.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Modern Sub-Fumigation of garlic and dried figs was already discussed by some Ancients.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The design of the instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated should ensure the retention of menses and secondary flow.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It may be made of glass or of earth.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Let the thin end be placed in the cavity and the broad end above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be applied over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	It should contain what is to be consumed by that sub-fumigation and another should be added.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment of the infant's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Newborn infants and their unperforated anuses which are still narrow and closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, it is the duty of the midwife to perforate that narrow opening with a sharp instrument; and if she does not have one, she should use a sharp stick, ensuring that she does not touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Place a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil on it, and apply medicine internally when the anus is clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is concern that it may still be closed, place a cannula in it for several days and remove it when the infant desires to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And there may also be obstruction of the anus due to consolidation of a plague or abscess; therefore, that consolidation must be incised and treated as we have said for treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment of fistulas that occur in the rectum.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur near the anus, in the lower part or outside it, should be treated by applying warm poultices and using cautery near the fistula or in the space between the anus and one of the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or boil.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and has become moist with foul, white or suppurating pus, some of these fistulas may burst.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these bursting fistulas can be recognized by the discharge that exits through it and by its odor; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation as a remedy, but in most cases the worms are strong in those.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas may also burst in the space between the bladder and the bowel, or into the joint of the hip and into the nut of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	The distinction between a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is that you insert your sharp instrument into the anus, and try to probe gently with earth or iron in the fistula, but do not cause injury.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is injury during the probing, insert a probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel resistance or hair in your anus.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel any resistance or experience any evacuation, worms, or odor as mentioned before, then you should conclude that it is non-penetrating and proceed with treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula bursts into the bladder or bowel, its significance is clearly of urine and it should be prohibited to drink anything except medicine until the location is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If the fistula bursts into the hip joint or bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, the sign is that the probe penetrates into it if there is no injury to the bone, and pain in the surrounding area of the anus; and that it produces pus quickly; and that no medicine works, nor does it heal with internal application.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all such penetrating fistulas there is no cure and the cure of these is labor and futile efforts of foolish doctors.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	However, in non-penetrating and non-old fistulas, healing with iron is expected as I will recommend to you and as I have proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The patient should lie on their back with legs raised and knees bent, so that the buttocks are inclined toward the stomach, and probe gently with lead or earth if the fistula is not injured, until you find its location.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If the patient feels pain around the lower back, then insert your finger in the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel resistance in your anus when inserting the probe and you also feel it touching something soft or flesh, then you can be sure that it is penetrating; and do not work on it, as there is no healing in it, as mentioned before.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it heals in some men temporarily.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which healing is hoped for in it, it is that you ignite a small cautery according to the size of the fistula as described before, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and afterwards apply it two or three times until you know that all the surrounding flesh affected by the fistula has become seared like the feathers of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And treat it with calves wrapped in bandages until all the affected flesh has healed, and treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate new skin, and if it is healed, it is good; otherwise, it is not cured at another time by other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the anus tries to protrude and does not enter within it (the anus), as there is a swelling in the area of the anus that is either flesh or abscess, and sometimes there is a fistula on the surface of the anus, then dry the anus from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see drying with the swelling, and it should be cut into the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the end of the swelling is, and by the swelling it is released and captured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then clean and dress those fleshly fistulas that resemble the beak of a bird's egg, ensuring there is no remaining cause for them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If bleeding often accompanies your action when you treat those fleshly areas, then apply milk or a mild cauterizing instrument such as fire or a sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire is a good habit: it ensures proper adjustment of the affected areas and the drying out of the blood from excess moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And cover the affected area with warm cloth or compresses until the wound is healed, and treat the wound with tough, hard-working meat to heal and consolidate it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And use medications that contain astringency and drying properties. Once the wound is restored, it will be healed and there will be no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has entered the rectum of the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then you should enter your finger into the anus and feel it with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you find the swelling and it is almost ready to penetrate, there should be no operation on it, but rather by trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: or to cauterize it as we have said; or to cut it into the cavity so that you can gain access to it for proper healing; and do not proceed with cutting unless you are sure that you will not injure the muscles containing the colon, and this should not be done without the patient's consent. Rather, heal it with what we have said before, which is a strong remedy. Or elongate the swelling and clean the pus that seeps into the area near the anus, as we have said, or with the swelling or another sharp instrument with a pointed end, and then clean the fleshly fistulas in the incision using a plaster. And finally, work on restoring the entire wound by cutting, and if the orifice of the pus is not consolidated and the fistula remains open near the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you enter your finger into the fistula and find it at the side of the anus near the skin and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated probe like a sharp needle prepared in the following manner:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And enter the swelling that is wrapped in five fields, or around those areas. Then insert your finger into the fistula until you gain access to it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if penetration occurs near the anus, you should extract the field from that hole by pulling it out along with your finger entering the anus. Pull out the end of the field and straighten both ends, and leave them for a day or two until the field is more deeply embedded in the flesh, and then tighten it as far as those fleshy areas allow, which are between the two ends of the field and that fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, make it penetrate using any method prepared by you, but do not force it into the rectum, as it is not your place to do so lest you injure the muscles; and heal it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The way to use a pointed sponge to split the fistula: the curved side is sharp and the other side is not, so that it does not penetrate unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching for hemorrhoids where blood flows from their incisions.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids have two types: either they resemble coal, like those which are hard, or they are as fat as butter.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	These are small and large hemorrhoids that bleed frequently and are always one, and these are the swellings or external ones, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are external from the anus follow seasons of little moisture, where clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow occurs, and they are in accordance with the body's color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The treatment for internal hemorrhoids is to instruct the patient to sit down and to express himself before the anus dries up, and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut them with scissors or what you have at hand with your nail, and you should carefully incise them.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	However, if scissors are not available for the hemorrhoids due to their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or cotton or flaxen thread, extract them with tweezers, carefully incise them, and apply some powders that resemble cautery over them, so that they remain in place; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Apply other treatments for them until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the anus does not release them, then you should fistulate the patient with a small fistula and wash it with water that facilitates their release when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is light and you should gently take them with your nail or scissors, incise them, and apply other treatments for them until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	The one with incisions must receive stitching of them according to this method: take fine thread and pierce it through the hemorrhoids at their divisions, making it penetrate the other side with the needle, and envelop both ends of the thread in the division beyond the needle, transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, knot the thread, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, leaving one open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place it over the anus and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Leave it inside until it dries up; and when it is healed, treat them with poultice or another treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment for fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Swellings that occur due to the drying of a wound or by nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	Since they are old and have no value in that medicine, it is necessary that you lance them with a lancet or your nail until they become moist and the discharge increases above, which prevents their consolidation; and treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with a sharp reason as soon as possible, and treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Treatment for hemorrhoids, it is important.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	It is important to be aware that hemorrhoids can resemble a red dot on the body similar to a clavicle head, and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the abdomen and genitals, and because of these pains you should always treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise what is around the clavicle, and hold it with forceps or scissors, and remove it from its root; and treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, cauterize the following as described in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	However, a wart is a small rough fistula that protrudes roundly from the surface of the body, and they frequently appear in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for it is to stretch and incise it, or to tighten it with thread or cloth until it dries up.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, cauterize it as described earlier with fire or with a strong medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the reverses and non-reverses have been removed with the tool that I will mention.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	However, a tick is a small rough or thick fistula that appears on the surface of the body and when it bites it becomes red like the bite of a flea, and it is found around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for it is to take a pointed needle or a hollow needle, and hold it firmly, place it on the tick until it is contained within its circle; then rotate your hand with the needle around the tick until you incise what is around the tick, and press it into the skin, and remove the tick from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, do this with an iron needle or a lancet in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The first part of the sentence seems to be instructing the removal of something that is located above the cannula (possibly a stitch or suture), which appears undamaged and wrapped, so that the underlying area can be observed and the rotation of it can be perceived. Translation: "Let the area above the cannula be drawn out to subtlety, undamaged (meaning not perforated), wrapped, so that the underlying part may be uncovered and its rotation can be perceived."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize a flea as previously mentioned in the section on cauterization of atheyl (a kind of skin growth) in the chapter on cauteries. Translation: "And if you want to cauterize a flea, just as was previously described in the section on cauterizing atheyl under the chapter of cauteries."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that are administered for the purpose of making an incision. Translation: "In the manner of the instruments that are used to make an incision."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes an incision is made using a silver or lead instrument that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is made with smaller and larger instruments depending on the patient, because the one administered during the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are fleshy or painful, the incisions should be smaller. Translation: "Sometimes an incision is made using a silver or lead instrument that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is made with instruments of various sizes depending on the patient, because the one used during the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are fleshy or painful, smaller incisions should be made."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and shallow incision: Translation: "The form of a large but shallow incision:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above where the bag is attached should be wide in this manner; and it should be clearly distinguished from where the bag is attached as was mentioned previously. Translation: "The head of the cannula above where the bag is attached should be wide, just like we described earlier; and it should be clearly distinguishable from where the bag is attached."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it that is inserted in the buttock should be undamaged (meaning not opened), as much as possible, narrowed to subtlety; and on one side there should be two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the size of the rays, and the larger ones should be smaller. Translation: "And the end of it that is inserted in the buttock should be undamaged (meaning not opened), as much as possible, narrowed to subtlety; and on one side there should be two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the size of the rays, and the larger ones should be smaller."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the animal bladder or sheep's wool medications are placed be round in shape, and its diameter should be approximately the size of a palm. Translation: "And let the bag for holding the medications derived from animal bladders or sheep's wool be rounded in shape; and its diameter should be roughly the size of a palm."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	It should be pierced with numerous cuts, just like it is rolled up; and the space between each cut should correspond to the size of the finger. Translation: "It should be pierced with numerous small cuts, as if it were rolled up; and the distance between each cut should correspond to the size of a finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert it into the cuts carefully and firmly, using a sterile needle that is as thin as possible, or cover them with something sterile; and adjust the bag accordingly. When the bag is inserted, it should be tight at the head of the incision between two distinct points with strong pressure; and then cauterize each cut. However, the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be warmed according to the tolerance of the patient; but be careful not to make it too hot or too cold. Translation: "And insert it carefully into the cuts using a very thin sterile needle, or cover the cuts with something sterile. Adjust the bag accordingly. When the bag is inserted, tighten it at the head of the incision between two distinct points with strong pressure; and then cauterize each cut. However, the quality of doing this is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be warmed according to the tolerance of the patient; but make sure not to overheat or chill it too much."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a bolster; and then apply the exterior of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fennel or similar substances. Then insert it gently into the buttock and have someone hold the bag and press it firmly, expelling everything that is in the incision until it is completely emptied from the intestine; and then remove the cautery and raise the patient's legs against the wall. Translation: "And place the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a bolster. Then apply the exterior of the cautery with oil, albumen of egg, mucilage of fennel, or similar substances. Gently insert it into the buttock and have someone hold the bag and press it firmly, expelling everything that is in the incision until it is completely emptied from the intestine. Then remove the cautery and raise the patient's legs against the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medication is not sufficient for that purpose, let it have as much as possible; and if it persists for an entire night, it is more beneficial in the end. Translation: "If the medication is not sufficient for that purpose, let it have as much as possible; and if it lasts for an entire night, it will be more beneficial."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you cauterize that in cases of intestinal disease and the solution of the liver, then you should reapply the cautery until it is healed. Translation: "However, if you cauterize that in cases of intestinal disease or the solution of the liver, then you should continue applying the cautery until it is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the buttocks, then let the incision be shallow and narrow, using those incisions that are used for children. Translation: "And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the buttocks, then make the incision shallow and narrow, using those incisions that are typically made for children."
De curacio de las plaguas.	The treatment of sores. Translation: "The treatment of sores."
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	It was already mentioned in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free individual, and I will now explain the treatment of them using more specific methods and medications according to their needs. Translation: "I have already explained in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for a free person, and I will now describe the treatment of them in more detail, using specific methods and medications according to their needs."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that sores are differentiated depending on what causes them and the location where they occur. Translation: "Therefore, I state that sores are differentiated based on what causes them and the location where they occur."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of sores that are made at various times can be due to injuries from stones, or cuts from a sword, or blows with a spear, a club, an arrow, or similar instruments. Translation: "And the causes of sores that occur at various times can be due to injuries from rocks, cuts from swords, blows with spears, clubs, arrows, or similar objects."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Plagues that are in the body's locations are similar to a plague that covers the head, neck, feet, abdomen, or back, and resemble those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And you recommend the cure for some plagues by stopping this reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore say that when a simple plague occurs in the head (not a fracture), consider: if it is due to the throwing of stones or something similar, and the patient has already tightened the bandage only and it is a large plague and you fear that the patient may have an abscess, you immediately cut and flush the cephalic, not delaying; and remove it according to the amount of strength of the blood (if there is no other reason prohibiting flushing), especially if the blood that comes out is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the flushing of the affected area be opposite, and protect the patient from overfilling, vomiting, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any reason for minimizing the food intake, then let it be diminished and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place a cushion over the plague if an abscess is formed, fill it with rose oil or wine that has been stabilized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of the abscess, place a cushion over the plague if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend keeping small.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, place some salve over it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is large or due to an injury and the lips are not properly aligned, adjust them with suture according to my recommendation for suturing them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has already exposed the bone and skin, and there is only a small suspension, you should cut it and take care of the wound with medicine and restore the skin to its place with bandages, and command the patient to avoid heavy foods: meat and similar items, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is rottenness in the bandage and it does not adhere to the bone, you should cut it all off and get rid of it, and care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicine, you should explore the artery, and if the unexplored artery is rotten, you should cut it with a spatula or cauterize it; and if necessity compels that what I said does not conform, then you should cauterize until the blood is released.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause is slight; therefore you should sprinkle this powder over them, as it will solidify before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of uncooked substances; grind everything thoroughly and sieve it; fill the plague with the mixture, tightly bind it with good binding until it adheres to it, and let it coagulate with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply it to the above with powder and release it when it is solidified, but do not remove it while it is still abscessed, for the medicine will not take effect until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes do this alone with caution, when you do not have olive oil and dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this operation on large plagues when it is necessary to place a cushion over them and they are tightened, and only recent plagues with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered it, and especially in summer, do not consider the position of this powder, but instead care for them with what I said before, placing over them some salves made from changed substances, or place over them flour powder mixed with water and honey until they are healed; and treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a plague occurs in the bone as a fracture and it is small, you should extract it with a tool.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you the cure for poisonous head fractures.
De las plaguas del col.	Of neck plagues.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple head plague.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, you should be careful if it is a nerve, do not engage in its care using anything that causes violent stiffness, such as zinc and vitriol, which harm nerves and counteract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of all fire on the wound, for the substance of nerves is sensitive and their continuity is with the brain, which is the most important part of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is someone who is cured by light medicines, such as when washed with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and also washed with sweet water and other remedies prepared in this manner, swallow moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or sew the lips of it, and apply healing powder inside until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or it occurs in the lower part that has become putrid, then perforate it in the most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already incised in the wound and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if it causes necessity at that moment.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all are incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the spine with sutures along the neck of the vertebrae without touching it; place it equal to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a decent structure, and allow it to rest for several days; and apply healing powder inside where there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has reached the bone in danger, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bones in it, remove all that you can; and what is not suitable for you, leave it until the wound heals, and separate it and the surrounding flesh should be relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula is made in the wound, then heal it with whatever comes to mind from its corresponding chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the neck wounds or similar ones when made between the shoulders and are made with a spear, sword, lance, or something similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a spear or sword wound, and sometimes deeply, then consider more if the wound is airy when the patient sighs; you should know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with the patient's blood, then pause in it at the first hour with powder, and do not strengthen it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and increases the patient, but rather pause with an attractive healing powder, and remove it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the wound is not accessible, then pause in the orifice of the wound with a piece of old rag to drain what comes out from the moisture; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is squeezed out runs where it is applied.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasms, tremors of bad heart or chest tightness occur in the patient, sometimes along with other good dispositions of it, then you should know that the wound is saved; and then heal it with warm water and other healing methods until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is excused and it remains open all the time, then you should know that a fistula has been made; heal it according to its corresponding chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is made by a spear or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then heal it with what comes before stitches, if large, or with powder, if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has caused danger to the bone and only fractured pieces remain, then you twist the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound heals, as the removal of them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, treatment is the same as what has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the large, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine protrudes, requiring more intense and delicate suturing.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to handle in another way, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the protrusion of them to their place immediately, because it opens up and becomes swollen, making the return to it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is medium-sized, because in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two types mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that the abdominal suture is according to four methods, but two of them are common and apply to the sutures of other wounds in the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other special sutures are applied to other wounds, but they are particularly suitable for abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you with exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, say that when the wound is small and there has been a cause of the intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then do one of two things: either because of the small disruption as mentioned before, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when that is the case, it is then necessary to heat the affected area and immerse a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or squeeze it into warm water, cyperium, spike, and bind it inside the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Occasionally, this condition presents with stiffness, and it is better for water alone to resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the inflammation resolved, then you wet the intestine with water in which is added elder and marshmallow, for by this the pain of it is alleviated slightly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestine is obstructed during this treatment, then you must cut the obstruction with a small instrument, with which are incised abscesses.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary treatment is better when it is appropriate that there is no cutting involved, and it should not be attempted without necessity and caution.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, cut its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The rounded part of it should be sharp and the other part should not be blunt, and the end should be thin, but not as thin as a needle, with an oblique edge slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the pustule is enlarged and comes out of the intestine, then its reduction should be in accordance with its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over that, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the obstruction is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on their back and place their legs apart as far as their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should raise their head and feet as far apart as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the obstruction is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and consideration immediately on that side where the pustule is located to be closer to it.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you must administer this in large and medium-sized pustules.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small pustules, apply what you have prepared and bring someone who is among your most trusted to administer it, who will hold the obstruction entirely with their hand and adjust the edges of it, and open one from that to the other where some cause of infection may be prevented.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suturing: take the needle (or a counting needle depending on the size of the pustule); and approach the edge of the obstruction of the finger, and draw the thread through one, but do not pass it through both ends of the knot, with both ends of the cord inside the incision, until you have made it penetrate from that side; and you have added two ends of the cord and two ends of the suture, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tie the thread with double knots around the needle, and sometimes from two sides at once, and bring together the edges and pustule by suitable approximation; and leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that area, and pass it through as was done with the first needle; and do not stop until all the contraction of the pustule is completed with needles.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles should be medium-sized between coarseness and finesse, for fine needles penetrate the flesh easily; and large ones are difficult to insert in the suture, and therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized in coarseness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is necessary that the needle be inserted in both ends of the suture not too much, so that the flesh is not penetrated easily and the pustule does not burst before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Do not prolong the suturing so that the pustule is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And pierce the edges of the needles so that the patient does not feel pain during their sleep; and press on the suturing all over the pustule, which should have the edges of the needles; and leave it in until you know that the pustule is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	This type of suturing with needles in this manner is more suitable for small pustules, as it only requires one or two needles around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second type of suture is common: and it is that you administer the four ends (two from the suture and two from the cord) in one application, with a needle wrapped in a fine thread in coarseness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When you have penetrated the four ends with the needle, reduce the needle from that same side from which you began, so that the thread enclosing the purulent part is pulled back from the pustule to the wound, so that the suture is like a stitch with fabric, where the fabrics are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Wait between each suture the thickness of a finger joint.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This type of suturing is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And so I sewed up the pustule that had occurred in a man's abdomen, which was injured by a spear, and the pustule bursting was larger than one palm, and it was near two palms from the intestine of the same location, and the obstruction was in the middle of the limb; and then I reduced that after the intestine had been out for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or more, and it was cured and healed; it survived for many years, and it remained as it was, in its disposition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by miracle, for I could not cure the wound because it was in a place where no remedy or medicine was known, only pressed on the wound twice a day and frequent washing with honey water healed it.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will say two types of sutures according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it begins with the herringbone stitch, and you insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	Therefore, when the needle pierces the skin and enters the body in accordance with the rules and the length of the entire body, it should leave the end of the cephalac (head) where the needle has entered; then, the needle should be made to penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside on the opposite extremity of the myriad (limb or organ).
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	Therefore, when you have made it penetrate (the needle), you should make it penetrate again in the same way on the opposite side of the myriad (limb or organ) from inside to outside; and leave the end of the cephalac (head) that is in this place, and let the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	Make it penetrate with that penetration, which you make penetrate into the head in the end of the myriad (limb or organ) on the inside of where everything is to penetrate.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	When you begin this insertion and move to the side that is on the other end of the head, take out the needle that has penetrated, and return it to the skin where it entered, and move the end of the myriad (limb or organ) on the other side with this extramitation (extraction); then take out the part of the skin from there.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this repeatedly and do it again, repeating this process until you close everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suturing method is that you sew with skin sutures, which sew the skin and fur, in this way you sew the head once from the end of the skin, and then let go of that other side until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suturing specifically that is called Gualla, and this is about its name and is recommended for it, is that you sew according to half according to the way in which some physicians sew, adding all the parts to their corresponding part as nature dictates; and apply the end of one side and the end of the myriad (limb or organ) to the other end of it, and this is done according to what I have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that you place the needle in the end of the myriad (limb or organ) near the outside of the part, and make it penetrate into the inside in one place, and leave two ends of the cephalac; and rotate the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the other two ends of the cephalac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate each one, and make each one penetrate from the inside to outside in the two ends of the myriad (limb or organ) on the opposite sides.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than common simple sutures, and it is the suturing that comes before the reminder (the next step).
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the Gualla sermon
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	Others also say that the ventral suture is corrected with two needles, so it is that you enter each one with a needle and begin from the incision of the needle that corresponds to you, and make it penetrate across the other side according to the suture of those who sew hearts together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than the other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of a wound (plaga) is judged according to other wounds (plagues).
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That is because when you achieve the recent wound with the patient's blood still flowing before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine (bude) and sew it properly and prepare it decently, then pause over the powdered carminative (encarnativa).
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over those ointments that are present with you until they make it hard and seal the needle holes, and let it heal head to toe; and take care of it in this way as with the healing of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you are not present with the medicine, pause over it immediately as it starts to drip, bracken, and change every two days, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, since you do not need another medication when the ailment is simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the ailment will spread to the main members, it is necessary for you to immerse wool in boiled oil of suitable quality or in rose oil and apply it on the circle of areas between the joints, and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, which continues for many days, then crystallize it with black violet-tea, and especially if the pus has reached the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one coming from large intestine heals more easily than the one in smaller intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the intestine known as "gegunu" does not receive healing from ailments that arise in it completely; and this is due to the great number of veins there, its large size, the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If the substance produced by the ailment is a membrane, and you obtain it promptly, reduce it according to your rule for reducing intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been some time and it turns green or black, then you should tighten it with a thread on the area that is affected by it, in order to obtain blood flow, because there are veins and arteries in the membrane.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And place the incision that is outside of the membrane and stop two ends of the thread hanging from the side of the wound, so that there is relief from the attraction of it, and you will release the tension of the membrane and the discharge of the pus from the ailment.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering ailments when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small disruption in the intestine, it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that which was ailmented in the abdomen with lance blows and was an ailment of the right side of the stomach, and the ailment was old and had formed a fistula, and it was treated with care and patience.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore I continued the healing of it since it was not confirmed in its healing, but continued to carefully treat it until the fire healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the area consolidated, so I examined the patient who had sustained an injury to his abdomen; and no one should fall ill due to this unfortunate accident, and he should continue with his usual diet and drink, and enter into baths and exercise.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Experienced individuals say that when a small ailment occurs in the intestine, it is necessary to tie it in this manner: take large grains of wheat; and adjust the two lips of the ailment and place one grain from among them with its mouth open over the two lips of the ailment; thus when you press on it and tighten its mouth, it separates from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Place another grain next to the first one and do not cease making grains until the entire ailment is covered.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Reduce it and secure the ailment with the grains; and leave the grains attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible to tie the intestine with a thin thread made from an animal's intestine since it is smaller in gauge; and you should take the extremity of this fine thread for the intestine, making sure it is well stripped, and tie the extremity of it with thread, enveloping it, and insert the thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, reducing the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of stitching with grains is not only by faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the ailment is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then you should not trust only in subtlety, but seek another method that can heal it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatise on ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every ailment and boil that becomes old and festered, and does not heal and exudes pus constantly without being drained, is universally called a fistula and we call it an ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula, in truth, is a hard, white nodule without pain and with a cavity similar to the cavity of a bladder stone; and for this reason it is called a hard ulcer, that is, bladder stone.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men who have excessive moisture, which flows from the arm; and the moisture is frequently expelled within certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture becomes moved, and it becomes little, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned the division, therefore when I speak of plagues, any ulcer that is not healed or in raw flesh, it is not that but one of these causes: one is due to insufficient blood supply in the body; or due to the corruption of the area; or because between it and the lips there is hard skin preventing natural healing; or because it is moving pus; or because the ulcer itself contains worms and the material sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for the cure of the ulcer; or when corruption attacks the region, and it is a pestilence; or due to the properties of the region such as Saragossa, where digestion is difficult due to the nature of the maladies, and the healing of abscesses is slow by nature; or because in it there is one bone, or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so it is necessary for me to tell you the treatment of a fistula which is made by surgical means with a knife.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You should know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; because those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed in this way such as hand and foot; and those are the ones that provide proximity to the main member and similar parts.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, this type of fistula is one of those difficult to heal diseases that does not receive treatment and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If one of these fistulas has such great depth that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its healing, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or an iron, and if the fistula is straight, then pierce it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, because lead, having the lightness of its body, is alleviated and curved along the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	But if the fistula has multiple openings, it is not possible for you to signify over it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then sterilize the wounds with a solution, since the moisture used to sterilize one area will contaminate other wounds and spread from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then carefully investigate whether you have a bone or nerve, and determine the shape of the fistula (long or short) or an abscess, and find out if it is a single or multiple fistulas and whether it is located in an area where all your strength, concentration, and treatment applied to the patient, and discover the cause of pain, then apply pressure with your hand on the spot, similar to the symptoms and causes of an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood by all those causes with certainty, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: namely, that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the surface, far from a joint or nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which you know.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula as previously mentioned in the narrative, remove any pus or corrupted flesh, and treat any new growths in the skin or tissue around the wound and let it heal once it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is deep and long, then according to tradition, you must incise it as deeply as possible, clean out all infected tissue, apply hot poultices wrapped in medicinal herbs, insert these into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an instrument.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And let it be done with the poultices for several days until the medicine penetrates and eradicates all the corruption in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with clean bandages until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal with this treatment, then you must cauterize it as recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is a bone and you are certain of this, then investigate it and dry it as recommended if you do not rule out any possible causes of veins or nerves or major limbs as mentioned previously.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered and there is any corruption or blackening in it, then you should remove it until all the corruption is stopped; and treat it with something that encourages healing until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healed and continues to bleed as before, then you should realize that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, you must investigate further and cleanse and disinfect it with the utmost care, using your final strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, that is good; and if not, then you should realize that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and in this case, there is no hope for it but to leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the infected bone is small and can be extracted, then you should remove it with fine forceps which are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If there are multiple bones involved, then carefully extract all of them, and do not overlook any potential causes of complications with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If there are any complications with the moisture or if the incision does not cause fear or error, then you should make an incision and drain any liquids or infected tissue, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then wait for the wound to heal a little so that it can be healed more easily, and leave it covered with flesh and liquid, and keep the wound from drying out, and compress the incision site that you have made during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If afraid, place a cushion on the spot submerged in boiling trissa oil, or a spot submerged in Egyptian anguent, or one of the bitter verts, for when those liquids boil, the bones are separated from their ablation, and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	However, if it is a large bone like the hip bone or thigh bone or similar to them, and what is corrupt is only its surface, then remove that with resin only behind where the blackness and corruption remain, and apply healing to the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	However, if what is corrupt is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and cut through the area where the corruption was found, and heal that within until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh, that you hold it and assist him in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Take a young man approximately thirty years old, to whom pain in the thigh occurs, and from within the limbs there is bad matter approaching towards the center of the body into the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess with large abscess, and it is not caused externally.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Therefore, the time was extended for that by the error of the doctors until the abscess opened, and materials came out from it, and its healing was delayed until the hernia became fistulated, and they made openings in the affected areas which all became purulent and the body's humidity.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after two years, many doctors tried to cure it without wisdom but with technique until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the hernia and the matter flowing from those openings through a large wound, and the body of that man was completely stabilized, and his skin was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I approached and probed all the openings, and found that they were reaching from all parts of the hernia.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I took a scalpel and made an incision into one of the openings, where I discovered a bone fragment, and found it rotten and corrupted; and a portion of the hernia was already rotted out to the mesocolon.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cut away what had been discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I knew that it was not in the bone but the corruption which had abscessed and was cut away, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied healing to the wound with long-lasting consolidating medicine, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I investigated and discovered further on the bone following the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I cut away what appeared to be of the corruption, and then I attempted to perform healing and restoration on it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I continued to investigate further and did not stop making small incisions in the bone piece by piece, and performed healing on it, but it was not restored until I made an incision around a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became well.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to investigate or section the operation on him, except for the loosening of his flesh and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, as he had experienced it at all times due to excessive bad syncope evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, it healed completely, and nothing was found in the bone area; and the positioning of him in his body and the return of his virtue were made good; and he was maintained in his positions and did not cause any harm to him by ambulation or any discomfort in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if a protruding bone in the body is already broken, then it is necessary for you to section it according to this method: and take a strong liquid and soak that at the end of the protruding bone, and order someone to extend it; and place the liquid of wool thicker than the first one over the bone tissue, and spread it over the skin surrounding it; and stretch the area by pulling the skin away from the edges, and you discover the skin over the area you want to cut so that the cut does not harm the skin.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a board or table under the bone properly, as when you do this it is not forbidden to cut the rotten flesh with a knife.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	It is necessary that the cut be made over the rotten area little by little, as if it is in the depression of the corrupt bone and does not appear on its surface, then perhaps the cut will have to be made at another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten but not protruding, then it is one continuous division with the other, and the corruption is in some part or parts of it, then you discover all the skin; and place a board under it, and cut that of the first division where the corruption continues until the cutting of the other division is also continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the lock corresponding to the place of corruption should be small, as has been said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is at a joint, incise the corrupted joint and saw the bone where it joins with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather trickery.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption by finding out which method it appears to you, and then incise and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let every remedy be corrected without causing harm to your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what incision tools and saws are for cutting these bones, which depends on the position of the bones, their preparation, and the coarseness and subtlety or smallness and rarity of the bones; therefore, you must prepare all types of operations with appropriate instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation concerns the type of instrument required for you; since you have extensive study and knowledge of the various methods of this art, and are familiar with the various symptoms of diseases, therefore you already know which instruments are appropriate for all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will learn at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones with which you will perform the procedure that you have experienced on others.
Forma de serra:	The form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	The form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	The form of a ray (bone cutter):
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this bone cutter be in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and let the points be like the points on a saw.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not necessary except when the joints are crushed or their opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of larger scissors (other):
Forma de razori menor:	The form of smaller scissors:
Forma de razori lat:	The form of lateral scissors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The correct translation is: "Another suitable form of incision should be made: the arch above and its sharpness of iron should be made, and the member below should be pierced with a lance decently."
Forma de lu:	Another suitable shape for the incision should be made. The arch should be formed above, and its sharpness from the iron should be made. The member beneath should be pierced with a lance decently.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a saw with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another suitable form for the scissors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another suitable shape for the curved-tip scissors:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Another suitable shape for small scissors resembling a clamp:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of incision knives used for cutting bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another suitable shape for smaller incision knives:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another incision knife, resembling a ray, with a serrated edge that is used in various locations to cut through the bone.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a saw that is suitable for cutting through bones (perforating).
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and it resembles all the causes that we spoke about scissors, incision knives, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision and bone sawing.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The endpoints can be narrowed or due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated the corruption but the cure does not work, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent cause, in that case, it is necessary to incise the affected member through the corrupted area, so that the patient can escape death or greater damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black before it burns out, or it may become swollen before the corruption enters into the same member and spreads throughout the body; therefore be cautious and incise it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	When the corruption is caused by poisonous striking of some causes, such as from a sea scorpion, viper, viperine or similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or striking is at the end of a limb, then you should cut the limb and do not give space for the corruption to enter into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you reach the hand, then you should cut off that part of the hand, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into your arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If it swells, then you should cut off the arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If the corruption spreads and reaches the joint, then it is the death of the patient; and administering another treatment to cure is as much virtue as possible.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	If the foot's corruption swells, then you should cut off that part of the foot at one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If it grows on the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it grows in the ankle, then you should cut off the leg at the ankle joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has reached the knee, it is not salvageable but dismissal, and you should let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting off a limb or sewing it is to tighten the ligaments at the place you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over that area; then extend one ligament on each side, and extend another ligament above it; separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make an incision or sew it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is necessary to place linen cloth over all the incisions to prevent any injury to the site, and bring the wound to the patient with a fitting dressing and cauterized aposteme.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs during the operation, you should cauterize the site with caution, or place some restraining powders on it to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And tie the affected limb with linen cloth at an appropriate place, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that in the case of a man suffering in his foot, you administer the treatment which I also recommend, which is called "negro en el pie" due to its resemblance to burns caused by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption initially occurs in the patient's affected part, spreading throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore, prepare the man by applying more of the treatment as soon as possible to reach the affected limb with its intensity of pain and heat, and cut off that foot at the joint, and heal it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Over a long time, that methodical corruption occurs in the hand as indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And therefore, I advise you to perform a treatment that removes that excess from the hand using appropriate medications for cleansing the body of it; and do not let the excess continue in one hand without spreading to the other hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient called me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the recovery of the excess, and instead I feared the amputation of his hand would be fatal, since the virtue of the patient was in decline.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he lost hope in me, he returned to his homeland and informed me that the patient had prepared himself and cut off his entire hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not added to this narrative except as an aid for treating this ailment, and as a sign that it should be understood and acted upon accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Cure with sennas and the quality of clysters using medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	If an abscess occurs in any fleshy limb and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, then break and perforate it, release the pus from it, leave the area as if it were a vessel, cover it with thin linen fabric, and do not allow secondary corruption to occur; nor does it press on bone or nerve or ligament. This is called a sinus, and is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until corruption begins in any limb, it is called a fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is to cut off that covering completely, as if it were rolled up, and especially when it has been thinned out and made like fabric, and make sure it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the covering will stick and that the corruption has not yet been achieved by secondary consequence, and there is a swelling in the covering, then you should treat it with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And since you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes from it has a foul smell, then clisterize it with the Egyptian medicine which is oil, wine, garlic, crushed into portions, mixed together, placed in a vessel, and poured over fire until the medicine becomes thin and reaches a specific point of boiling.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take the necessary amount and dissolve it in water and honey; clisterize the sinus with it, strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine there for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract it carefully; do this for as many days as necessary until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is gone.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Sometimes it is cleansed with water and ashes when the previous medicine is not available; in this case, take ashes from vinegar, put them in water, let it boil, and then strain it. Use this solution to cleanse the sinus until you are confident that it has been completely closed off.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	When the patient is not tolerant of the Egyptian medicine or water and ashes, then clisterize it with a mixture of water, honey, and crushed garlic, or with wine and honey mixed together. In this case, honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the sinus sticky, particularly when it contains an excess of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have done this for several days and are confident that the sinus has been closed off, then clisterize it with a solution that promotes new tissue growth in the area.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take defyfinkon oil, dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar of rosin, or clisterize it with other medications and remedies that have properties I have previously written about in the treatise on remedies.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the opening of the sinus is narrow and the clisterium cannot be inserted, then widen it gradually with a small iron tool, stopping when it becomes wide enough to insert the clisterium. Cover the affected area with Egyptian or basilica oil until it is fully dilated.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the opening is wide, sew together the lips of it and leave the remaining quantity inside the clisterium (medical instrument).
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the opening of the sinus from which the arm extends upward between the thighs is wet, dry it at the base where it originates so that the arm can run outside, because when the arm is constricted by a sinus, flesh is generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to dry the sinus around the bone at its base as you wish, then perform the preparation necessary for moving the limb so that the arm comes out easily according to your ability and without being hindered by any cause of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medications and place them on the sinus as appropriate, so that they may be pressed onto it with a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Make the cloth large enough to cover the entire sinus; then insert scissors into the center of the sinus opening and make a wide, shallow cut along its length. Place a piece of lion's oil-soaked cloth over the incision, covering it completely with the length of the cut, and leave it in place at a distance from the sinus opening to relieve arm pain and not press the cloth too tightly against the skin for more than a few days at a time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	That which is over the sinus opening should always be moistened, so that what is inside the arm can flow out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To determine if what runs from the arm is more or less, digestible or indigestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your treatment continues in this manner and the matter that is discharged from the sinus has adhered to the orifices, or it becomes adherent, then you must loosen or remove it on the third day, and when you have removed the plaster, change the bandage and renew the salve.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinus has small and subtle cavities, do not despair of adhesion because the healing approaches, for some men have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and it is opposite in those.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus becomes more than five days indigestible, you must know that the sinus does not adhere; if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then you should adjust in drying of the medications, and if the medications are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried like diaphetic ointment when excess moisture is added.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last remedy, which is curative, is to take diaphetic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and have an ancient antidote in its substance, and apply it with it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	When that is not available, use diaphetic ointment, honey that is thickened, and apply it; or take myrrh, aloe, and sulfur, grind everything into powder over the hot fire, apply it to a linen cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; apply the powdered mixture with the thickened honey, and then strengthen the latter over the linen cloth.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Sometimes it is administered with long-term aristolochia and the juice of this celestial plant (this refers to the celestial plant) and centaury flour, and use these simple ingredients or adjust them, grind them and sift them, and powder it over the recommended honey; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you must know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and make an examination of the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then cure it with a fistula treatment as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment for paronychia and nail abrasion, digit addition, and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises from the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and it can be strong in other places, and when prolonged and its cure is expensive, it becomes an abscessed abscess or corrupted, and it eats away at the root of the nail, completely corrupting it, and its corruption spreads to the bone beneath it, causing a foul odor, and the tip of the finger turns black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	So when you have that with what has been said in the division and it does not conform to your treatment, then you must incise with iron all the superfluous matter remaining from the nail and cauterize the wound with it, as cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is good and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail press the flesh inward at the sides, and it begins to hurt and swell there, then you must stop a fine needle under the edge of the nail that pierces the flesh, apply pressure on it and cut the flesh with ease, apply medicine over what remains of the flesh from corrosive substances until it is completely absorbed; and heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already reached the bone, you must incise the bone and extract it, as nothing can be healed when the bone is rotten.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the corruption and rottenness move towards the finger, you must incise it in one of the knuckles according to its memory, and heal it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail is struck or crushed and causes violent pain, then at the beginning you should anesthetize the patient, and cut the nail with a flat chisel along a transverse section from top to bottom, ensuring that the incision does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, as this will cause the patient intense pain and may lead to the growth of excess tissue in the area; and heal the wound with a substance that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	A large, well-built man, who is strong in flesh, bones, or nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The joint is located at the root of a large man, or it originates in a large man's bones.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	If the joint originates in a large man's bones, it is not harmful; but if it originates in the joints, it causes great harm.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	If they originate in flesh, the sections are light, and you should cut them with a lancet.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	If they originate in the root of a joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, avoid its abscessing.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it originates in bones, you must cut the flesh first, using a round incision into the bone, then use an appropriate saw and cure that to heal.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation that occurs in joints between the muscles observed or due to the nature of the man who was born this way, or due to consolidation of wounds or burns, or similar, therefore it is necessary to cut that consolidation until the joint returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Place cloth soaked in red oil between their swollen tissues to prevent them from consolidating lightly, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if there is consolidation in the palm of a joint, then you must cut that consolidation as necessary and according to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Incisions made without reason are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are varices, and they are large, swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluity, which move in the limbs of the body, and their major occurrence is in the legs, especially those who travel, work, and carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you must administer purge of the body with black bile several times with strong evacuation, and apply bloodletting from the basilica vein to the patient.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of these [varicose veins] with iron is according to two methods: the first is that it should be cut and black blood drawn out, or the second method is that the vein should be elevated and everything extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is wrapped with hot water until the black blood becomes thin and resolved, which is foul from the vein, and then the patient's leg is straightened above the knee joint to the ankle joint with a bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places, making a wide incision, and the black blood is raised with the thumb of the patient's hand from below the vein upwards and downwards until the desired amount and times have been reached, and this will remove the power of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And bind that up, and order the patient to abstain from foods causing black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and you notice this in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them [varicose veins] is according to this method: if there are movements in the leg, immerse it in hot water and bandage the leg with warm water until it becomes swollen and the veins overflow; or exercise it with strong exercise, if hot water is not available, until the limb is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And cut the cunune (codena) in the correct position of the vein by making a long incision or short, depending on whether you want to cut the dorsum or the sole of the foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And open the cunune with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it is felt, and you must be aware that when you see it reddening, it is approaching blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, when you notice that the cunune becomes white like a cord, evacuate.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And place it downwards, the root towards the area to be elevated and displaced from the cunune, and suspend it with a piece of lion's hair.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And make another incision next to that incision for three fingers, and strip the cunune from above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And raise that and incise the lower incision towards the sole of the foot, and remove it and raise it until it is extracted through the second incision, and remove it from the incision above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until it is completely extracted from the upper or lower incision of all the incisions, and then close that incision.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and elevate it, insert a double-pointed needle with strong thread and tie it off, or insert the root downwards and rotate your hand all around until it is displaced.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and this will harm the patient by that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that is completely displaced, place a cloth soaked in wine and red oil over the wound, and treat it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is contracted with curvature at the partition, which is an enclosure at the parts, and not as it should be according to what we have said, then it is necessary that you cut through that entire curvature of the partition and the places of enclosure of it, and suspend it with sutures within until you lift it up completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not cut into the vein and injure it, for it will be difficult to lift it up, and use your prudence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape the incision near where life has been severed:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape the incision for plundering (orp):
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Make the incision not too close to the vein or sharp at its end so that it does not injure the vein, and it should be of a wide flexibility, for if it is too thin, it will cut into the vein due to its thinness; having excessive thickness like we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hips, such as the Ategi (Aegean) in Arabian lands and in the dry and arid lands of India where there is little vegetation and no grass or herbs.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And a strong vein is born in other parts of the body besides the hips.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its reproduction is due to rotting, which comes from the intestine, such as snakes, worms and scabs and worms breeding between the intestine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the onset of this condition is swelling in the hip, and the location becomes inflamed; and from there, the vein starts to ooze like a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	When the end appears (of the fetus), it is necessary that you cover that with a lead weight of about one dram, weighing between two and three drams, and hang it down from the woman's thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And for as many days as there is any cause at the partition outside, cover it with lead and leave it like that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the mot (disorder or disease) persists, then you should incise a part of it and cover the rest; do not incise it too deeply until it is outside, for if you incise it too deeply, it will be contracted and enter the flesh and cause abscesses, pustules and ulcers in that location.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the body without any remaining cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it has appeared in some men who are as tall as five palms and have already reached twenty palms in length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is incised at the time of its treatment, insert the lance into the wound and pierce it deeply with a long lance through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer purgatives to the location for several days with medicines; and take care of it with abscess treatment.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has rampant motions (growths), and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, it causes many abscesses, and is born from each abscess separately.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore, treat it as we have said in the division and with what was previously mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the incision of worms generated under the skin, this condition is called cow disease (bovine illness).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called cow disease in some places because it often affects cattle and is a small worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, which grows throughout the body and rises and falls, and is manifested through the sensation of pain in each member until it ruptures the intestine and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of it is due to putrefaction of certain humors, such as when worms, snakes, roundworms, and parasites occur in the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of the malice of it, since when it goes through the body and reaches the head, it is carried to the nose, then it immediately invades it and destroys the nasal cavity, and this causes many observations.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, one must not do so without knowing its movement and appearance, and therefore it is necessary to strengthen what is above it and below it tightly and compress it strongly, and then dry it and remove it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is embedded in the flesh and does not rot, you should wait until it emerges, then you must cauterize with fire on the area where it dwells. The main cause that is feared is its corruption which corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that being carried to the head near the nose, you should strengthen above the eyebrow with strong compression, and dry it, and remove it; and it is necessary for the patient to use cleansing of the body with medicines that evacuate corrupt humors, and guard oneself from foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From incision over the illness of the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafar" in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is confined to one member from another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have seen that as I advised.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were summoned to a sick woman in a village, and you discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was left open for an hour, I saw that inflammation swell like worms rising to this point, more slowly than it should be, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that area settled in the muscle and remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then it moved to the other body towards the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Then I advised you to turn it over the entire body as I saw it, and it was very astonishing at its change and the speed of one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I had already seen that in the past in the most similar cases, but I have seen many times when pain is transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not with the nose as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	I did not think that it was because of that, but rather because the woman was old, where old people have dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this case, it appeared to my senses that the putridity was transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with weakened veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, do not do it as I said at the nose, but rather strengthen above it lightly and dry it until the putridity is expelled, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in your noses, then you cure it by cleansing the body and evacuating putridity, and singe it with foul-smelling ointments and serapion ointment and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of thorns.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Thorns are various depending on their species, and according to the places in the body where they occur, because of their diversity, some have large points, small, concave, blunt, which are solid ones; some have three angles, and those with tongues, and those that are prickly.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is second to the members and the swellings in which it happens according to two manners: for the members or are principal members, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the kidneys, the intestines, the hernias, the bladder, and their likes; and therefore when a disease appears in one of these members and signals of death appear to you, I recommend that you avoid extraction of that arrowhead in those cases where death is imminent in the person in the greatest dispositions, and when such symptoms do not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And concerning the symptoms of the brain, when an arrow penetrates the bone and exits through the skull, for it often causes violent bleeding, blindness, dizziness, fever in the head, inflammation and fever of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, vomiting of bile, the word is quickly lost and the voice destroyed, and pus oozes from the wound site, which resembles white moist powder similar to ash and watery discharge like that of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if such symptoms appear to you, then you should refrain from treatment and extraction of the arrowhead unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the symptoms of an arrow in the heart, which is near the left nipple, and feels hard when embedded, not empty; and the movement of the arrow is similar to that of a pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and there is chilliness at the site, sweating, and fainting; therefore know that death approaches.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms of an arrow in the lungs are characterized by sputum from the wound that is foamy and bloody, and vessels near the neck become congested, and the color of the patient changes, and they expel a great amount of breath and ask for warm air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm, which is located in the lower abdomen, then pain is characteristic of small ribs and is accompanied by severe and violent pain and heavy breathing, but all other parts of the muscles are not affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be foul-smelling pus from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and is embedded, there will be a tear or opening in the wound, and intestine, hernia, or other tissue that is torn, and there is no hope of healing from extracting the arrowhead.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and comes out through urine, and there is some cause for the rupture outside, then pain is severe on the patient, you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other members such as the head, neck, jaw, shoulders, adjoining parts, spinal column, vertebrae, pelvis, and their similar body parts are saved if the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery, and the arrowhead is not poisoned.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that you know the nature of these arrows, which signifies the treatment for them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man, an arrow strikes the lacrimal gland of the eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from another side, removing the gray matter of the bone, and he recovered without harm to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew that struck him in the root of his eye, removing the eyelid with it, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained except for a small tip attached to its shaft, and it was a sharp Turkish arrow without iron heads.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered well, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man that struck him in the jaw, an Arabic arrow with iron heads, and it was submerged in his jawbone; and so I cut it into two pieces, and then I carefully removed it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the stomach, thinking he would die from it; and since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I cut into the arrow and threaded it, and he recovered, and there was no further harm to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man who had an arrow in his back, and the wound had healed over time, and after seven years, the arrowhead emerged from the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had an arrow in her stomach, and the wound was healed on the inside, and there was no change in her condition over time, and the woman suffered no harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had an arrow in his face and the wound had healed, but the arrowhead was broken off, causing no further pain or similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king who had been struck in the middle of his nose and it had declined a little on the right side, but the entire arrowhead was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	You were summoned to the cure of him approximately three days after the arrow shot.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I examined the wound of the arrow, and it seemed narrow; then I inquired about it with delicate touch, but did not feel it; however, he felt a prick below the right ear, so I suspected that the prick was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	I spread the area with a plaster containing attracting and digestive properties, convinced that the area would open up to me so that I could see where the arrow was, so that I could cut it off.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no accident happened in the area that suggested the arrow had reached that spot; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, but nothing happened; the wound healed in the meantime, and the patient felt the arrow in his nose after many days, telling me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until a pus opened, and with delicate touch I probed that area, and found the tip of the arrow thinly adhering to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to me clearly, and I waited for it for a time of up to four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound was enlarged, it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, and I left them there without them moving, then I did not cease probing and ingeniously working on it with various methods, until one day, using instruments made for this purpose, I took hold of it with descending forceps as described at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered completely without any complication.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows, which you should take note of and understand what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the difficulties in it are not understood with simple narration or reading that book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsman understands little by much, and from what is present he understands what is absent, and he recognizes new operations and new instruments as a consequence of foreign causes in the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they have been shot except by two methods: either because of attraction to the place entered, or because of the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The arrow that is shot into a fleshy location or proceeds from a fleshy area and is shot and lost.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if the time of the shot is not known, it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the surrounding tissue can soften and the attraction and its exit are relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it has been shot into bone and you do not know the time, leave it for some days and apply pressure and movement to it every day, and it will be lost.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not know the time of the arrowshot, it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in all directions with a fairly sharp tool until the area is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is in the bone of the skull and has passed through one of the cavities of the brain, and it appears in the patient with some of those symptoms that I have mentioned, refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it until his life is equalized for about some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain cavity, death will not be delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is only in the bone of the chest and does not enter the brain cavity, but the patient remains for some days without any symptoms of those mentioned, then you should ingeniously work on attracting the arrow and the surrounding tissue.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	However, if it is not deeply embedded and does not require extraction, you should administer various treatments around the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	However, if the arrow is embedded in the chest and cannot be felt, you should probe it with touch, and if you feel it, you should shoot it out with some suitable tools for attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot go over it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and this is neither bone, nerve nor vein, then you should make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ear with those that should be kept, you should cut the flesh around it in all directions using all the ingenuity you can; and work on it, if you cannot go over the exit of the flesh by breaking the eardrums and twisting them until you succeed.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, you should use twisting with your hand and forceps in all directions until it obeys; and work delicately to avoid breaking the arrow and making its extraction difficult, using subtle techniques for easy attraction of it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot handle it at that time, then leave it for several days until the surrounding parts can be prepared, and then repeat it when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is bleeding from the wound, then administer what has been said for its treatment in its own chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Be careful with the incision of vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer all means to prevent the suture from escaping; do it gradually, peacefully, slowly, and firmly as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, tie the suture so that the patient is as in the figure according to which you must sew the suture there, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But sutures that are missing on the opposite side of the other part, or that have already been cut from one part to another, or are swollen outside the suture line due to the part above the adjacent skin and sometimes protruding; in this case, you cut it; and make the incision according to the amount that the forceps take; then grab it, because it is made easily.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you should twist the blade against it until the suture penetrates the bone, and expand it to make room for it, and then pull it out.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if it does not protrude, leave it for several days and repeat it until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the thread of the suture is in that area, then push it back with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the thread is cut and you want to administer pressure, insert your finger and push it in if it is hard, using a hollow spoon to guide it into the concavity of the suture and then push it back with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the suture is concave, you should push it in with a strong instrument into that area, because the suture will be relieved by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the suture is tightened, you must compress all the flesh around it if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the suture is caught on the leg, abdomen, bladder, chest, or side and it is possible to cut it, then cut it and guard against incision of vein or nerve, pull it out, and sew the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps for suturing:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their tips are like a bird's beak, made with scissors when they grab the suture so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of these are made various types, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size and thickness of the suture, as well as the width of the wound and the tension of the tissue.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the concave pressing tool for this convex tip is like a bird's beak, which will relieve the entry of the suture into it and push the hard suture.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the pressing tool for hard tips:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod to relieve the entry of the concave suture into it and push the hard suture with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins to be phlebotomized are usually .xxx., Of these, there are 16 in the head. There are two pulsating veins, which are near the ears, called "auricular"; there are two plants that are in the two temples visible; and there are two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes called "lacrimal"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the end of the nose; and there are two grooves that are on the neck; and there are two veins that are on the upper lip; and there are two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins called "angular"; and there are two veins under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins to be phlebotomized in the arms are .v., When discussing those [veins], one is cephalic, and it should be let loose the latissimus dorsi; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is deaf, and is a minor vein, and is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is stopped in the latissimus dorsi, and is named "cephalic", and common people call it "vein of the abdomen"; the one of the arm, and is passed over the elbow, and is that in which bloodletting is performed, and is that which appears above the point for a visible appearance; and saphenous, and is the vein which is between the named auricle and the smallest digit, and it is found in two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the leg and thigh there are three veins: one of them is that which follows the curve of the outer border of the latissimus dorsi; and the second is saphenous, and its place is below the thigh of the latissimus dorsi; and the sciatic, and its place is below the thigh of the latissimus silvestre; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juxtaposition of the veins that are near the ears is remedy for ancient catarrhs, emigraines, and scalp sores.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And as for the bleeding of those veins that I recommend to you: it should be done with the patient's head shaved, and the patient's head should be washed in the occipital region where both veins are found covered by a large cloth with good friction; then tightly bind the patient's neck with a bandage so that they appear at two places on each side of the head; and you must seek those with your fingers, and if you feel their pulses with your fingers, here is a sign to try it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical knife that is incisive, and insert it below the vein into the hollow of the neck until blood comes out.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand with the vein and the neck towards the divisions above, and incise the vein with an incisive incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be adjusted to two fingers or around that amount; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And tightly bind it with pulvils and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already, at the beginning of this treatise, there is an incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arteries that are in the temples, the remedy for migraine, old and bad, and chronic optic nerve disease and disorders of the liver with acute excesses discharged to the eyes is bloodletting.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of bloodletting those is as follows, which I recommend to you: tightly bind the patient's neck so that they appear at two places on each side of the head where their pulses can be felt with your fingers; and then you must test it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then lift the neck over the vein to the divisions above, as indicated by your fingers, and insert the bloodletting tool incisively below, and elevate the vein upward; and incise it in the same way as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow out according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And loosen the patient's neck, and place your fingers on the vein for an hour, and then place your hand on that area and bind it with pulvils and tighten it strongly above, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already, the reminder of those (bloodletting procedures) has been made, and their incision, and their attraction has been mentioned at the beginning of the treatise.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the remedy for bloodletting of the vein on the forehead is similar to that of the cephalic vein for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and sores with a foul odor.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the lancet operation on him is as you recommend, so it is that the patient strengthens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and take the instrument which is called the lancet, this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the head of the lancet on that vein and perform it with a downward or other cause in its method, and let the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then release the patient's perforation and hold it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes an incision is made with a lancet, but it's not necessary that the lancet be of sharp point as other lancets, it should rather be blunt, and make the incision transversely, because the bone is close and strong, so the lancet would easily break when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Moreover, the advantage of the two veins that are in the tear-ducts of two eyes, due to the inflammation of the eyes from heat and scabies on the eyelids, and for facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the lancet procedure is that the patient strengthens his neck with a bandage and then make the incision there, you should stand over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the lancet incision should be made transversely along a short length and only a little bit, since there is not much flesh in that area; if the lancet is too thin, it can easily break at its end.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let the blood flow for as much as necessary, stop over that area, hold it with a new cloth and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Moreover, the lancet of the nose vein is used for acute fever and violent sweating, as well as facial diseases, migraines, and heat or inflammation that occurs on the face, especially in the elderly.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the lancet procedure on him is that the patient strengthens his neck and places his left hand near his nose, takes the thin long lancet and puts it in the middle of the nasal cavity where it does not appear to the touch, because the vein does not become visible there, and blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is necessary that you gradually move your hand with the small lancet and let blood flow as needed; then bind it with a new cloth, because it will be restored easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Moreover, the advantage of the lancet procedure on both sides is for constriction of the glands and the beginning of leprosy and many other diseases and swellings, as well as impetigo and destructive ulcers such as erysipelas.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the lancet procedure on those areas is that the patient holds each one in his neck with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, while he lies on a stretcher.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And make the incision along the long vein with a wide thin lancet little by little; and let out blood according to measured quantity or as needed, as it is observed; and then make the other vein look similar.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And release the bandage and hold both veins with moderate pressure to prevent the patient from being overheated and let them rest in a warm place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The advantage of the lancet procedure on the veins in the neck is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, destructive ulcers and cracks, as well as destructive ulcers that are in the nose and its surrounding area.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the lancet procedure on those areas is that you face the patient, hold his neck with a bandage and turn his lips aside, observe both veins of which one is from the right lip and the other from the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkening of both sides, and this is because in the area of those veins there are small black veins; then make an incision for each side.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt about which one, then make an incision on the larger one and from the pus that will appear.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Make them look similar to the veins in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is common to make an incision on both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And the advantage of two veins under the tongue is to use lancet procedure on the jugular for heat that occurs in the throat, disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of lancing those areas is that the patient lies between your hands, raises his tongue and looks down, observe from one side of him the vein and from the other side the vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then lance each one; and make sure you do not press too hard when lancing them because there are arteries below those areas.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are lanced in the neck are in those which it is common for all men, and the lancing of them is performed in two ways, either with a sharp lancet coated with myrtle or olive oil to make it thin; or cauterize with a surgical knife, called alnisil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This sentence means: "And this incision is what is suitable for section, and of those is special and subtle according to the size of the veins and according to the narrowness of those." (English Translation)
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The guessed translation for the given sentence in English is: "The type of incision that should be made is the one suitable for lancing, and this is special and delicate according to the size of the veins and according to their narrowness." (English Translation)
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The given sentence means: "The veins that are swollen and appear thick should be opened with concave incisions filled with coarse blood, and the veins containing clotted blood should be treated similarly." (English Translation)
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	The given sentence means: "And this is the method of lancing olive-shaped incision:" (English Translation)
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	The given sentence means: "And this lancing is smaller and has subtle end shape, and it should be used for lancing of subtle veins containing delicate citrus-colored blood." (English Translation)
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The given sentence means: "Moreover, lancing of the basilic vein which is one of the three veins: it drains the blood from illnesses that are in the back and neck, and those of the legs and abdomen." (English Translation)
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	The given sentence means: "And it is necessary for the person performing lancing, when lancing that vein, to be careful and cautious, as there is an artery nearby, and if it is missed or incorrectly punctured during the lancing, it will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is essential not to lance that vein with a pointed lancet, but rather with a small incision like an opening." (English Translation)
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	The given sentence means: "And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary that you find another one or seek one of its branches; or lance in the location where the end of the arm finishes, as this is clear; and cut it with a small incision like an opening, as we have said." (English Translation)
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The given sentence means: "Moreover, if you wish to perform lancing of the wrist, then it is necessary to do it in front of the bend of the arm, touching the area between where you know the location of the hands, and place your hand over it with a cloth; and place the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a small opening like we have said; and be careful that the percussion hits the area for a space near the artery." (English Translation)
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	The given sentence means: "And when you see, as the limb is tense, inflate in the area that you have marked with a cloth, then this inflation is of the artery, and therefore avoid it." (English Translation)
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	The given sentence means: "And if you see blood flowing from the lancing similar to that of a child's urine, and the blood is thin red, then you should know that it is from the artery; and you should wait and keep your hand over it for a long time; and remove your hand when the blood is separated, as it is often separated, and then stretch the arm and leave it." (English Translation)
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The given sentence means: "And take care of the patient from the discharge of that place, and be careful with it, and do not disturb it for several days until it is healed." (English Translation)
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	The given sentence means: "Moreover, if the blood is not separated and you do not have medicine to treat it, then you should cut the artery if it appears; as its end is contracted, and the blood separates; or you should take a fistula, make it, and take one of them and stretch it over the location of the vein with narrowness between the limb and pulses until the next day." (English Translation)
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	The given sentence means: "And if the blood is separated, it's good; and if not, you should treat it with what was mentioned before regarding the location of the powders that cause bleeding." (English Translation)
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The given sentence means: "And the bleeding of that blood is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the wrist limb." (English Translation)
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The given sentence means: "Moreover, lancing of the dark vein is beneficial as it drains the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; since it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said." (English Translation)
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The given sentence means: "It is necessary for the person performing lancing to be cautious during lancing of that place, as there is a nerve nearby; and if it touches the nerve during puncture of the lancet and damages it, it will cause paralysis, and recovery will be difficult, and some damage may not heal completely. This nerve appears with sensation after a few days, and if it is hidden and subtle in some people and is not noticeable, then you should wait for the lancing with a small opening, and avoid the nerve using your strength." (English Translation)
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you make the vein longer.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and provides relief to headache sufferers.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Therefore, for this specific purpose, if you want to perform phlebotomy on the olive vein or the myrtle vein; as it is safe from all veins, as there is no artery or nerve nearby.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is important to note that during phlebotomy, you must ensure that the puncture does not pierce the skin too deeply, and look for an easier location, and not be careless if not located with the initial percussion test that is performed on that specific vein.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is very dangerous to perform an incision in some men if they are not initially phlebotomized, but do not neglect the incision itself.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of phlebotomy at that location and its associated complications must be considered, for which it is necessary to think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you must know that phlebotomy is only administered for the sake of health preservation and hope for improvement and caution against illness, and that it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, such as cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals when there is a sign of congestion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	The phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least one day after three hours have passed since the previous meal.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy that is administered should only be done when it is convenient and necessary, either during the day or at night, at any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It is important that the child should not be phlebotomized before they reach twelve years of age, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth to seventh month, and elderly people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	If someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, it is necessary to empty their intestines with leon clyster before the phlebotomy if they have a fissured wound there, so that the veins do not fill with excess fluid during phlebotomy of the wounds, which are clean, and that this does not affect the main organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Phlebotomy should not be performed on patients with nausea or vomiting, nor on those suffering from illness or intoxication until they have recovered, nor on patients with edema, and phlebotomy should be feared near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, and multiplication of the intestines and labor and exercise during fasting or vigils and for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider the subtlety of fluids before performing phlebotomy if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medications if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Enter the bath if there is no prohibition, or perform exercise for the sake that the blood be thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Stop phlebotomy of the feet during the day, especially around third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Ensure that the foot is kept safe on that day from all animal and physical mishaps, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all labor and excessive pain, labor and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And on the following day, make sure to be present with the causes of which men often use aromatics and perfumes and balms similar to those according to the degree of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the one of the patient who must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And pull out your arm and touch it with your hand three times or more, the phlebotomist will grip it tightly and tie it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The constriction should be moderate, as excessive contraction or constriction with excess fluid, you should prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with dilution, in which case you should prohibit the heartbeat of blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And regarding the constriction, it is important to touch the patient's hands between them before the veins are inflamed and declared by feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist should anoint his phlebotomy needle with a little bit of antique oil properly; and the patient's left hand should be placed on top of the vein, in the location where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein rises slightly, and the percussion test is softened because some veins are like cords fleeing, in which case the phlebotomy must be delayed until they fill up with vitality, and of these is one that has a lot of windiness and when you press on it, it contracts and the phlebotomist is discovered; and the phlebotomy should not pierce the vein, and if it pierces, it is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be firm and vigilant in all of these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Approach the flank incision, but if the vein is swollen in a certain place, that's good; otherwise, you should wait for another swelling to appear in that location or hurry up if the location isn't affected (posthumous).
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is affected (posthumous) or the patient is sick, you should leave it for a day or two and do not apply a ligation, because a strong ligation will attract pus, or enter in bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And approach the lancing if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and it flows thin blood that you fear does not flow as much as desired, then you should lance the abscess in that place according to right procedure and make an incision slightly larger than the opening and do so quickly before the location becomes affected, because a location that is affected in many men requires little opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it is already affected (posthumous), do not lance over there, because you have no excuse for it; and wait over some part of the oil hole, because it relieves the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in that location to use olive oil than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer an oil hole in all abscesses where you must prohibit the flow of blood, and do so thyriacum and sage when it is paused over one of those on the location, because the blood becomes thin and turns into pus when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a large abscess is generated in the location of the lancing, because many swellings happen, and especially that which is not blood-soaked but only that swelling, or in the opening of the vein little, and then you take cotton, place it on the location soaked with sponge infused with water and salt, slightly scalded, and hold it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And you should do this next to the coagulated blood of that vein with complement from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the location for several days with some blackness or greenishness, do not observe it; and if you want, wait over any cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or any cause of mint juice or chalk or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And because many swellings happen, abscesses and elevations you should lance in the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore keep your hand on it (the affected area), and if you need to press it, you should keep your compression on it, the elevation is bad and evil; then be careful that you wait over any cause of what has been said, because a strong flow will come from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster with what is stiffening, so that the location becomes hardened, and take care of it with the other treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to draw blood from every man according to the amount of its potency and according to the color that prevails in the blood according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, you should let it settle until it turns red (coagulates); and similarly, if you see it thick, you should let it settle until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you should keep its sharpness until it subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	It is necessary for a healthy and strong man who needs bloodletting in one swelling, that the incision of the vein be enlarged and the abscess be lanced.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in a weak person, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to draw blood from him too much and often, and that the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best treatment in vein lancing is cross-section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of lancing is safe from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more permissible and safer than lancing according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in the case where fainting is common, you should perform the lancing, and it is necessary to cure him before the lancing with a small piece of bread infused in milk-grain wine or simple oxymel scalded; and draw blood from him every three or four swellings.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a swelling due to congestion, you should take before the lancing a drink infused with myrrh syrup or scented honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or aromatic syrup that has a pleasant smell.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs due to excessive blood, you should perform the lancing, and it is necessary to drink water of meat and a subtle-scented syrup; and use aromatics and place his feet in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wants to swell his arm and dissolve his blood according to the next swelling, it is necessary for him from whom lancing is for great evacuation, and its potency is weak, that he evacuates little blood every day, as much as the potency in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Whoever wishes to amputate their arm and let blood twice, and their body is strong, then do it about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body against its natural inclination, it must be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Whoever has a body in which blood is already scalded and inflamed, causing fever, it must be bled on one occasion and a large amount of blood must be drawn and the incision should be enlarged until fainting occurs. However, you must observe all conditions for phlebotomy and keep your hand over the pulse of the blood to prevent death from fainting, as many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is necessary that when you wish to cut off the arm and evacuate blood on another occasion, with the orifices of the veins closed and the flow of blood being difficult, that you press hard on it with great force and stretch it slightly, as this is not good.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it until it can be phlebotomized again; or leave off the phlebotomy because the blood is coagulated in the vein orifices; or place a leech or sage on it and compress it lightly until the blood has come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is suppurated (or ulcerated), leave it and do not touch it until the suppuration has settled down.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If there is a necessity to bleed again, and this is not an excuse, then you must sign (i.e., mark with a cross or other symbol) the same place or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "the nerve of the arm" is phlebotomized in the crook or the basilic (vein), if it is not contracted or concealed because it consists of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the needle becomes swollen and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then tighten it with strong and narrow bandage; phlebotomize along the transverse small vein, not longitudinally or according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Make the incision wide and make your phlebotomy in the joint of the hand with a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is forbidden, you immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until your need is fulfilled.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the summer days, you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and the body is prevented from bleeding in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is more secure than that of all the other veins because there is no pulsating vein or nerve nearby.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The phlebotomy of the cubital vein on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the arm with a strong bandage or your hand, then place it in warm water until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible to the eye; phlebotomize this transversely, and if you are unable to find a vein at all, do not try again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to press your hand too hard during phlebotomy, as nearby are the exposed nerves of the fingers.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, as if you do not immerse your hand in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein orifice and the flow is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when blood is drawn according to the amount of necessity, you must keep your hand over the olive oil and salt so that it does not solidify easily; similarly, you should do the same in all branches.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the advantage of phlebotomy from the left hand vein is that it is suitable for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Similarly, do the same in the phlebotomy of this as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases in the posterior part of the body such as dysmenorrhea, retention of menses, and diseases of the kidneys and old ulcers and their similar ones.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction on it until the veins appear; then place a bandage around the ankle, and the location of the vein must be indicated by pressure, as it branches out from the face of the foot towards multiple directions.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, phlebotomize the ankle joint or below the calf, as this is better and more secure.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you phlebotomize on the face of the foot, you should be careful about the nerves that are nearby on the surface of the foot and your phlebotomy should be performed transversely as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy be done.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the bleeding of blood is forbidden, then you must make the patient walk in warm water and allow the blood to flow into that place until it is drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first observation, then you must make him bleed again after a little while, as that place is salty; and do not fear trickery, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same with the swelling in the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the heel of the separated leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The benefit of the phlebotomy in this case is to relieve back pain when it is due to blood clots.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters the bath, and hurries to the latrine, and presses his buttocks from the lower part of the abdomen up to four fingers above the heel with a long, thin bandage, as it will not be apparent otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, you must bleed that place according to your skill and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise that place with an incision or cut it with a section, as that place is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men who are weakened; and if that area shrinks and does not appear to the senses, you must bleed one of its branches, and that one which appears near the heel opposite the ear and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Be careful of the nerves and let the blood flow the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Release the constriction and place your hand over the location of the phlebotomy site and press it, as it heals easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventosection and of the qualities of using those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventoses are for warts, or abscesses, or veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventosection is performed in two ways: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood; the other is ventosection without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This ventosection that is without incision can be done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The ventoses that are administered with incision and extraction of blood are twelve locations in the body, of which one, where ventoses are placed, is alnocrati, and it is the lower part of the neck; the middle location from two necks; ventoses of the mentum just below the mouth; ventoses of two spatulas; ventoses of alohoster, and they are at the end of the backbone; ventoses of two foci, and they are at two elbows; ventoses of two thigh bones; and ventoses of two cuoyssas (femur bones).
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventosection does not draw blood from veins, but only from small scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the effect as obtained by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that ventosection be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion inside the body before the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity requires ventosection due to disease or continuous, administer it at the beginning and end of each month, as well as in the middle and at any time during that period.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in some men, blood is increased to the point where extraction of it by ventosection and shrinkage occurs in the head, causing severe pain; of these there are those who suffer swelling and heat on the face and head, and in the neck; of these there are those who suffer pain in the face and forehead, and blackness and dullness in the eyes; of these there are those whose ventosection site is suppurating; of these are those whose laughter is increased; of these is one who has a taste for blood in his mouth, or whose tongue is protruded and spits blood; and of these are those who have excessive sleep, and who in their sleep sweat blood, fever, plagues, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when it happens in some of these causes, and particularly if it is during the third or fourth week of the month, then you command that ventosection be done more than three hours after sunset.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The benefit of ventosection on the neck is that it relieves gravity in the head and helps to alleviate sinking in the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by total evacuation of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventosection is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not permissible to use it in those who have a complete or cold phlegm, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore, it is not necessary to use that in the elderly, and in those with cold diseases of the head.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for those who have persistent pain over it (ventosection site), memory loss occurs; therefore, you must command the ventosist to pause his hand slightly above the ventosection site, beware of the generation of amnesia.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventosection in the alveolus is at the location of phlebotomy of the femoral vein and basilic vein: it causes asthma, constriction of the airway, fissure of the tympanum of the ear, coughing, repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The joint pain is made worse if the windpipe is closed a little, for if it is kept closed, it causes weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The narrowing of the windpipe causes headaches and eyestrain, migraines, inflammation and toothaches; it is in the place for basilica vein lancing.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the windpipe compressor not to press hard with scissors so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The closing of the windpipe beneath the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, resemblance to other diseases that are in the mouth, and it is the place for vein lancing below the upper lip.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the windpipe compression made on both cheeks causes coughing, which is caused by an accumulation of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Also, the windpipe compression made deep in the eyes confers venepuncture of three veins: basilica, facial and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all the vessels that are in the flesh, and the small veins of the other large veins converge into these three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the windpipe compressor not to perform incision, for the area is exposed, and there are nerves and arteries below it.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a windpipe compression that is performed on the anus and causes hemorrhoids in the rectum and ulcers beneath it.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the windpipe compressor to make a deep wound, for the area requires strong incision; and thick, forceful windpipe compressions that are subtle should be avoided, and it should be cut with scissors.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But windpipe compressions made in the groin area cause bleeding of the entire body, and they cause old coughs and kidney pain, and bladder problems; they induce menstruation, and cause swelling and inflammation; they are located near two veins, one called saphenous vein and another called femoral vein.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, weakening the entire body causes fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the windpipe compression that causes bleeding near the groin area is also close to the windpipe compressions in both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the windpipe compressions is that they are initially closed and gradually opened, and not prolonged for a long time; but they should be paused lightly, and remain in place intermittently, and that the humors come to the area by coincidence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until the place reddens, swells, and the redness of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you make a small incision and gradually apply the suction, and be careful in the arrangement of the patient's body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a man with thin and rare skin, it is necessary to make a single incision and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the windpipe compressor to make a larger incision and be careful not to go too deep, and apply the suction gently.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thick blood, it is necessary to make two incisions, for the first incision opens the way for thinning and removing the blood.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, during the vigorous exploration of the removal of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, make a third incision for the removal of the final part.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to remove a small amount or a little blood, it is sufficient for us with one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to remove a lot of blood, make a deep incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to make a deep incision with scissors.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "incision" refers only to the depth of the wound.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the wound is deep, hard, dark, and has tight pores, the area of the windpipe compressions should be treated gently and resolved more open; if it is in summer, use aloe oil or violet oil, or olive oil from two olives, or sesame oil from a goat's foot; and if it is in winter, use narce oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or bloodroot oil and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and greasy, use oil of amaranth, balsam oil, aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the windpipe compressor has wide pores of thin skin, it is necessary to prohibit oil and to use water or warm water from solatrum, goat's foot, bordeaux water, or similar ones at the areas of their windpipe compressions.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is very moist, wash their windpipe compressions with vinegar or lemon and sumac water and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From the given text, it appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French. Here's the translation line by line:
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The sores should be kept away from bathing; it is necessary that they be treated directly after the bath for an hour or two, and it is necessary that they sleep near the sore. (Translation in English)
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is required is that the veins of the sandy sore be drained before the bleeding. (Translation in English)
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the one who will bleed or the one who is to drain the sore is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation, then it is necessary to take cooling substances such as mustard powder, vinegar and lettuce juice, and dandelion, and to apply them, and so on. (Translation in English)
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, and acidic foods, and so on. (Translation in English)
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for someone who is cold-natured, it is necessary to drink almond syrup or sage root syrup with cumin and sumac, and a moderate amount of fragrant wine between autumn and winter; it is recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause the consumption of poultry and game birds and fish and small birds and doves. (Translation in English)
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	It is necessary that on the day of the sore treatment and bleeding, the drinking should be greater than eating. (Translation in English)
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is necessary to give to some men tarragon alpocras or medicines containing musk, that is musk oil, or celery water before the sore treatment or bleeding, or near them, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made more subtle; it is not necessary for them to take that chalk. (Translation in English)
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, sores that are not incised are sores that have been stopped on the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the navel, in the joints of the fingers, and on the ankle, as these members cannot bear incision upon them. (Translation in English)
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those sores except the attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a sore on the nipple in sickness of blood from the nose or nostrils; and they use that to dissolve cold and thick swelling of a member, such as stopping on the belly and navel; since it rarifies the member, chalks it, and softens the pain which resolves swelling. (Translation in English)
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is stopped on the throat when it occurs in its opening or pores, because by the strong attraction of the blood, it relieves the opening and removes the pores from their place. (Translation in English)
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similar is when it is stopped on the liver and spleen, as it relieves swelling in those closed places. (Translation in English)
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These sores are administered with juice only, and sometimes with fire. (Translation in English)
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of hot water in sicknesses of the spleen. (Translation in English)
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is so that the sore is filled and is large, that is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs are immersed. (Translation in English)
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of sore administered with fire: The size of the opening should be twice as wide as we have made it; and the depth of the wound should be equal to the width of a palm; and at the sides, in the area surrounding it, it should be as deep as it is wide, the cut should be small according to the quantity that an awl fits into it. (Translation in English)
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made with roasted earth or citrus, with thick edges, lion's teeth, and smooth to prevent the member from sliding during its position on it. (Translation in English)
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, there should be a crossbar made of earth or iron where the candle is stopped with fire. (Translation in English)
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this sore should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller according to the sicknesses and the state of the one who uses it. (Translation in English)
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the sores of infants and thin ones are different from those of young people and large adults. (Translation in English)
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of stopping this sore with fire on the member is that it should spread the flesh with fire decently in front of a small amount of wax candle, and it should be stopped on the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the sore, so that the fire is lit around the edges to prevent the body of the patient from being burned. (Translation in English)
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be stopped on the member of the patient, and the aforementioned should be over the cut that we have said, until when we have sores and do not need to remove the stopper and let the steam rise from the cut, then the sore will soon dissolve. (Translation in English)
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And burn the flesh according to its method, and repeat it if necessary. (Translation in English)
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of an abscess with a cavity that is treated in pus-related illnesses, and it has no transverse or vertical furrow, and it is filled with water instead of being punctured, then it should only be covered over the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This abscess, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter seventy-five.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisuge (leech) is not administered to any member but only to those members where the positioning of an abscess is not possible due to their small size, such as the lips, gums and similar areas; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using such leeches should be of those found in clean water bodies.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be soaked in clean water for two days, and no cause remains in their stomachs; and evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and abscesses; and anoint the patient's member until it becomes red; and cover them (the leeches) over him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full (of blood) and burst.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to draw liquid from the abscess area, it is more helpful in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the abscess area with warm water and apply damp cloth; and anoint and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the bleeding of the leech continues for a long time and it secretes, then immerse a cloth in cold water and place it over it until the secretion is drained.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the bleeding multiplies, then powder vitriol triturated, or similar substances from stiptics causes over it until the bleeding is stopped; or place the juices of cooked fava beans over the area and leave them there until they adhere to the area, and the bleeding is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And cover, if necessary, the repetition of leeches, when it is possible to replace them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the use of leeches is prohibited, then anoint the area with fresh blood or insert a needle in the areas where bleeding occurs; and cover them, as these will soon stop bleeding.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered allium (onion) over them, or salt, or ash and let them fall immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of the third division: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and accidents involving bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or son, my child, that the foolish physicians and the ignorant and those who do not care about the books of the ancients or read even one letter from them boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the method of the wise men on our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten about it even for a short time, and I have not applied what follows, except by long study of the books of the ancients and understanding of their works until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct my efforts to experimentation and study for the rest of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the core of my science and on which my experience has passed; since I abridge what follows for you and relieve it from the burden of lengthiness; and abridged in the end of brevity; and showed it in the end of declaration; and formed more forms of tools that are administered in it, as done by adding a declaration, just like I did in the previous two chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and compilation of the causes of bone fractures, from which their premise is necessary before we begin the memory of fractured members and various ones.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, we must state the summary of this chapter's speech, and the chapters that are understood by the skilled craftsmen at the beginning, who are placed in a position on the truth of these matters; so you and those who are quick to learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore, we say that when there is a fracture, dislocation, twist, or rupture, it is necessary to start with phlebotomy or lancing of the affected area, or any other means, unless a specific cause prohibits it, such as weakness in strength, or it is the patient who is affected, or old age, or a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Approach the diet with fresh herbs and birds (such as larks and thrushes); prohibit thick meats, filling with food, or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a cauterized abscess, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to their original diet according to the usual practice of medicine.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	As the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods with dense and heavy nutrition containing viscosity, such as food made from wheat cooked with water, rice, peas, beef, veal, mutton, and similar foods, and with this diet coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Know that the broken bones in young men and the elderly cannot be continuously healed and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They can be continuously healed and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying of those limbs, and they can be healed and consolidated in old age, such as the bones of infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature regulates and corrects the broken bone in all parts with a similar cause resembling glue, thickening that adheres to it until it is consolidated at the same time, until the end of softness and firmness comes, such as fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prohibit it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	Therefore, it is necessary to pause the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick, as previously mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The types of fracture vary according to the type of limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, because a fracture in the thigh bone is different from a fracture in the head; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the hand; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	I recall all species of fracture, explained separately in their own chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The types of fracture are diverse in themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The types of bone fractures are diverse in their causes; there is one type that occurs at the star (stellas); and some are classified according to the length of the bone: and those of the tibia and fibula, and additions, whether present or absent, such as that which occurs when the bone is prepared for writing, and is a fracture with a wound and rupture in the head, and is a fracture with a fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every type has its own pain or torment in the healing of the bone, as will be remembered separately at their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	By this is recognized a bone fracture: it is a crookedness of the bone, and from this prominence and perception of it by feeling, and only when you press on it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no crookedness or swelling in the location, and pressing on the bone does not cause great pain for the patient, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If it is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure in that location, then you must press and compress it with all your strength; pause on the medicine appropriate for that moment, according to the location; and apply tight compression using a subtle string.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Know that the location that is crooked and not split in two or anything that does not occur at the tibia, such as all parts of its circumference, then it is necessary to begin from your time the correction of it, having ensured that an abscess has formed due to cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess has formed due to cauterization, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and apply any method of traction or manipulation that you can with ease and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Know that the healing of the bone and the reduction of it is easier than that of a fracture in which the tibia occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Strengthen it according to the memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	However, if in the bone there is a fracture of the tibia, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Place yourself in a position according to which you will draw the fractured limb back according to its natural shape, while extending the parts of the broken limb, then you must ensure that you bring the additions back with skill and according to their respective locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be cautious that your force does not harm the patient through your procedure or injury; and perform according to your ability, apply a bone with its companion in the best forms possible.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And in that time skillfully touch the patient and, if you see any other cause different from this, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your power.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Exercise vigorous extension and compression, as foolish doctors do when they cause boils to appear through their procedure or contract the limb, as we have seen happen through the operation of their misguided treatment.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then, attach, adjust, and perform a decent operation and stricture on the affected limb, and rest and tranquility; instruct the patient to avoid worsening it during his vigils and sleep hours, observe its rotation and agitation, provide for its excretion, and provide for all of its movements with your whole ability; and wait to see if the position of the limb is a position in which pain occurs. If so, you must change it to another position without pain. Make sure that the position is correct and aligned, so that no deformity occurs when the limb is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the limb's immobilization that I recommend is as follows: you should know that fractured members are various in their size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	For small members like the arm and thigh, you must use a thin fabric covering.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For large members like the thigh or leg, you must use a wide and hard covering, since thick padding holds the large member together with stricture on all sides, so that dirt does not enter it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then, start by adjusting your position of equilibrium, placing yourself conveniently at the location of the fracture with three or four coverings according to the member's need; and hold it lightly but firmly with a small amount of pressure.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Approach the part above the location of the fracture with caution and apply pressure only enough to hold the fractured area without causing further injury.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Approach the fracture location with the covering and gently loosen the pressure on it, gradually increasing the opening until you can take a large piece of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Take another bandage and cover the broken part with the previous covering, then approach the area below the fracture with new coverings; your operation should be in immobilizing the covering and loosening the pressure on it according to what was said earlier about the first covering.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Place padding between the layers of leather or fabric that straightens the deformity of the fracture if there is one; otherwise, do not cause any harm to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Place the bandage on another layer of padding, and quickly attach well-made stitches over these coverings if there is no inflammation or boil at that location. Then press down where the boil is present and relieve the inflammation; leave it for some days; then tighten the stitches.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The stitches should be made of strong linen thread, well-made and smartly formed; or of wood splints; or of palm branches. Each stitch should be the same length and shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than other stitches, with a length proportional to the size of the member; and tighten the stitches over the other bandage according to your initial immobilization; and tie it securely with thread properly according to our earlier instructions on immobilization; and the immobilization should be tighter near the fracture and less so as it is further away from it.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads must be medium in thickness and fineness, made of linen; if the thread is thick, as I have seen some foolish people using thick twine to tie their knots, that is a great mistake, since the immobilization will not be even.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Very thin threads are not suitable because you will not be able to achieve immobilization with them, and it is not necessary for there to be a space of one finger width between stitches.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient is injured by the ends of the stitches near the immobilization in those areas, then you must cover it with leather or camel's hair padding before that does any harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by wounds and rupture in the sinew, and I will come to a specific case of this in the next chapter.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that the entire fractured member is not immobilized with stitches on the first day; the reason being that the large member does not need to be immediately immobilized with stitches, but rather after three or five days or more, depending on your confidence in the prevention of a boil.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plasters used by the ancients, which are applied to fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	This is the method of plaster used by the ancients for restoring fractures, which are mainly suitable for dislocations and twists in women and children, as it does not require heat or friction: take powder from grinding and the medulla of wheat flour that you will grind with a millstone.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Fill that with the same substance, unless you filter it with albumen (huou), and let the mixture not be thick or too subtle; use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method to treat fracture and dislocation and twist: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of elm bark, and myrrh gum, which is made from wild miller's grass, of one pound; of frankincense and aloewood of half a pound; of aloes, twice the amount; all are ground and sifted and mixed with sweet oil or egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly; and apply this plaster, for it has good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for plaster to treat fracture and twist: recipe of myrrh gum, one pound of white alum; half a pound of frankincense and aloewood; six pounds of acacia; two pounds of Armenian pitch.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all three ingredients together in a mortar with a pestle, sieve them, and then mix with water or egg white before administering it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Use liniment to soothe the joints and bones that have been separated from their places, and alleviate pain in those areas as well as for wounds and fractures: obtain clean wool, immerse it in sour milk and olive oil, then place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Moreover, this liniment does not have the power of healing or treating abscesses and directly relieving pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another liniment to heal fractured bones: take fig leaves and wild poppy flowers, grind them into a paste, and apply it as an ointment.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A quick-acting liniment for the healing of fractured bones and to resolve abscesses: take equal parts of althea (marshmallow), camomile, violets, erysipelas (a plant similar to redness), all ground together. Grind all ingredients together with water, if the affected limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, use water from a cooling cucumber or water and apply it to the affected area.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another quick-acting liniment for the healing of a long-lasting abscess that requires resolving an affected limb: take equal parts of althea (marshmallow), its seeds, balm of Gilead, clover, melilot, marjoram, violets, camomile, all ground together. Grind them with water from sweet willow, mild water, or plain water, according to the quality of the affected limb and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Moreover, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that liniment should be applied to a broken limb for healing, but only a plaster made of wax and oil and nothing else should be used; and recommend it to be moderate between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Furthermore, it is seen in Galen's writings that liniments should be applied to a broken limb for healing and the conditions where drying with low heat are appropriate, such as myrrh, cinnamon, and similar substances from those recommended causes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A liniment for injury and pain: take mallow, ceasar, human skin (without hair) or feather of an eagle, and althea (marshmallow), salt, all ground together; sift and mix, then make it into a liniment.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity that is required to keep the wound open and to allow it to drain, if there is no pain or inflammation, and if the bone is not out of its place, then you should not discontinue for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if the affected area experiences intense pain or inflammation, you should carefully discontinue the liniment from that spot.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge soaked in warm water, immerse it in tepid water, then use it to clean the affected area until the inflammation and pain subside; ensure that the limb rests for an hour; place a cushion of clean wool immersed in sour milk and olive oil or rose oil over it for one night until you are certain that the abscess has healed, and that the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and that the pain from it subsides.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And ensure that the tightness is gradually released and the liniment applied gently without excessive force, until it is completely healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all associated symptoms have been completely resolved, then you no longer need to apply liniment or tighten it as before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause for the affected limb as described previously, do not remove it but allow it to heal for three or four or five or six days. After some weeks, all this is sufficient for the healing of the limb as described previously, until the fracture adheres and the skin connects over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust the tightness more in the bandage than in your initial binding, and tighten the patient's wound dressing as prescribed, following the previously mentioned guidelines.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see the location of the fracture is already drained and stretched more than necessary, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; therefore, wrap it with warm water all day long for three days; loosen the swelling slightly, and through this operation, allow the member to receive nourishment, and it will heal lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But the foolish healers of a fractured limb perform this procedure later when it has not been restored at the beginning, as necessary, and restore it according to its twisting, which is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if they had followed the ancient rules and acted accordingly, they would have enlarged upon this matter in their books.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Two: On Fractures That Occur in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are multiple, and the figures of their shapes are various, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by a blow to the bone, which shatters all the bone inside, leaving it as shards, just like when this is done in the shaft, and for that reason, this type of fracture is called splintering; or the blow cuts through part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh but does not go through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound in these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether it is a contracted or distracted fracture; and its cause is a blow with a hammer or impact on stones, and similar objects.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is either penetrating, approaching the panniculus that is behind the bone, or it is on the face of the bone, and the wound in these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fractures is that which is narrowed within the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for that reason, this type of fracture is called the capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is caused by impact or blow with stones and similar objects, which causes some layer of bone to break into the divisions inside, and it occurs in concave areas such as the hinge joints of an elbow when it is struck and is divided on its inner side.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Furthermore, this type of fracture occurs in bones that are soft, such as the skulls of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures require remedies, such as separated needles (splinters).
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	I will return to the topic at hand.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I know all these types of fractures through detection on them and examination of their causes by testing and the removal of rotten flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary type of fracture is recognized by its discovery on the bone and its removal, and it is treated with probing because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, one must first consider the circumstances of the patient, and if you see through their symptoms that they signify danger, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the voice, fainting, acute fever, inflammation or redness of the eyes, and similar symptoms in major cases, then there is doubt whether it will heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you do not see any unusual symptoms, you hope for health, and then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason is that if the wound has been brought to you at the beginning as it was in winter days, then you must study the removal of the bone within twelve days according to all precautions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then you must remove the bone within seven days, knowing that what remains behind the bone can be rotten due to the panniculus, and that the accidents mentioned above may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the panniculus covering the brain, and is made of small, distracted fragments, then you must compress the fractured area and hold it together as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you reason about the patient's head with the wounded area, and you discover on the bone according to your usual practice and method, depending on the shape of the wound, but do not be rough on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it occurs to you, you must examine the bone, flow of blood or pus, in that case, you oppose yourself with what is necessary, and use hops infused in wine and warm oil, let the wound rest until the pus subsides, and make sure there is no bleeding; and begin by circling the bone and removing it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this may be according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method is that you insert the bone with an instrument of straight shape, and this form is as follows: First, administer another instrument of slightly smaller size than the one used; and this form is as follows:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer more incision than the second [person].
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	It is necessary that you have a number of different incisions, some of which are deeper than others; and some of them shall be shorter than the others and be at the end of sharpness of their tips, and they should be made with iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them with ease while striking the incision to avoid hitting the skull and damaging it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to pierce around it before administering the incisions with shallow channels, which are called non-penetrating channels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called this way, because the channels do not pierce the bone all the way to its end, but instead have a rounded tip or margin around the bone, similar to the edge of a small disk, which prevents them from being submerged and passing through the bone's thickness.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a large number of these channels, each of which corresponds to the thickness of each bone, until the end of every bone in your skull is sharp, and the length and width should be according to the thickness of that bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of channels: The purpose of perforating around the broken bone is to place the channel over the bone and rotate it using your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the channel to another location, and stop at the point where the thickness of the ray or surrounding area is reached.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then incise with the incision tool between each fracture of the bone, making it as thin as possible at the end of your reach, as we have said, until you have reduced the bone, or with your hand, or with some other means using certain tools that you will prepare for this purpose, such as a mallet and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	It is necessary that you take great care to ensure that the incision tool does not touch any of the nerves.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the nerve, if it is separated from the nerve, you must extract it, and you must cauterize and tie it in the roughness of the bone using another tool similar to an incision tool, but it should be thinner and more delicate than the other incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there remains any small fracture or indentation of the bones, then take it with ease using whatever tool you need to use; and treat the wound with linen and ointments, as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is easy and remote from fear, which is called Gualla and the Lausor for great praise; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you to begin at the start by discovering the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most visible and intense, until when you have discovered that fracture and stopped at the end of the incision, the shape should be long and slow as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The lenticular fracture is convex and does not make an incision on any cause, and the acute fracture is concave from two sides towards the long side, like sometimes; that the lenticular fracture should be adjacent to the nerve with the sharp incision in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike the incision tool of one fracture with a small hammer until you have incised the entire bone with ease and rotate it as easily as possible, and if you are certain that no accident will occur in any way, and if the doctor was the most foolish and ignorant of all men; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there remains any nerve attached to the bone from a panniculus in some locations of the bone, you should incise that with the end of the incision tool in a lenticular shape, and deliver it with ease, because it is delivered without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is separated or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains rough and subtle indentations; then it is necessary to smooth out that roughness and remove those indentations with sharp razors that you have prepared in different thicknesses, so that you can use them anywhere and in the most appropriate way for each fracture of that broken bone and the shape of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	It is necessary that you administer the incision with your reasoning, and you should use the most delicate of those razors first, and do not stop until you reach the thinnest and most delicate parts of them all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In every other small capillary and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have learned for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is due to the fact that not all those who have studied in that craft are skilled at it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	Place it on what we have shown in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the fat (pannicol) is round when you amputate the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound, dip it in red oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of cloth folded or tripled, dip it in wine and red oil, and place that over the first cloth lightly so as not to press it too much. Then administer a healing ointment (liament lat) on it, but do not apply too much except according to the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave it like this for a day or two until you are sure that the wound is healed; then remove it and administer medicines for excessive dryness, such as linen rind and flour of eggs, powder of incense and aristaology, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make powder of these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, such as the dry ones; and in general, administer all medicine with properties that help to heal and not harm.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware that the wound during treatment remains clean; do not let it get infected with pus or other filth; nor should you allow it to become more inflamed; because when it is in contact with the brain tissue, it corrupts it and then a fatal illness occurs in the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And when the fracture of the skull is healed and the bone is removed and more treatment is given to it, and it becomes darker in surface; then consider whether the patient has experienced the symptoms that we have mentioned, because they are dangerous without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness is not due to the medicine applied but rather from the properties of the medicine itself, then you must take some honey and three parts of red oil. And place a linen cloth on it and apply the appropriate healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into two parts but rather split with a blow on top or one of them visible due to the fact that it has two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous and is not really broken but bent and twisted, causing pain.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small piece of wood into the patient's nose and hold the fracture inside with your finger or a wooden splint from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do it as convenient for you but be careful not to harm the patient in any way during the procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach the tip, you must align it with the end of the nasal bone where there is a small projection.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in both parts, then you should perform a similar procedure.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Try to repair it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, you should place a splint over the wound for seven or ten days.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Place a piece of linen cloth on the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; otherwise, put two pieces of gauze, one for each side, with enough thickness to fill the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some of the ancient restorers recommend that the gauze be covered with fabric and kept moist all day, but I do not see it; however, the gauze should be soaked in honey-oil emulsion with powdered milling, and then left in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardens.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes it should be inserted between the nostrils, in place of the septum, because it is covered with lion's cloth; and if the nose has been broken violently and the patient is not forbidden from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary; and if you wish, do it, and if you wish, insert septum.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs cauterize the nose, fill it with wax or cotton dipped in strong vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no abscess, it is necessary to pack it from outside with sizam flour and cinnamon powder mixed with albumen of egg; place your hand over the lion's cloth, and do not let the nose become blocked for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, it is necessary to cut them apart and remove them with the instruments appropriate for that; then suture the incision, care for it with what encourages healing and consolidation, and use appropriate dressings.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an ulcer inside the nose, it is necessary to treat it with hot compresses and administer lead cannulas until it is healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not an ulcer, examine whether the fracture is only on the outside and not broken into two, nor curved at the inner part, then its recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right jawbone, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left jawbone, insert your right index finger; and push gently the swelling of the inner fracture at the outer part with one hand, and the other hand from the outer part of the bone with equal force.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two, it is necessary to administer extension of both parts according to correct measurement until the alignment of the parts can be achieved.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is displacement of teeth to disruption, stretch those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or suture; and place your hand over the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth over it, and another thick cloth properly made, or a piece of sole leather as long as the jawbone; and bind it as needed, according to the ligature method and the application that is appropriate for it, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and tranquility, and stop the sour food of lions (meat or wine).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you think that the shape has been altered in some way, you should examine it on the third day and correct what has been altered; and fill it with powder of milled charcoal, albumen of egg, or flour of cumin, as you will leave the wax there, and cover the dressing with lion's wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so when the dressing is attached and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it, as you will not remove it until it is healed and strengthen the fracture; for most fractures heal in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess occurs later, administer the same as was said earlier in its treatment until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is an ulcer, examine whether it is a piece of bone separated or a fissure, and carefully remove those pieces with instruments appropriate for that purpose.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifices of the ulcer are narrow, enlarge it with a probe according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those pieces and they are not reabsorbed, sew the orifices of the ulcer if it is wide; otherwise, cover it with one of the dressings appropriate for that purpose and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furculum when broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	After some time, the furculum is broken at the anterior division and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts without any fissures; and it is easy to restore in the first case; or it happens that there are fissures, making it difficult to restore in the second case; or the fracture is an ulcer.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	The operation in the case of a fracture without an ulcer is that you should have two assistants present, one to help hold the broken furculum and the other to extend the neck on that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And bind the fracture with the ties as described earlier until the shape is achieved, and there should not be excessive prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, you should place a support under the patient's chin made of cloth or wool, and its size according to your need; extend and elevate the furculum and hold it with your hand until you bind the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the extremity of the neckbone (clavicle) to the parting outside due to its being adhered to the shoulder, then it is necessary for the patient to be reclined on their neck, and a cushion half-sized in large size should be placed on the muscle of the shoulder.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister should press on the muscle of the shoulder towards the parting until the bone of the neckbone (clavicle) is elevated up to the collarbone, and then you straighten the fracture and bind it with bandages.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if there is pain in the neckbone (clavicle) and it is swollen, then it is necessary to cut through it and remove the swelling easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, you make an incision through it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the clavicle in a position to serve as a support; and this instrument is either a drill or iron of which its form is:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a drill bit, the concavity of which is like that of a spoon; and its width should be according to what is necessary for it, depending on the size of the bone or the scarcity of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be such as is possible for the operation; it should have two extremities like this, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound resulting from the incision made when you have removed the swelling in the bone is wide and it is certain that there is an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound is small or there is fear of an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then you fill it with cloth soaked in strong wine and oil of roses and leave it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the bone is narrow without a wound or incision, then you apply a plaster made of flour and egg whites, and place it on the lion's stopper (a type of splint), and hold a cushion nearby, if necessary, and take humid warm baths, which are called "torca" by the Saracens, that is long, and its width is about one palm or slightly more; and you also place powders on the plaster; and you take a thin table-steel needle with a width of three fingers and length similar to it; and you wrap it in cloth, and wrap this cloth around the needle at the location above the fracture; and you apply warm humid baths as needed, rotating it over the patient's neck and back and sides of the patient, and bringing it back to its original position, and when the narrowing of the fracture widens, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And it is important that the splint is not swollen over the broken bone; and therefore you must observe the patient every day, so that when the swelling subsides or the splint has been removed, then you correct this and strengthen the union.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And you place the patient's pillow under their neck, and at night you should sleep on their right side with your back turned away from them; so that the support of their arm is raised at the level of their armpit, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is elevated to the level of the muscle; or the arm is tied to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the splint unless an abscess or pressure sores occur in the location before twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And you renew the plaster if you observe its appearance at that location, and adjust it in the narrowing and restore it until it is restored and the clavicle fracture is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it becomes strong and comfortable within twenty-eight days, and in some cases it is made in a period of time shorter than that.
Capitol .vi.	Capital VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken at its side and not completely, only the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore when the location of it is broken - and it is broken at the middle of it - and it is not known except by touching, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare for it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible using any means at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And you place powder of milled flour and egg whites and lion's stopper on the location; and you place double cloth powder; and you place a thin table-steel needle on it according to the size of the entire spatula or slightly less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the needle is concave at one of the locations of the spatula, then you bind the concavity with lion's stopper, and you press the needle according to equal distribution.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And strengthen it above with warm baths with appropriate compression and the firmness of the needle until it is no longer swollen from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the plaster every day; and in all cases when it subsides, the following day and strengthen it equally if it is swollen from its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And let the patient rest on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty or thirty days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	When this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you know for certain that it is one of the bones, whose beginning or dissolution should not be feared.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	Proceed to the site of the broken bone and place the bandage there, then you cut through it, remove it, and follow what has been said about the fracture of the vertebra or abscess in the cauterization of an ulcer if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the repair of a fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes the foot is broken in several places, but more often it is only the ends that are crushed and fractured. In either case, it is important to immobilize the foot as soon as possible to prevent further damage and allow the bone to heal properly. This can be done by splinting the foot with strips of cloth or wood, or by using a cast. It is also important to rest the foot and avoid putting weight on it for the time prescribed by the doctor. If the fracture involves the ankle joint, it may be necessary to immobilize both the ankle and the foot to ensure proper healing. In addition, if there is any swelling or bleeding, it should be treated promptly to prevent infection and promote healing.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the midshaft of the bone is broken, it may collapse into fragments and cause pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, shortness of breath, fever, and vomiting. The fracture can be felt as a depression or hollow in the affected area, and is not hidden from sensation. If you suspect that someone has a midshaft fracture, it is important to seek medical attention immediately to ensure proper treatment and prevention of complications.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The treatment for a midshaft fracture is to carefully align the broken bone and immobilize it using a splint or cast. The patient should be placed on their back with a pillow under their head and shoulders, and the affected area should be gently supported to prevent movement. The muscles around the fracture site should be relaxed, and the costal margins (the edges of the ribs) should be aligned so that they are in the correct position. The doctor will carefully manipulate the bone into its proper alignment, taking care not to cause further damage or discomfort. Once the bone is properly aligned, it will be immobilized with a splint or cast to allow it to heal correctly. It is important to follow the doctor's instructions for rest and immobilization, as well as any other recommended treatments or medications, to ensure proper healing and prevent complications.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And you apply the plaster and stopper on it and apply a thin, delicate bandage of willow or walnut bark on top, as you wrap it in cloth; then tie a thin linen cloth over the broken bone so that it does not become infected; and go along the backbone several times with a ligature, tightening it decently; and consider the ligature at all times and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If there is inflammation, swelling, or pain that occurs in the wound, you should cauterize it or apply a hot substance to it, or let it drain naturally; then clean the wound and treat it as necessary for healing; and return the plaster if necessary; and tie the bandage tightly until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the repair of fractured ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a rib fracture does not occur except in large places, and the ends of the breakage do not contract unless they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And it is necessary to investigate this without being misled by symptoms.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the repair should be such that the fracture is aligned with the symptoms as much as possible, until it is healed as needed; and plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is inclined towards the internal ends, the patient will experience intense pain and puncture, like puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason cover the bones with a cloth; and there will be difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting of blood; and this is a difficult healing.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled at treating this with various remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say: it is necessary to place the patient on a diet that causes inflammation and bloating, so that the stomach is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external ends.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	However, we should not do this if it is likely to cause an abscess or pus, unless necessary; and if it does occur, help with the remedy as needed.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Some said that it should be done over a windy place and that it should be drained with strength; and this is logical, but it is feared that the wind may attract superfluidity to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Others said that the site should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and powdered herbs placed between the ribs until it is filled, and that the ligature should be tightened when wrapping it as needed; and the patient should be cured with a diet and medicine for pleurisy.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the intense pain that afflicts the patient cannot be borne and the bones are punctured with a cloth, it is feared for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to make an incision over the site, expose the broken rib, and place an instrument over it to prevent complications, as described earlier, and to split the bones with ease, and remove the foreign object.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And it is appropriate to approximate the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, you should clean and apply powder in rose oil over the site, and treat the patient with remedies as needed for internal abscesses.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	It should be placed on a slab above the bed until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the repair of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the vertebrae of the neck, and then there is swelling, and similarly in the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you want to know whether it will heal or not, consider that if the muscles surrounding it are softened, swollen, and dead and cannot be extended or strengthened, and when you press on them with your fingers or puncture them with a needle without feeling pain, then you know it will not heal, and in a matter of days it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If that member experiences pain and tightness along with puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If the vertebrae in the neck seem like this and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the weight of them.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you notice that it has become softened: then apply to those who have the same condition and when it lies on its back, there is wind and evacuation without voluntary control, and sometimes it is rolled over onto its back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and do not treat it with healing methods.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If there is no cause for those symptoms, the condition is better and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for it is to perform an incision over the hardened vertebra and let it drain pus, or use oil soaked mullein leaves; apply this to it for several days until the pus dries up.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a comforting and healing plaster to the affected area, and hold it in place with a bandage; instruct the patient to rest and remain calm, and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If there is a fracture of the bone or any other cause that has already been identified, then you must saw through the shaft and remove the affected bone; align the edges of the wound, stitch it if necessary; and care for it with bandages until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the bone at the heel is broken and it is the end of the coccyx, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and pull the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible in alignment; apply plaster and splints to it if necessary, and secure it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel broken fractures there, then make an incision over it, remove the bone fragments, and care for the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capital .x.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the repair of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are often broken, and if they break, the fracture is not complete but rather a communication at the ends and they are inclined inward towards the sides; pain and swelling occur at the site and the cavity becomes stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The repair of it is to extend your hand over the fracture until you cover its entire shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you pull it back as necessary to align it with its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the shaft and bends towards the sides, you make the patient lie on their stomach until the repair of that fracture is prepared for you.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have pulled it back, apply plaster to the area, and place a splint of wood or bone over it, and secure it with a bandage that does not risk causing further fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Pull the concavity with that which fills it until it takes the bandage evenly, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side that is not affected.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if pus is present, stop the extension and repair of it until the pus dries up, apply that which soothes the area according to what is appropriate; then return to the repair of it, and secure it as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If such a thing occurs in the fractured bones or they are crushed, you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restoration of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The joint between the arm and the shoulder (adjutor)
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it should be done in one of two ways, and the first way you take a flat piece of wood about this size (indicates with hands)
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Place them at both ends with ligaments, and hang it from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the patient on a chair; place the broken arm over the stick and bring it to the point where the curve of the stick meets its midpoint.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it with some cause of pain or the minister extends it to the limbs on the opposite side; then the doctor and his assistant should hold the fractured bone with their hands until the fracture returns as required.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the patient lies down on their back and suspends the hand with a ligament from the neck; then command two ministers, one of them to hold something over the fracture with his hands, while the other holds the foot below it; each extends their limbs to the side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you tighten the ligaments on both sides of the fracture and each minister extends their limbs to the opposite side.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, it should be stopped halfway along the ligament at its midpoint and the other part should be placed on the opposite side of the fracture.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the joint, it should be stopped at that location and on the opposite side of the joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap it with ease and without effort, and apply it as needed and in a good manner. Then tighten it if it doesn't heal up and prevent the formation of an abscess by cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess forms by cauterization, you should leave the bandage on for up to seven days and apply linen soaked in warm vinegar and olive oil to it until the abscess subsides, then tighten it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method for tightening it is to apply plaster on the fracture and then cover it with gauze wrap. Then adjust the arm to the shoulder joint and place a handkerchief over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Place the gauze and tighten it on the shoulder joint so that the arm is in a stable position, unless there is any cause preventing the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Use splints (stelhas).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place the broad and strong splint over the fracture; and between each splint, place the width of a finger, and the length of the splints should be according to the breakage, with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then press strongly on the hardened areas with the constriction mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your pressure on the location of the fracture should be stronger.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as much as the fracture becomes longer, the pressure should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, when you notice the condition of the hardened areas and the pressure as we said in the time when you are restoring the member to its original position, then you do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess might form from the pressure, leave the hardened areas and the constriction for 7 days as we said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the liniment in all parts for 3 days, so that it does not cause any burning or swelling at the site; or food is forbidden to reach the member due to excessive constriction of the area; and therefore correct everything as we said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are uncertain that there is no cause for this, do not remove the binding until at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The patient's sleep should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Place a warm, woolen compress on the affected limb, and consider that the fracture figure should not be removed or dissolved at any time of day or night; instead, let the liniment remain moistened, so correct everything with your judgement.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Restrict the patient's food as ordered before, in such a way that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and therefore coarsen their diet.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	After 40 days of using the compress and pillow, they should be removed, and a bath should be given with soothing medicine to correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is healing, leave the liniment and the hardened areas for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones that are called the two focils; one is small, which is the one that is near the wrist, and the other is large and is located below the small one, from the lower side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger bone is broken, or both bones are fractured together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	If only the smaller bone is broken at the top, the restoration and healing of it is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	If the larger bone is broken at the lower part, the fracture is bad, and healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse is when both bones are fractured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the smaller bone is broken at the top, it is appropriate for the doctor to pause briefly and extend the healing process slightly, as long as the limb is immobilized.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	However, if the larger bone is fractured, an extended healing period must be applied more forcefully.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both bones are fractured together, you should apply the treatment less forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	You should immobilize the hand figure, restore it and extend the healing process over a cushion, place the fingers of the hand apart above, as we have said before, and place the ear on the other side, and the patient should be lying down on a slanted bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Place a cushion in front of him at his head or foot to prevent him from working.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the minister should extend the arm from the lower side with his hand or linen, and another minister should do the same on top.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor immobilizes the bone until it reduces properly in the best possible way.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If a splinter is in the fractured bone, you must make every effort to remove it from its location with your judgment.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If a separated splinter appears that pierces the skin and is not hopeful for healing, you must cauterize it and remove it as we said before.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	However, if the fracture is with a wound, you have already done what we said in that special chapter, and therefore take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess forms at the beginning of your restoration, you line up a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it over the abscess with gentle pressure until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered milling and clay of huou, and cover the area; and let the hardened area, which is located above the fracture, be larger and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Know that the number of bones in the arm is usually two or three, depending on whether the fracture occurs in one bone or both bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And apply your pressure on the location of the fracture forcefully and persistently; when more movement is observed above or below the fracture, reduce the pressure slightly as a reminder to the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The soft, moist bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should not be hard or rough, and the one who binds it should be of moderate strength between fine and thick, as recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any cause arises requiring correction, such as swelling of the limb, and you find it necessary to immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Release the limb only when it has recovered, and restore the constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the constriction has become softened and the bone has healed as in similar cases, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction, then you should soften it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment reaches it again, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not experience any of the aforementioned causes, he should not be dislocated for more than about twenty days or less.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Place the patient's hand in a sling due to its relaxing effect on movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture is restored in thirty or thirty-two days, or at least twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the patient's complexion and the skill of the practitioner.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the thumb fracture and finger joint fractures often result in simple dislocations rather than actual fractures, and do not treat them without careful observation.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or dislocated, it is necessary for the patient to remain seated with his elbow resting on a flat surface and to rest the hand above it.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the nurse should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them properly until they are properly united.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	You should apply a plaster and padding if there is no abscess; otherwise, insert a probe according to the size of the wound, and then wrap it in bandages.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the inner part of the palm, you should make a dressing that covers the entire palm, and tell the patient to hold it with his injured hand; it should be tightly bound with long bandages.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The probe made of cloth should be light enough for the cure to be applied to the palm and tightened as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outer part, you should place probes on both sides of the fractured area on the palm to keep it open and straight; then tighten the constriction as needed by rotating the hand in the socket between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a finger joint fracture, if possible, make an incision and align the bone as needed, then immobilize it with bandages and if desired, insert a small straight probe to raise the fracture and prevent deformity.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other fingers such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, align and immobilize it with the help of the surrounding fingers; this is preferable. Or if desired, place a small probe on it as mentioned earlier for the incision.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider the disposition of cautery for abscess and opposition (immobilization) with your treatment, taking into account any cases that may arise as described in the preceding narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The broken and displaced hip bone can be detected by palpation, as it becomes swollen in the surrounding area above and below the joint.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration is carried out by immobilizing the bone with a bandage on both sides of the fracture and placing the patient on his stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The nurse should extend the bandage to the entire fracture area if the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If the hip joint is dislocated, the bandage should be positioned near the bottom of the pelvis at the pubic bone to bring the extension upwards, and another bandage on the opposite side of the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is at the bottom, make the bandage near the bottom and extend it to the opposite side of the fracture.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The doctor should align the bones with both hands until they are properly aligned and joined by good union; then you should apply a plaster and bandages, if there is no swelling in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If there is an abscess, leave it alone for several days until the abscess is drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be wrapped around the fracture in this way: wrap a firm bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times and soak it in warm water; then wrap the thigh area to reach the knee and hip joint.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long needle between the thigh and hip close to the groin at the pubic bone, and the extremities of the needle should come out from the other side of both parts, then turn it around on the thigh and hip so that any excess thread is removed from the stitch.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Place a cushion on the thigh at the location of that fracture splint, and place one pin over the bone of the hip.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the void between the thigh and hip with soft cloth, to help clot the flow of blood.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Begin to tie the strong thread around the location of the fracture with three or four loops, and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your knot should be smaller, lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the thread to both ends of the needle as far as it reaches to the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the needles from the other side so that the stitch does not come loose from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Loosen the stitch over that area so as not to cause corrosion, cauterization, abscess or inflammation and similar conditions; and if any such problem occurs, then cut it off immediately, and correct whatever may have occurred appropriately, as I have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	However, if it is a bone problem that requires treatment, then you must pack it as possible; and if not, apply oil on it and leave it to heal, and cure it with what its previous memory suggests before it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases, this thigh fracture may require stronger treatment than the previous ones, as I mentioned in the ankle and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the healing of such a fracture, do not let the patient limp; and if it is only healed by itself, then apply the other leg as well, otherwise it is necessary that the one being treated limps continuously.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh heals in 40 days or a little less than a month, and everything depends on the complexity of the case and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the healing of the shinbone fracture.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the shinbone fracture takes a long time to heal, but it happens more slowly than in previous cases.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if it is a fracture, then it is not simply a crack or break in its parts, but rather a wound or multiple wounds, and everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The healing of it is such that the broken parts are packed with what I have mentioned before, until they are brought together and joined as possible by means of calculation, ease and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Place plaster and place it over the round pin if necessary; and tighten with appropriate knots above it.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Consider all the dispositions I recommended in other fractures, such as cauterization and similar ones that counteract any accidents that may occur until it heals appropriately.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the healing of the thigh fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the hip bone; the other is thin and is called femur.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if any of the types of fracture occur in the two bones of the arm, and it is healed as the arm bone is, then the operation of it is one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If both bones are broken together, the thigh is broken into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is broken, the thigh is converted to fragments in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, it turns backward, and this is due to causes that you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension, alignment and ligature of the splints according to the packing.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the thigh fracture does not have many complications, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your expertise.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh there is some reason for operation on the arm, and this is when you pack the needles and complete all the work of that operation, then take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes that are placed alone, and they are made exactly like branches of palm; align those with a small thickness, and not be thick in the hands, and its length according to the length of the thigh, and from the hip to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to the length of it, and place one over the fracture of the thigh of one part and the other over the other part, and they should be from the hip to the ankle joint of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two needles in three places of the two ends and at the middle one, because with this stitch the thigh is prohibited from closing on the left and right sides, and this is a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace of pine wood according to the length of the thigh is administered; and it should be placed under the thigh to preserve its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And moreover, it must be done for a fracture, and when that is a wound properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then apply warm compress to the wound every day and study it closely, and keep it from becoming an abscess or inflamed or affected by similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, immediately oppose yourself to it with something that is necessary until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Capital Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A fracture does not occur in the entire heel, but occurs sometimes in the foot bones; and in the toes of the feet, fractures occur rarely, and do not occur except during birth or at times of delivery.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot are fractured and those bones are sometimes raised above themselves, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared in this way as they walk.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on what is raised from those bones, and step on it, press, and hold it until it returns to its place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and stop it, and place a small table under the belly of the foot with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that area of the foot with traction, because you have wrapped it in bandages and other means required for that purpose.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, you remove the bandages, because you will discover the bones are held together, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on these is so difficult to perform.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if the toes are broken, restore them and hold them together as I instruct you and recommend to you in the restoration of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken finger in position according to the length of the finger, and the hand should be slightly above it; and place this table which I have recommended under the foot, and strengthen that area with proper traction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then you place a splint on each finger according to its size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table under the heel, and stand on one of the table's legs away from the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you to remember that you should not overlook all the causes I mentioned in other fractures and the accidents that I described, and oppose yourself to every accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Capital Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the hump of a woman and the bone of the pelvis and the buttock of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hump of a woman is broken, it should be made to rest in a sling, and incline it slightly to one side, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife should fill the hump of cotton, and make it like that as hoped; and the woman should be confined, and raise her legs little by little, because all this is forgotten until it is in front of the hump as expected, and the broken bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place poultices on the legs, and when it is necessary to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and urinate, and reduce it and return it as described in the method used at the beginning, and return the poultice first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or a little more, because it is healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of an ewe and strengthen it over the trough of the pelvis with a cane tube; and insert the entire bladder into the pelvis, and inflate the tube with air inside until the bladder is swollen in the pelvis, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with cotton and remain for as many days as recommended until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the pelvis in a man or woman is broken, administer to its restoration and fixation what I have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is right should not be hidden in these proximate fractures and those which are rare, especially for the one who has studied this subject and knows my book; because that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions the correct way of restoration and traction of it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the buttock of a man when it is broken, take a gooseberry leaf, and place the buttock on it; and place a cloth over it wrapped, and wrap it, and let it rest for three days or more until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Capital Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractured bones when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate to treat the person who has suffered a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder blade, or resembles it, to set and drain that as soon as possible if the conditions for setting bones are present as described previously.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the wound bleeds profusely, it is necessary that you take steps to stop the bleeding by applying powdered hematostatic agent if there is no other reason for it.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then proceed to set the fracture on that day and do not delay, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if the abscess is cauterized, you should wait to set the fracture for up to nine days, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day, for you will cause bad outcomes.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin, it is necessary that you perforate and reduce it with your hands with as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the reduction is not prepared and the situation with your hands, you should reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the physician to choose one or two of these instruments based on the size of the fracture in every type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	It should be round and as little curved as possible to ensure proper understanding of the situation during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It should have sharp edges at the margins of its extremities and be thicker at the bottom and smaller towards the middle.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, which means it is a small, flat tool.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, the end of the instrument should be stopped when it comes into contact with the protruding bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	You should probe it once to ensure that the bone has been reduced and is properly set.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, you should insert the instrument into the fracture ends to set them, and if the fractured bone is thin, do not use the tool for this purpose unless it has enough power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with the instrument we have recommended, you should make an incision using the chisels that were mentioned; or it could be one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then file down the bone that remains rough and has small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	Once the bone is set, and the patient feels intense pain gradually, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do what provides great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your procedure on the bone is complete, immerse a piece of black mustard-oil-soaked cloth in vinegar and apply it directly to the wound, especially if it is summertime; do not pause over the wound or other cause where oil might be present, so that it does not cause pus formation and rotting.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the bone setting procedure, and leave the wound open so that you can make incisions with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be cautious not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolish physicians have done this before, causing their patients' death or corrosive and painful wounds, which is sinful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the ligature is loose, soft, and different from the ligatures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or a bad one and you are concerned about the potential for bad complications as we have warned, and there is pain at the site, it is not necessary to apply stitches; instead, apply a hard bandage in place of stitches and tighten it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the wound starts to form pus, which is a sign of infection, you should remove the cloth that you had placed over it with vinegar and apply ointments such as tetra-pharmacon or similar ones that are customarily used for treating wounds.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	You should remove the dressing and inspect the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and make sure that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus drains towards the incisions away from the wound site with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound persists for many days without healing or becoming abscess-free, you should know that this is a sign of the smallpox, and you must examine the wound with caution.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of these signs, those that are separated and extracted should be distinguished from those that remain attached and cause limb swelling and pain; if you can perforate them as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound turns black or emits a foul odor, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, you should pause until one of them is treated according to the treatment that was previously described in its respective chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	When the thighbone is broken, it protrudes from the member in a manner similar to the bones of the large limbs, and do not presume to attract or extract it, as many unfortunate incidents occur due to that, leading to death; leave it inside until it can be set properly, as it may fall apart within 20 to 30 days. Then treat the wound if you see it, and leave it untreated otherwise.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX. (Chapter Twenty)
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodes that occur in the trace of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodes frequently occur in the trace of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and are swollen due to the figure of the member; therefore, forcefully prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Hence consider if the node is recent and administer medicines that have a coagulating effect such as aloes, henna, and so on; in this way take some or all of these, and bind them with wax or albumen, or vinegar, and place it over the node in a poultice, and constrict it well with good binding.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the extraction untouched for several days; then loosen it and apply another, until the node subsides; or press a lead plate gently over it, as lead has the property of holding anything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the node has already turned into a hard and tight mass and it is necessary to remove it frequently, then cut it through the most elevated part of it, remove the superfluous matter and protrusion, or scrape it with sharp scissors until it subsides; and treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Capital XXI (Chapter Twenty-One)
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored and keep the limb thin and weak, according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has been restored and the limb is kept thin and weak, this should not be done except for several reasons: one of which is an abundance of soluble ligament and the ligament made incorrectly; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments before the nutrient is prohibited from flowing into the limb; or due to excessive swelling of the ligaments; or due to superfluous movement not at its time; or due to a small amount of blood in the patient's body and the debilitation of the same.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until the blood is increased in them; administer baths; and give them nourishment and comfort.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice draws in the nutrient, or continue swelling of it with hot water, until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Capital XXII (Chapter Twenty-Two)
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they have been restored incorrectly and prohibit their operation as required.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb has been restored and there is a need for correction of tortuosity and protrusion in the broken bone and node, this is due to the shape of the member being distorted; however, do not prohibit the limb from its natural operation, but it does not necessarily mean that the limb was newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very condemnable and leads to great fear of the sign of which death is imminent.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limpness and nodes are recent, then it is necessary to swell them with hot water in which soft herbs soothing the pain are steeped, such as comfrey leaves and roots, marshmallow, and others similar; and make a plaster with a plaster made from mallow; or take the juice of althea root and bind it with walnut oil or olive oil, and apply it; or take ripe figs, grind them with pigeon flour, and others similar of the medicines that are named "merciful consolidation".
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases it is dissolved with continuous light friction that is done with the most moist materials and movement of the limb is administered throughout all parts at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	However, if tortuosity has already advanced forward and is made strong and turned into stone and requires treatment with iron, then it is necessary that the pus be incised and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what superfluous matter from the node of the same be cut away with sharp scissors; and facilitate the process by applying heat and studying.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capital XXIII (Chapter Twenty-Three)
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is essentially of one of the joints in its place, which is prevented from movement, and distorts the shape of the member, causing pain and great injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when there is a dislocation, it is necessary to perform the reduction as soon as possible and not delay in reducing it, as if it is delayed, the place becomes numb and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	It is not necessary that he be sick or lying down at the time of the amputation, for many times watching it causes spasms and painful shuddering.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When it occurs, it is necessary that you prepare for the patient's flabotomy, and be ready before the amputation resumes; and bind the amputated member with hot water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And let every member be healed by the water that will come to mind at its location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation as it is done before in fractures, from the higher part of the body to the lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of a dislocated jawbone (lower).
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated and not torn, the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: that they are returned to their places with little movement, and softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and compressed, until they are softened at the joint partition, so that saliva from the patient flows out and he cannot keep it in or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation is slight, then it returns to its place with little effort.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and compressed, it is necessary to administer a gentle reduction of it, and not delay it unnecessarily.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister holds the patient's head, and enters his hand into the side of the affected jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the rest of him outside; and commands the patient to stop moving his jaws and let them go from each side; and the minister holds the jaw and wraps it with his hand until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both can be done easily and not delayed unnecessarily, as we said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when they are wrapped and closed, the patient's mouth is clamped shut, and it is not softened, then you place those powdered pieces of cloth with wax on them, made of beeswax and rose oil; and let them lie there with ease and gentle pressure.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows to prevent him from turning either to the right or left; do not force him to move in any way; let his diet consist only of lion meat until the pain is alleviated, and the jaws are healed.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be done with ease, and do not strain the opening of the mouth by eating, drinking, speaking or laughing until the jaw is healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not returned to their places, many times fevers occur, and constant vomiting of pure bile follows, and the patient's abdomen is swollen and his urine becomes dark yellow.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you know that it is a disaster; and many times he who suffers from this condition dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone should not be dislocated from the chest cavity; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, which can be confirmed by examination.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The treatment for this is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then grasp the area with your hand to firmly hold it in place, as it will return to its original position.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Place a dressing over that area and press down on it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The dislocation of the extremity that is connected to the joint will not occur in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and fixed as mentioned earlier and as you are equipped for.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Place a dressing over that area, compress it and immobilize it with bandages, and instruct the patient to rest quietly until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	With this treatment, the dislocation of the muscle's extremity is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capital. XXVI. (This indicates that a new section or chapter is starting)
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle can only be dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the shoulder joint on the outside.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, which can happen, but it is not dislocated behind the shoulder or in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Moreover, it is dislocated and extends beyond the shoulder joint on the outside, especially in those with less flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those with more fleshy areas, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a strong blow or fall can cause it to happen in some men, and the muscle is removed by cauterizing the abscess, and it is treated as if it were already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should be aware of this and treat it accordingly if you encounter it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The dislocation of the shoulder joint on the outside is well-known; so you should distinguish between a dislocated muscle and an intact one, because there are clear differences among them; and at the head of the muscle you will find a concavity towards the inside of the shoulder joint, and when you touch the head of the muscle in that way, it feels like a hump, and the patient cannot reduce their arm or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated on the outside of the shoulder joint or above it, you should clearly feel for it and not miss it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The reduction of this dislocation is made easily when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of the shoulder joint dislocation is that the caregiver lifts the arm above the joint and places their hands below the shoulder joint, lifting the joint upwards to its original position with force, and then the caregiver lifts the arm and extends it; and then they place their hands below it so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return after the treatment described earlier, and it is in its initial stage, a few days later, the patient should be bathed with hot water and administered an embrocation that softens and soothes like if it were a wound of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should lie on their back and rest with their shoulder joint placed between looseness and firmness, and the doctor should place their hand on the head of the muscle, lifting it vertically, and pull the arm of the patient towards the outside to prevent it from slipping out, and another caregiver should hold the head of the patient so that it does not slip out, because it will quickly return to its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: that you bring a man who is taller than the patient to the side of the affected shoulder, and insert your muscle under the shoulder joint of the patient and lift the shoulder joint upwards towards the outside until the patient is suspended in the air, and another caregiver pulls the arm of the patient from below their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, it is necessary that whatever causes the weight be suspended to make it heavier, because the dislocation will quickly return.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Another method of reduction is that a long pole with a round head (similar to the shape of a mortar pestle) should be placed on the ground, not too thick or too thin, and then it should be placed below the patient; then two cloths made of lion skin are placed over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and their arm is extended to the other side with force, because the joint will quickly return to its original position.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction of the shoulder joint is difficult due to all the causes mentioned earlier, use this treatment: take a pole whose length is two forearms and latitude of four fingers, and its thickness should be reduced at the head in this way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Place round lion skin cloths over the round head of the pole to prevent the patient from being injured.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And it should be placed under the thighs of the patient, and the hand or arm should be extended inside the thigh, and the thigh should be tied to the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a step according to its length, extend the hand towards the sides, and have something suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon be joined.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the intestine of it is completed in any way that is possible for you, then you must place under the thigh a linen cloth of appropriate size; and over that, apply an emplaster prepared with powder of moly, oil of rosin, and album over all the muscle, so that it is rolled up, and strengthen under the thigh with a good string; and the hernia should be wrapped around the emplaster, and the hand of it should be connected to its neck, and let it rest, and the hand should not be harmed for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to restrict the food of the patient little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier for healing in it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And food should be given more abundantly after seven or five days and exercise movements; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated by water or other reason many times, then in that case it is necessary to administer cauterization with three cuts, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this is done and after seven days the hernia is not closed and the wrap is removed, and the emplaster and string are reduced several times without being closed and it catches and cannot lift that arm to the sides above, you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have become inactivated or extended or softened, and know that the hernia will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that one you must press on the shin and the breast or the sides behind it, the reduction is done with thrust and extension with hands until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another string should be applied to it, and heal that one until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is serious healing in the member and slow movement of it, then you must use baths several times until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its nature first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated on all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not disguised for you, because the bones are displaced from their place or touched by some figure, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, that is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch it with its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms, because if it comes to an abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and healing of it is slow; and especially when it is behind, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and with more pain, and many times it causes death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that one can be reduced, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with his fingers or the tip of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in front, then you must return it so that the arm bends with its own hand, until you strike the shoulder with the tip of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer violent extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two ministers should extend the arm, and another two should hold it so that the extension does not slip back.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And the arm must be wrapped entirely with folded cloth around it, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with oil to help in the lubrication of the joint and ease of movement; and then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of that area must be stopped on that plaster where there is stiffness and swelling with serous fluid, and it should be compressed with a bandage, and the descent should be prevented with a constrictive device, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then loosen it; therefore, if the joint is formed in its place, you must remove the bandage and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not strong, you must rub the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it subsides; then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if gravity favors the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, you should administer humid heat in bathing and gentle friction, and compress it, until it is relieved; or place something lubricated over the joint, such as greasy material; and bind it, and leave it on the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove it and put it in a bath; when it has cooled down, you should rub the joint with warm friction, and apply something lubricated over it, such as a roll of grease, once, twice, and three times.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has reached the nail bed under the skin, let it be limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, place it over the wet and scalded cowhide seam and press on it; and do this several times, as the area is moist and reduces to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of shoulder (of the joint between the arm and the hand).
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it requires speed in the reduction at the time when it is dislocated, before the location becomes apophthegmatized or a cautionary incision occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's hand on a table and extend their arm, and place your hand or palm over the point of the joint, and push it back into its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the patient's belly, in that case, the patient places their hands on a table and extends and reduces them; if the dislocation is preceded, you should place the patient's hand on the table with their arm positioned intrinsically so that the doctor's hand rests on the point of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, you must compress it with bandage allowing the apophthegma to heal and leave it; do not rub it, as otherwise, pain will occur and you cannot bear it until several days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may remain twisted; and you should not tell the patient about any cause, but rather soften the hand so that it cannot be compressed due to a cause; in that case, you should know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and you should not engage in it unless it is tightened with a pointed cautery for the purpose of healing and providing some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the shoulder is returned, you must place it over the bandage that has been recommended, and leave it compressed for 5 days, and then remove it and exercise the patient's arm.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If its movement is stopped and there occurs any gravity, you should loosen it with warm water and gentle friction several times, until it subsides.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes fingers are dislocated in all directions.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a finger is dislocated at the base or in the palm of one of them, you should press on the finger and push its displacement with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the tip of the finger and suspend the part in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When it is night, do as described earlier, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising movement, and leave it at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist of the hand, and place it in the opposite direction and do the first operation as described, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Do the same when it is dislocated in other directions.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When complete dislocation of one or more vertebrae of the spine or neck occurs, and some displaced vertebrae remain in their original location, there is no cure for it, as death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of this is that the patient's excretion is outside their control and they cannot retain it; several members of the body or two legs or both arms, or one of them, are swollen, or one vertebra remains in its original position, as several days pass, another vertebra remains in place, and several days later, removal of those vertebrae is made in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has already receded behind the parts (limbs) and is called goutiness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure for it is that you should consider if goutiness occurs in childhood, because in that case, there is no cure or healing of it completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Furthermore, in those cases that occur from injury or blow, or similar to those, the ancient authors described the methods of cure at length, but I will condense it as much as possible due to the brevity of this text, with a more concise explanation; however, I have summarized and explained it using various instruments which I will show and explain here.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in goutiness occurring at the front of the foot, there is no cure or healing of it; and similarly in those cases where it occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	That which I recommend is the one that will be cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient should lie down with his back against a wall and his legs propped up with something moist to prevent them from being hurt.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Place a straight stick on the ground at the foot of the patient, and place another stick perpendicular to the first one under their heels.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The first servant should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a pit; the second servant should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Wrap the head of the patient with a cloth and gently tickle the lion's mane (beard) so that it does not hurt him; extend the end of the liament (towel or bandage) to the stick that is under his head, and tie it there; and tighten the other liament over his lower back, around his waist, and cover his legs; and adjust all the liaments and tie them to the other stick that is under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the servant should extend each liament to the side of the stick, but not recede behind both sticks and their liaments where they are fixed, but rather they should remain as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor should place his hands on the spine with strength until it returns (becomes normal), or he may place a board under it and adjust his feet on the board until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then you should take a board that is the same width or length as three arms, and carve a hole in the wall near the patient, in which the end of the board will fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The servant should place the edge of the board on the spine, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and press it with force until the spine is twisted and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish, turn the pulley with your hand; and you should be on the ground at the foot of the patient with two sticks (rods), each one a span long, and the distance between them should be a palm, and make a hole in each rod so that it can rotate, and each one should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let a bandage be wrapped around the thigh, and roll it up in both ends of the two bands.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it (the bandage), there is a knot that forms the thigh, the length of which is one hand span and rolled up; and in the other two bands is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Tighten the ligaments that you have tied around the legs of the patient at the joint that should be at the head, and the ligaments that you have tied around the thighs of him/her at the joint that should be at the feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then you must hold each joint with one servant who turns it with his hand, and the doctor should manipulate the vertebra as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the joint:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Once the vertebra is returned and held in place, you must apply an exisanguinating paste made of albumin of egg and stopper; and apply a plaster on top of the paste, the width of which should be three fingers or nearby that, and the length to match the size of the swelling, and over the parting of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And use the diet that we have mentioned for the patient until he/she is well.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there remains any danger in the area at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and smooth with long-term administration of liniment, which we have recommended; and already a layer of lead has been applied on that site.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes danger remains at the end of the two vertebrae, and this is due to dislocation; and that bone remains in a dangerous position which must not be corrected with this medicine, because it can lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated pelvis.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscles do not only dislocate, but this only occurs in dislocation and not at those other joints where small movement and concavity occur.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the pelvis is dislocated in four ways, because it can be dislocated at the internal divisions, or at the external divisions, or at the frontal divisions, or at the posterior divisions.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Moreover, it is more often dislocated at the internal divisions and less so at the frontal or posterior divisions.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of dislocation in the internal divisions is that when you adjust the thigh of the patient with the healthy thigh, the affected one becomes longer and the end is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his/her leg; therefore, it must be straightened by placing a cauterized apostema at the place where it should be straightened.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to whom this dislocation occurs at the external divisions is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to whom this dislocation occurs at the frontal divisions is that the thigh expands in compliance with it, but does not bend without pain at the end; and if it is perforated to go forward, it cannot be raised beyond the frontal divisions; and the urine is retained, and a cauterized apostema is placed on it, and you must walk on your heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to whom this dislocation occurs at the posterior divisions is that the end does not expand, nor can the front bend as much as the other; and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the pain is relieved, and the head of the thigh should be at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider if the dislocation is old and chronic, which has already been treated with the application of reducing measures and leaving it in its position, then that treatment is not complete; therefore, in that case, correction should not be made.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	However, in the one with recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must strive to correct the joint and stretch it at the internal and external divisions, and move it to the left and right, because this will return it and not require other care.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong servant and stretch the thigh of him/her from the lower part or with his hand or with ligaments that are tied above the knee; another servant should extend his hand above it to the place where he touches the thigh; and another servant should tighten a cord around the head of the hip, and another servant should hold the end of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension is either from the internal part to the ankle at the neck of the pelvis or from the posterior part to the end of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension is for all in one move so that the patient remains raised off the ground and hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in all cases to follow the remedy for this treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of it, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is in the internal divisions, it is necessary that the patient lies on his/her back; and you place ligaments over the head of the hip at the place where the head of the hip is between the pelvis and the lower end of the thigh; and extend the ligament above the knee to the most anterior part of the pelvis.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another strong servant grasps the patient's arms, and gently presses on the swollen part of the sick person's groin and spreads it out to the sides forcibly, as it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This type of treatment is light cure for the abscess which reduces that member unlike other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is not possible to access the abscess with this type of treatment, then it is necessary to tie both the patient's feet together firmly and lightly on top of both ankles and wrists.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each cord be four fingers, and let the sick person's abdomen be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then let the patient be suspended over the post at the highest point, and let the length from the ground to that point be two arms (or about 50 cm).
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to saw the head of the abscess off, and let another strong young man hold the patient, while another pushes the abscess out with force, as the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction itself, when it is a dislocation at the side part, it is necessary for the patient to walk on their toes as we have recommended in the previous section; and tie the cord firmly around the abdomen of the patient themselves and around their legs.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And let two posts be placed, one at the feet and another at the head; and let posts be placed adjusted to the middle of the pole that damp cloths are wrapped around, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their legs, so that the extension to the sides is not restricted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each servant extend to his side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art (or technique).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If it is possible to reverse the position, it will be very good; and if not, press on that area carefully and in this way as we have recommended in the previous section through guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary for the patient to walk on their elbows when they can.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the front side parts, then let the abdomen be extended slightly and as in this narration on pole; and the doctor places his right palm on the sick person's groin, and with the other hand, he compresses that area, and with that compression, he extends the compressed area to the back side parts at the hip.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back side parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended to the sides and raised from the ground; rather, they should be placed on a hard surface, as in the case of an inguinal hernia when the groin area is dislocated outside, as we have said in the previous section about lying down on two cushions; and it should be on their back and the cords should be extended, as we have said, without any benefit.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	It is necessary to apply compression with a table at the joint area where the dislocation is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is complicated, as you know, and the sign of the reduction of that member is not hidden from you (meaning you extend the patient's abdomens and when you see the cords contract and the patient expands their abdomen without excuse, then you will know that the member has returned to its place) - and then you adjust two cushions and apply ointment and compress with bandages so that the hernia is not injured in any of the sides; and keep the patient in rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the cord and the ointment, and compare one abdomen with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see the cords in their proper place, then you will know that the dislocation has been closed and then let the patient walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply ointment to that area and compress it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that, and make the patient walk slowly on crutches for some days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of inguinal dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The inguinal region can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outside, inside, more to the back than to the front, but not at the front side parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of inguinal dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their abdomen to the groin area, and then you will know that the inguinal region is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the recovery of all these dislocations is that you place the patient correctly, so that they extend their abdomen if possible; place your hands on the front part of them, and hold their feet between your legs; and then have another servant hold the inguinal region of them with their palms and keep those areas firmly pressed together until the inguinal region returns to its place. Another servant should extend their leg inward until the inguinal region returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery is that the abdomen adheres to the groin area with a gentle pressure.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply ointment to that area and have the abdomen adhere to the groin, and keep them together with bandages for three or four days, and then remove the bandages.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not use the patient for walking for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction [of the hernia] is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with bandages in the treatment of the hernia, as mentioned in the previous account.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitolo XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Del trattamento della dislocazione del piede.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Il piede qualche volta viene rimosso parzialmente, e altre volte è dislocato per causa di trauma, e la dislocazione del piede può essere causata all'interno delle articolazioni oppure all'esterno.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	Ed è un segno della dislocazione del piede che, in alcuni casi, si nota l'inflessione del piede nella zona della dislocazione.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	Ma il trattamento della rimozione del piede è quello di ridurre semplicemente, rendendolo facile da espandere e compresso fino a quando non torni alla sua posizione originale.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Ma nel trattamento di una dislocazione del piede causata da trauma, è necessario tenere in posizione retta il paziente e avere un ministro forte e valido nella parte posteriore del piede in quella stessa posizione.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Poi prendi con la mano sinistra il lato destro del piede in posizione superiore della caviglia.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Poi tirai il piede con la mano destra verso te stesso, poi con la mano sinistra lo tieni per due volte, poi estendi la mano sinistra; quindi colpisci le ginocchia del piede con la mano destra senza lavorare.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	E fai quello che ho detto in due volte.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	E poi colpisci il ginocchio inferiore del piede con la mano sinistra sulla caviglia.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Se il piede torna alla sua posizione originale dopo una o due volte con questa tecnica, è buono; se non ciò accade, allora prosegui con l'operazione, poiché il piede tornerà indietro.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Ma se la riduzione del piede è proibita a te con quella tecnica raccomandata, allora lascia il paziente sedere sul suo fianco sulla terra, e metti un pavimento sicuro in terra fermo sotto di lui, e sia coperto da un lenzuolo per evitare che il paziente si ferisca.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	E il ministro tenga le sue mani sui lati del piede, e un altro ministro estenda il piede con le mani o con una spugna che giace sul collo del piede; e un altro ministro estenda quello stesso lato in opposizione all'estensione del suo lato, e il pavimento sia tra le gambe del paziente per tenere in posizione quello.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	E il medico riposiziona la dislocazione del piede con le sue mani, e un altro ministro tiene le gambe in posizione opposta, perché la dislocazione ritornerebbe facilmente.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	E quindi, quando la dislocazione ritorna e viene dichiarato che la riduzione è stata effettuata correttamente, allora posa dell'impasto su di esso e ti rimuovi con forza l'imballaggio e legami il piede alla caviglia.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	E è necessario essere attenti ai nervi che sono dietro al piede, poiché i legami sul piede non devono essere troppo forti e dolorosi.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	E lasciare quello per due o tre giorni; se i legami diventano mollificati, rimuovere quelli.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	E lasciare quello libero nel terzo giorno o nel quarto; proibisca al paziente di andare per quaranta giorni.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go before that space, it is not certain that the dislocation is not already resolved and corrupt, and it should be approached with caution as it may not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If it is a case of cauterizing an abscess, you must administer in the area where the treatment and dressing will be applied until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capital (chapter) 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes on the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the dislocated person be tied up with little extension and not too tight, because it should be easy to move.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to hold the patient's foot on a wooden or earth platform so that it remains stationary as if it were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And place your foot on that which supports the joints, and press it with your foot against it firmly until it returns, and observe if it remains tied and does not come out of its position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And press the belly of the foot to a table that supports the entire foot with two ends, and tighten it with a structure that is strong and firm for three days; and release it and let it rest from walking for several days, until it has been strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital (chapter) 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation caused by injury, fracture or any combination.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur and you are engaged in treating it and restoring it, death often occurs after a while.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Therefore, it is not necessary to presume on the treatment of it (the dislocation), but rather one who is skilled in the art, with long experience, mercy and compassion, cautious, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses medications that cure abscesses only at the beginning, leaves the patient to divine judgment, not to one for whom hope of salvation from perdition is doubtful, but rather to one for whom there is hope of alleviation from illness, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so, you should make every effort to reduce it (the dislocation) as soon as possible at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as desired, then administer a treatment that heals the abscess and treats the wound with what is appropriate for dry dressings.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If the dislocation is a fracture and there are separate splinters in the bones, then you should perform a setting of them, and do as we have said in simple illnesses in the places where they occur.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid as your virtue dictates the instrument in the dangerous paths following my preaching; for that is better for you should be to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasim may God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
