Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Therefore, my children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge in medicine, by completing it you will attain its end, and by reading its explanations and clarifications, I find that I should complete this treatise on surgery for you.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the art of surgery is almost entirely obsolete in our kingdom and time, due to the great danger it poses, and the instruments of surgery are lost; only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the ancients, which have been corrupted by many errors and hazards until their meanings are obscured and their power diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I find it appropriate to arrange this treatise according to the method of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of the work come with their explanations and preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	One reason for the scarcity of good craftsmen in this field is that the art of medicine requires lengthy study, and the one who practices it must have knowledge of anatomy, which includes knowing the joints and shapes of members, their connection and separation; having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and the extraction of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations for their incision.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said, a word is a small thing in itself, but it has great significance in work and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; whoever is not well-versed in anatomy is not qualified to avoid falling into error, which can lead to the death of men, as I have seen many of these people, some are ignorant of this science and abandon it after their learning and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in her neck so that a large amount of blood flowed until the woman died among them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	I also saw another doctor who believed he could pull out a stone from a man in his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him and cut a piece of the bladder while pulling out the stone, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	I have already stated that this is the case, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	I also saw another doctor who received a salary from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he went to a black castellan who was owed a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with pulvines and splints of strong construction, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	He laid it open as desired, and he applied the dressing, and he left it to heal for several days and commanded us to remove the bandages; and so it was until the thigh and leg became abscessed, and this led to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you are called upon to him, and prepare to unbind the liniment, and peace and quiet is obtained, and he may then alleviate his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, corruption had already spread in the limb, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the patient was at risk.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor pierced an abscess full of cancer, and it became an ulcer close to several days, until the evil within it was magnified by its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancerous growth is pure of melancholy humor, and therefore it should not come upon him with all ferocity, but rather on an organ or member that is most vulnerable to it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my son, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts: one part is the operation associated with health, and the other part is the operation in which danger lies in greater decisions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already examined this matter in every place of this book where the operation is carried out with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and let go of that, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and mislead you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take your weapons with caution and the protection of God, and your patients with compassion and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to be lost in salvation and a blessed succession, and set aside the terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and lay down your weapons from that which causes you fear, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not cause you to be led astray: for it remains with your glory, and moreover in this world and in the next to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualla now says in some of her teachings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat an evil disease, so that bad doctors do not become known."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first chapter of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is arranged for the foot, regarding the shapes of instruments and the fire of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter is about cysts and piercing, wounds, sores, extraction of bladders and similar things, all arranged in the shapes of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, and treatment of twisting and similar things, arranged for the foot, and in the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauteries with fire and sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	That is where the treatment of the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary that I speak about the quality of the juxtaposition of the cautery and its negative effects, and in what circumstances cauterization should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the juxtaposition of the cautery and its negative effects is a long, detailed, subtle discourse full of science, hidden secrets; and many wise people have already spoken at length about it, and they disagree, and to me it amounts to only a small part of their discourses, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that the use of cauterization applies universally to all matters or substances, with two exceptions, which are situations without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the situation without matter and dry, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for a disease that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is appropriate that a dry and desiccated disease be treated with wet things.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that he who says the opposite is correct, that cauterization is beneficial in all dry and desiccated diseases that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the nature of fire, the bodies of men are burned by it.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say from experience that this has been observed in some cases by me.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not necessary to reiterate that which has already been expounded and exercised in the chapter on cauterization by previous exercise, and to know the diversity of human bodies and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of these diseases, and the accidents associated with them, and the time span of these conditions.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other situations, there is no need for fear, and especially in wet and cold diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and there is no disagreement about the beneficial effects of cauterization in these cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you, my sons, know that the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it is that cauterization with burning medicine is superior to cauterization with fire, because fire is simple, its action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized and is harmful only to a small extent to neighboring members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of burning medicine extends to adjacent members, and it has a strong effect in bringing disease to the diseased member that is difficult to heal and causes pain.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, except that it superfluesc. It is already known to us by experience and by the length of service in the study of the art concerning the truth of the causes; and because of that, I am excused from the length of the sermon. If it were not forbidden in my free speech here, I would reveal secretly hidden about fire, and the quality of the operation in the bodies and its expulsion through which diseases are expelled, philosophical demonstrative discourse, which sharpens your thoughts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause the best time of springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm due to accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn from cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, which do not tolerate delay, since it is feared that the harm coming from malicious intent, which is greater than small harm entering through time, could overcome it.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	Do not believe in your thoughts, or sons, that it is not considered except by the common people and foolish doctors, because reduction of that disease which is cured by cautery is not complete at all times, and they pause on this consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they believe, because cautery is not simply in a place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humidities that are the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But indeed, cautery surpasses medicine due to the desire for its value and virtue in its operation and the greatness of its Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease will return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, as well as its power, and what is prepared in his body from accumulations in him of superfluities and humidities, and what is obtained for him in food and similar things from these causes; except that the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as cautionery on teeth for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather it is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is an incorrect saying, not according to what I understand in it, because I believe that it is not a cure that improves with medicine or any other reason for cautionery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is opposite of that; and my intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not because it is administered in some diseases when methods of healing do not confer, but rather at the end of the disease, cautionery is administered and improves upon it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Now you understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention that I understand from the common people and the follies of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	They said the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	They said that the location of cautery does not harm, as this is not absolutely true, because I already have it proven and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterizing with gold is better than with iron as they say; however, when you perform cauterization with fire from gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the quantity that you want according to the roughness of gold, and it prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it above the fire, the gold melts due to heat, and if some layers occur in the fire for the craftsman to cut through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cautery with iron must be done lightly and more carefully in terms of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I alleviate your request for what you want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterizing pain in the head due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers upon coldness and humidity the harmful accident of which there are two causes, namely scrofula and an abundance of rheumatic fluxes, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the ears and eyelids flowing, and an abundance of sleeping, and tooth pain and hoarseness, and universally on all disease that comes due to coldness, such as paralysis, scurvy, apoplexy, and similar things in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine, cleansing his head for three or four nights, according to the power of the patient and his age and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and position it so that you sit on top of it between your hands on a sloping bench and hold his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the edge of your palm in line with the base of the nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But indeed, as your hand position has been reached, mark that location with a test and then ignite the olive oil cautery, which is the form of this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place a cushion on the spot indicated, in such a manner that it descends, with which your hand should be gently constrained little by little, and you turn it over.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, if you see any part of the bone exposed, such as a small amount of gravel, then raise your hand, and if it does not return to that position, use another tool, if it is cold, until the bone that I told you about is seen.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a small amount of salt and dissolve it in water at that spot, let it remain for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place a cushion over the sore wound and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And treat the area with a strong four-ingredient medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	They say that when the wound remains open, it gets better by applying honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They say that some of them should have the callous burned to the bone with a cautery and keep the cautery on it until some part of the bone has been burned away.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And shave that which is next to the bone and treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others say that with the cautery you can reach the marrow, until it causes deep pain in the bone, and this is the method of amputation in small cases.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They believe that from that spot the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Keep the wound open for a long time and treat it until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Moreover, I have not seen these two types of cauterization in every case, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one alone, for it is better for your health when you do so, because the head is exposed due to a continuous solution of such things as we have testified in other members, and especially if the patient's head is naturally frail.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The primary type of cauterization is safer and better for your health, and from that moment on, use it for your health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the entire head in the patient and it is prolonged, and he uses medications such as headaches, migraines, head wraps, and capillary treatments, ointments, poultices, balms, oils, liniments, and similar remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery that has not helped in any of those ways, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong; and if it is not frail and weak, perform another cauterization using a different cautery.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And cauterize that part of the head near the ear with cauterization until the callous is separated.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the callous and expose the bone in the quantity that has been determined and cauterize it at the back of the head in the place called "Venus," - which is the location where a blister is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And be careful not to expose the bone because the patient will experience great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will tell you where this cauterization should be performed, because the cauterization in which the corn of the head and the occiput is cauterized is more subtle than the one used for cauterizing other parts of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Treatise on modern cautery (or Cauterization in Modern Times)
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain in the head occurs or pain penetrates into the skull, or pain settles in the neck, it should be treated with medications that heal the head, and the other remedy, which I have mentioned in the treatments for diseases; but if this does not help, then cauterization is required in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Moreover, burning with a hot iron requires that you take a ladle of lime, scrape it and remove its edges on both sides from the handles.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then make an incision in the temple area with a scalpel that enters deeply until it is made hidden (covered up).
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then press down on the area with compressed bandages and leave it like that for three hours; then loosen the bandage and remove the lime, leaving the wound open for two or three days, and then place a dressing over the submerged area until the tissue heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the wound until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, do this with some burning medications that I have written in the second treatise on burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, ironing cauterization according to this method: fire for the cauterizing is required. The shape of it is:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and is called a nail-like claw, because its head is shaped like a nail with a slight curve, and in the middle of it there is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Place your hand over the area of pain, keep your hand - so as not to be harmed by the archer's equipment that is nearby - and rotate the small iron slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is burned by the sharp edge of the scalpel is small compared to the size of it, raise your hand in such a way that the artery is not harmed, which is nearby, so that there will be no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then immerse the area in salt water and place it over the location, leaving it for three days; then cover the area with lint, and care for the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want, perform the cauterization with the extremity of the cutler's knife according to cautery and be careful not to make an incision in the artery during this modern gout treatment (cauterization).
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Treatise on ancient gout cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat gout with the remedies that I have previously mentioned, and the treatment does not work, or the disease is one that does not respond to the remedy for the first cauterization with medicine or fire cauterization, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery knife until it glows, meaning placing it on the location of pain with a line of sufficient length, so that it covers the area; and after pressing your hand for a while, pierce the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must be careful not to damage the jawbone, which is necessary for chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves that supply it, and that there are no spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and caution of stopping the flow of blood from an artery that is incised, for in the incision there is fear, especially for one who does not know what to do and is not skilled and experienced; leave the operation on it at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this illness is not alleviated by this cautery and the body of the patient tolerates it, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and heal the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you find that the cautery mentioned in the section on artery obstruction with cautery having two irons is not effective, this caution is more beneficial and appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Capital V:
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Chapter on Cauterization of Ear Pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and is cured by causatives or other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, which is called "puncture." Here is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Approach the "puncture" with caution and bring it near the ignition, ensuring that it surrounds the entire ear as a wheel is rolled or in the circumference of each sample if the pain is in one area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Approach the ear cauterization slowly, taking care to locate the exact spot before proceeding.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If multiple points of cauterization are made in the entire ear, ensure that each is properly treated until healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI:
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Chapter on Cauterization for Torticollis (Wryneck).
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Wryneck that is cured with cauterization is only done for the species that come from poison, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Cauterization should be avoided for the species that enter by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	If the treatment of wryneck with herbs, capers, and gargles does not work, you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: first, make an incision in the ear, second, apply a small hot iron to the temple, and third, cauterize the junction of the lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Allow the cautery to cool in the opposite direction of the affected side, as the healing process will only occur in the healthy area.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization involves using the cautery to make an incision in the upper part of the ear near the corner of the head, and another incision along the temple, the length of which should be the same as the width of the finger used to make it. After making the incisions, allow the cautery to cool before proceeding with treatment. Ensure that the cauterization is carried out until the affected area is completely burned away.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, it is the specialized tool of the blacksmith, its shape being like a tabletop.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more subtle than what one can see with the eyes; and it is necessary to remove any excess thickness from it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of the place with what is in front of the process before it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the ancient cautery for apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you are treating it with what has been said and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: primarily on all corners of his head; at the middle of the head, as has been said; and at the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of using the cautery is done as has been said before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	It has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; it is more recent; take care of it with what you are processing.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization for forgetfulness caused by fevers.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large and round pills, altering them if needed.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the patient's entire head and place on it a plaster made of the ingredients described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Leave that area uncovered for some days, as this is the method of using the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do what that medicine orders, which I have already mentioned before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Therefore, if it cures well with that treatment, then there is no need for anything else; but if not, make three cauteries on the lower part of his head, decreasing from the most superior part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Leave a gap between each cautery and take care of the cauterized area with what you are processing.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you feel that the patient can tolerate more, then make a single cautery at the middle location; but if you want to be more aggressive, make it over both ears.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care of the cauterized area until it heals; and let the cauterization be olive-shaped, as described before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization for preservation and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary to process the head with what has been said and give him pills; then shave the patient's head, make a cautery at the middle of his head, a cautery over all the corners of his head, another cautery on the lower part of his body, and three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body due to a severe condition and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize it over the vertebrae of the back with four cauterizations, and later make a cautery at the place where the cord emerges from the spine, and raise your hand above it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Take care of the cauterized area until it heals, and let this be olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not to be cauterized; rather, that epilepsy is due to a fever.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is necessary to process the brain of the patient at the beginning with what has been mentioned before and with the other treatment that I described in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, administer powders and sweetened medicines that can be processed, with the help of purgatives for several days, with purification of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head and make a single cautery at the middle of his head according to the previous method, another cautery on the back of his head, and one over each corner of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with a cautery, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spinal column at the neck and the spinal column at the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Then use olive oil as a precursor to the cauterization.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	However, if the patient is a child, pause the subtle cauterization in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and weakened humors, then cauterize that area with a cautery, having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess declining to melancholia, and the patient's body is moist, give him water that purifies his brain as described in the previous division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, and prepare a turtle shell properly made for him on top of his forehead, and apply it in the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be seated and kept from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply a lining, which is suitable for an old ewe's fleece.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that area over a fire at a moderate temperature, which the patient should endure when it is placed there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place it in the middle of his forehead, and leave him with it until it is cooled down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Do this to the patient every week once, along with his other treatment until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area by making small points as much as possible, without letting go of a cautery in such a manner: this is a type of cauterization that moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that area in sheep's wool or linen cloth.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water flowing down the leg.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have identified the start of water flowing down the leg according to the signs I mentioned in the previous division, begin and give the patient water that purifies his head, and keep him away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Apply that salt in a bath every day.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of his forehead; and cauterize it twice with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of a flow of water in both legs, or once with one cauterization if it is the beginning of water flowing in one leg.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make incisions with a cautery on all veins and arteries that are already open; and make the cauterizations in that area near the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Be careful to avoid bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from there, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the opening of those, as well as caution for bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	It is sometimes cauterized in the neck, just below two bones, with two cauterizations properly performed.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears in the legs are ancient and persistently, and it is determined that it is an excess of phlegmatic fluids in the areas of the head visible outside the skull and confirmed by the veins and arteries in that location, then cauterize that area with a cautery as described in the beginning of water flowing down the legs, and use a cauterization on the forehead and two cauterizations near the temples, as well as two cauterizations near the neck bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it requires addition (meaning treatment), then cauterize the entire length of the hernia along the base of the scrotum at the eyelash tip using a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	This appears to be a reference to a chapter number in the treatise. The Roman numerals were used in medieval texts, and this one corresponds to the 14th chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nasal foul smell.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat the person you mentioned in the previous section and your treatment does not work, prepare your equipment and give the patient three nights of cochina (a type of medicinal drink) to drink; then shave their head and cauterize the area using a medium-sized cautery with an olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that area with a small clove-scented cautery on both eyelids, removing the hair slightly.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn the affected area by accident.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And here is the shape of the clove-scented cautery: (No further translation provided for this line as it seems to be describing a visual aid rather than text.)
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv. (15th chapter)
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization for softening the eyelids of males.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of a male becomes soft due to illness or moisture, you should cauterize it with a cautery and this is its shape: (No further translation provided for this line as it seems to be describing an illustration or diagram.)
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you are cauterizing that area, make a small mark with two cauteries on both eyelids in all directions, and extend the marks to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery mark correspond to the width of the eyelash.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the third part of the eyelid that is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (16th chapter)
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cauterization of the male eyelid when the hair is converted into parts inside and pierces the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the eyelid is converted into parts inside and pierces the eye in this manner, cauterization can be performed in two ways: either by burning or by using a medicine to burn.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If a pointed cautery of the foot is heated, tell the patient to read these words just as those who clean themselves do, until they are prolonged and swollen; and if you puncture it, then hold the heels with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the skin grows back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then have the patient close their eyes and put your hand on the eyelids of the heels with a signal to them as shown by the figure of the holly leaf, and begin the signal at the place where the skin is.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then put cotton soaked in oil or bird glue on the heel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And heat the pointed cautery of that shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize with the pointed shape that was signaled, bit by bit, in small patches until the surface of the skin, which is like holly leaf, is burnt entirely and appears properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the cure of your work is that the eyelids of the heel will be contracted and the skin over the heel raised due to the puncture of the heel.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore lift it up and place it for three days, and have it bandaged until the scar has risen.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that one with mouthwash until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns due to some cause and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another time the cautery over it just as you did the first time.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is in the eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural position and is swollen and the skin does not touch the heel.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if the cautery with medicine burns this one, tell the patient to read the skin until it is prolonged and swollen, and have paper or cloth in the shape of holly leaf made.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known sage and live coals in a cup. And mix it well. And say that, and mix those substances well, and do it quickly so that it is not spoiled; and spread that over the paper in the shape of holly leaf, and place it on one or both heels; and place a cotton soaked in oil under the heel, and the head of the patient should be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the medicine on the skin and press it gently, but do not let it be too hard because biting is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you notice that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, then remove the medicine and let it dry; and once the biting stops, remove the medicine and wash the heel with water; and consider if the eyelid has been raised as it should be washed with fire or incision because at this point it is good; and if it does not return to its original position due to the medicine being pressed too hard or if the operation is spoiled, then put the medicine on the same spot until the heel is swollen.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And have it bandaged until the callus of the adhesion is removed, and cure that one with mouthwash or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must keep watch over your operation to make sure that no pus from the medicine falls on the heel, and if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days and some cause of the skin touches the heel, then repeat your medicine on the spot where the eyelid has become soft, just as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of holly leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You should know that the heels of men are diverse according to their size and thickness, and therefore your treatment will depend on this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not hide the true path from the one who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are in the heel's lacrimal gland.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistulas as mentioned in the division of diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: tell the patient to place their head in your lap, and have a servant hold the head of the patient in such a way that it is neither harmed nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And put cotton soaked in oil or bird glue on the heel of that fistula.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And heat the pointed cautery of this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The subject should be in a concave shape, similar to a reed or a pen with a bent tip, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it penetrates into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out thus it tries.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the concave one is better for this work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw pus and dry it out from there.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the purulent material from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place your hand on the cautery which should be well ignited, and hold it there about one finger's width below the patient's nose, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed, and then press the cautery onto the vein and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if the cautery enters the bone at the beginning, it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it as it is for three days, and then press on that spot with a border and cover it with an absorbent dressing until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if it has passed ten days and is not healed, then press on it with a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped as needed in its respective chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some have said earlier: enter the location of the fistula and fill it up, then press on that fissure with a fine metal rod of the shape of a feather; It was the quantity of one inch of melted lead; hold your hand with good grip, but do not harm the patient because the melted lead should not reach the vein of that location; and you must also press on the vein of the patient's location with albumen of egg or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what has been said about cauterization and cure, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nose drop and reduce the fistula into the nostril according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Treatise on the Cauterization of Fissures in the Feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Swelling frequently occurs in lips, especially in those of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	When the swelling does not improve with the treatment we've told you about, then heat it with a small cautery knife following this method:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The concavity of the area should be in accordance with the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place a cushion carefully over those swellings so that the cautery reaches the base of the swelling.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Apply the remedy until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess appears on the uvula or the palate or in the roots of teeth and you apply a bandage, and it bursts, and becomes infected, and a fistula is formed, and you treat it and its cure does not improve, then you must heat a cautery according to the amount required for the fistula, and insert the heated cautery into the hole in the fistula, keeping your hand inside until the heat reaches the base of it, and at the end do this once or twice; and apply treatment with what we have told you about its cure until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the pus is drained and heals, that is good; otherwise, it becomes necessary to find the location and remove the corrupt bone as described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterization of teeth and softening of swellings.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When swellings are softened by moisture and teeth are damaged, and you use medicines to treat them but they do not improve, then place the patient's head on your lap, and heat the cautery according to the method that will be described next, so that you can quickly press the handle of the cautery against the tooth and insert it into the swelling, keeping your hand a little away from the tooth until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And lift up your hand, and repeat heating the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Make the patient rinse their mouth with salty water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, because a damaged tooth is closed and swollen gums are tightened and decaying moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or it has rotted or worms have invaded it and cannot be cured with medicine, then cauterize in that manner according to two methods: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with a cow's horn means that you take a horn of a cow and sharpen it with iron, wrap it in cloth, immerse the sharpened end in boiling water, and place it on the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat the process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you prefer, immerse cotton or cloth in the horn mentioned earlier, place it on the painful tooth, and hold the heated iron over it until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterizing with fire requires careful attention to the quality of the charcoal or iron, and there should be some coarseness in it so that the heat of the fire does not burn the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And apply the chosen method of fire cauterization, place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cauterization cools down; do this several times to alleviate or eliminate the pain that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to inform the patient that they must keep good cotton in their mouth for an hour and then spit it out; this is the method of fire cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize with whichever method you prefer.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hemorrhoids are caused by coldness and humors that do not digest properly due to lack of digestive capacity, and you want to promote digestion of those humors slightly, apply heat cauterization using the following method: two openings should be made so that the smoke escapes from one side, and the cauterization is performed on the other side, placing it ignited on the hemorrhoid for a moment, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the root of the hemorrhoid.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the hemorrhoid is small, apply the cauterization according to its size, and leave it for three days and place cotton dipped in oil on top of it until the smoke has burned away what the fire has burnt.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with mouthwash, tents, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the cannula or method of cauterization should be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of throat ulcers and constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes on the trachea of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by inflammation, then the patient must be evacuated at first with laxatives, and the affected area should be cauterized with a cautery following the judgment of the physician.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Be careful not to burn the trachea with the cauterization or burn its covering, but only a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize the area with another cautery should be done at the joint of the neck in the lower part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery used should be a small, pointed tool as mentioned before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Care for the affected area with that which has been previously stated until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to moisture, the patient has no fever nor phlegm and the illness is chronic, then cauterize the area with two cauterizations on the collarbone at the points where lions' paws and bulls' hooves touch; and with another cautery in the middle of the thigh between the nipples; and let the cauteries be small and pointed as mentioned before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make the cauterization with a pointed cautery called a punt, whose form has been described in the treatment for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points at those places; and care for the affected area with that which has been previously stated until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cauteries have three prongs, for cauterization is with this: once you can do three cauterizations in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of tickling that is the head of the appendix.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the appendix is displaced due to lubricous moisture and does not return in its place at the time of its return, then its displacement should be returned before it is accustomed to do so; and with a slight movement, displace it so that it ends up, as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the displacement, and to place the patient on their back or on their side; and to lift the skin which is in the lower part of the appendix to the upper parts with your left hand if the junction is displaced below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And heat the cauteries, which have two heads; and this is their form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And carefully cauterize the skin, until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come soon with four pointed cauterizations.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be as subtle as the quantity of tendon; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some days are adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And pause over the cauteries for three days with salt, and apply tranquility to the patient, and let the member not be harmed for any time before it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is above and has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or many cauterizations, because the junction is confirmed, the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Treatise on cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When heat and moisture penetrate the stomach, causing it to swell and multiply within, and if the treatment methods are not followed, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, extends their arms and legs, and a cauterization must be made with three cauteries: one cautery placed under the feet about the size of a finger, another two cauteries placed at the costal margins of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery is formed; and elongate those not in line to avoid burns.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is the thickness of two thirds of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be in this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the midpoint of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	Cauterize the stomach where the cauterization is afraid: and if you feel on the stomach at the place you want with the test, then cauterize that area with the cautery in the points; and treat that area with the healing that precedes it until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterization of the swollen vein.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the vein due to heat, moisture or swelling that is beyond its normal course and exits excessively, and the patient has been treated with what has been said and it does not heal, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back and feel three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity placed on the vein near the hip bones (on the side of a man).
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	The space between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the straight body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not press the hand with the cautery too much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the quantity of what is applied is less than the thickness of the skin, and it is not tightly fitted; and if the patient is standing on their feet (on a stool); and if they are not, then let them sit, who has already extended their limbs, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You can cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife if you have the subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and make sure that the entire skin is covered for the whole body to enter the intestines, as the skin here is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess in the vein with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	If an abscess or tumor has arisen in the vein and you want to know if this abscess is in the flesh of the vein or in its sheath, then if it is in the flesh of the vein, the patient becomes heavy and more painful.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the sheath of the vein, then the pain increases greatly and often wearies the doctors in its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned on their back; and feel the location of the abscess with your fingers; and apply fire to the cautery that resembles a thread (a thin piece of wool or cotton), whose shape has been described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Burn with that and the cautery until all the skin is burned up to the cyst (abscess), so that it breaks open and purges pus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of that (area) until the other abscesses are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this method of cautery unless the study in the art of medicine has been prolonged and more maladies are known about it; but experiment with this operation a few times, nevertheless, leave that (one) alone, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pain.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients used cauteries for the removal of arteries in the treatment of pain according to this method; and it is this one that you will take from the long dry artery, and choose a pointed probe that is found, and its thickness should be like that of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse it in oil and heat it up, and cauterize that location with a cautery between the junction of the collarbone and neck; and with two small cauteries nearby, one slightly inclined towards the area below the beard, and two more in the area that is declining between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, slightly inclined backwards; and another on the same spot on the foot; and another over the stomach; and three cauteries at the rear; and another at the location between the shoulders, and two cauteries at the sides of the feet, excluding the one that is between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand with the cautery, but rather keep it uncovered in the open air.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancients used a cautery made of iron resembling a ray and heated it in that location between the ribs until they reached the abscess and drained the pus as mentioned in the case of an abscess on the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with cauterization there is no fear, for one may die immediately from the fistula in which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the malady of the spleen with the method we have described for its division and do not make progress in your treatment, then cauterize it in the following three ways, all of which are appropriate; one of which is to perform three or four cauteries according to the length of the spleen as shown in the figure of the cauterizations of the thigh (which has been previously described).
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the thickness of each cautery should be like that of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have described in the cauterization of the thigh.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle; and lift up the abdomen that is on the left side of the spleen so that the patient can lie on his right side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your lifting should be such that you raise the abdomen according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And place the two warm compresses together, ignite them, in that area where they penetrate each other's bandage of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then extract the cautery; and therefore, forge four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three warm compresses.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And apply the cautery that has been soaked in vinegar for several days, because it is more appropriate than the other causes mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydrocele (hydrocele treatment with cauterization).
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery should not be applied to the hydrocele, but rather to the scrotum itself (properly).
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrocele with the methods of treatment mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary that you cauterize it using four cauteries around the testicle and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And allow the cautery to cool down before using it again (to prevent burns for long periods).
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after applying the cautery with anything that is necessary for healing, and it should be hastened to him with assistance in recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be curved, as it was previously described, and this one is used to cauterize the back, following its previously mentioned shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and other things.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are afflicted with hydrocele and filled with sclerotic water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the heel at the point between the auricle and the ankle, and lift your hand with the cautery, but do not turn it; then lift your hand again, but do not return it entirely, as the sclerotic water will flow.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this manner: Place two cauteries on both thighs and within each thigh make a cautery with the tip of the cautery knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be as long as the thigh: Draw it down and the other one a little lower on the same thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time to let any pus drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And take care of those causes which I have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cauterization of Abdominal Wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When an abdominal wound is caused by cold and moisture that softens the internal organs, this affects the digestive and retentive functions, which are in the stomach and intestines. This condition is treated with the methods of treatment mentioned earlier, but sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization due to the display of virtue. In such cases, perform a large cautery over the patient's stomach as described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the circular cautery and four thin cauteries around the umbilicus, also using a fine cautery tip; and another cautery on the navel or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If the humidity excessively appears and the patient can tolerate it, then perform cauterization on the navel and intestines, and firmly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin area, as this is a perfect cure for that condition without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old hemorrhoids occur due to cold humors or decayed humidity, or when they have been treated but not cured as mentioned earlier, then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower part of the anus, in a triangular shape, and another cautery across the navel area.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes their face is abscessed, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as described earlier; and use one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a fine cautery tip. Leave the cautery open for some time and take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On Cauterization of Atheyl near the Abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove atheyl, heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place that heated cautery into the removed atheyl, and hold the handle until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And perform this procedure once or twice, as if atheyl is numerous, then cauterize each one individually as previously mentioned, and take care of them with the methods that promote healing until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more effective.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Cauterization of Fistulas Caused by Nature in Various Parts of the Body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work recommended in its location and the patient is frightened by it, use cauterization for healing.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When a person has an ulcer in nature posterior and it is old, the wound and corrupted humidity drain from it, so it is fitting that you try to heal that with subtle means, and approximate the amount of its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approach the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply that heated cautery to this ulcer and according to the depth to which it penetrates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the cauterization over those rotten humors until they are burned quickly one or two or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the ulcer is in the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, be careful with all those areas; and do this only when the ulcer is in a fleshy location and you believe that it does not penetrate deep.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Treat the affected area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the location is sealed and all matter has been removed from it and it remains in that state for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matter is not removed, you know that it is penetrating or corrupting bone, or it may cause the return of those causes which will be remembered in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterizing abscesses.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in the abscesses due to cold or large swelling, and so the patient is uncomfortable, it is necessary that you cauterize each abscess with a cautery on each abscess using a hot iron previously heated.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly apply the cautery with a small delay, so that three cauterizations will be made in sequence, and thus they will help each other more effectively.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterizing the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture causing the patient not to be able to retain urine, you should cauterize it in a lower location below the bladder, at the point where the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the bladder opening; cauterize that area with one cautery in a lower location or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	The iron for cauterizing should be prepared accordingly.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterizing the small intestine.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the small intestine is affected by cold and moisture, it is prohibited to perform an operation, and menstruation becomes corrupted, and its onset is delayed, and pain occurs, you should have the location cauterized with three cauterizations around the navel, as we mentioned in the section on the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower location of the intestine or two cauteries, and ensure that the cautery is hot.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterizing the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture thickens at the heel joint and causes swelling of the area, and it is extended over the other when compared to it, this is called prolongation of the toe.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is sought in the bone.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, you must cauterize the patient at the heel joint with a circular cautery because you will have a sign when the circle is around the joint as it revolves, and in this way the joint falls into the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the shape of the cautery be that of a stomach in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three small olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Let the cautery be made according to the severity of the bladder stone; and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs at the heel joint and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with the water that has been mentioned earlier (and not conferred), which is an old remedy. Therefore, you must let the patient take laxatives made of foul-smelling or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with a burning medicine or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two methods known to science, one of which is that you cauterize it on the heel joint with three triangular cauteries in this shape and make sure they have good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the size of the fingertip, and if the cauteries are olive-shaped or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	In some cases, the cautery should be over the middle of the heel where there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize it with a circle whose shape is that of the joint dislocation and which encompasses and burns the entire bladder stone.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the heel but not extended into the toes.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the toes, then you cauterize it with two cauteries on the toe at the location where the pain occurs; and with one cautery on the calf four fingers below the tendon.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is a surgical cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the severity of the bladder stone.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient's pain is extended to the location near the feet, then you cauterize it here where the pain occurs with a cautery at three or four points or more as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient's pain is below the testicle, then you cauterize it here with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not burn nerves or large vessels with the cautery, because this causes harm to the patient and spasms.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the calf and ultimately burned in the cauterization, and the leg swelled up to the knee, and the tumor advanced until it reached the foot, and the skin was perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And a strong solution of the abdomen is a very dangerous remedy, and this leads to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two joints, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise men of the past said in the cauterization of the heel that this is the method for the cautery: make it similar to a circle of iron, and let its circumference be the size of a palm; and let its holes according to the thickness of an almond or peach pit.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle should be another third; and let the space between them be the size of a thumbnail; and let those circles be open on two sides; and let the length of the gaps be one or two thumbnails, and make the edges of iron decorative in the circles; and this is the shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Let it be ignited in the fire until it glows and sparks, and let it be placed on the heel joint, with the patient lying down on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore, you cauterize it with three concentric circles in one sitting.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Let it rest for three days; let it be dressed with a bandage and leave the wound open for several days; and take care of it with warm compresses until it heals.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Said Albucasis: or, my children, of this type of cautery we have used little due to fear of the consequences and because few have been found who pay attention to it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for those who bear the pain of the cautery, seek out the location where it is.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Cauteries with burning medicines should be done with two concentric circles, and the thickness of the wall of the inner circle should be the diameter of a nut or whatever size you like.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And let the space between each one be the size of a fingernail; and let them be open below and above, and let them contain the solution in this shape:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place a cushion on the incision of the ankle where the patient lies, compress your hand over the incision of the ankle; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, its quality should be like a small fire gradually, and hold it for the duration of an hour, allow the patient to bear the pain and adjust themselves — since this burning sensation is similar to fire — until the pain subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then lift your hand from the instrument and clean the hot water from the entire ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Let it heal for three days and apply ointment on the wound until the blackness of the burn subsides, then let it heal for some more days, and the scab will fall off; this is the final remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain spreads to the body or the leg, make it stand in such a way that it contains water as was done with the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and for a non-extinguished wound on both sides of the ankle, stir and let it settle in a new wave, in which the incision should be perforated by a small hole according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Allow the other wave to settle, and pour live alkaline and fresh water on it, which takes up the perforations with a finger, and when you compress them with a clean hand for good compression, allow the hole that results from the sharp water in the incision to fill the other settled wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all the water, and pour more live water and renewed alkaline on it, since at this point it will be of great strength, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of other members, since this operation works like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of these medicines are cauterizing broad areas, such as pitch, honey, and sulfur mixed with each other.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Similarly, a man from the ancients describes the operation and cure for joint pain and sciatica pain, and it is very beneficial to do so, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, and he heals by a single application as recommended, since this remedy works effectively in bathing and drying quickly.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It should be prescribed a certain green herb, and if it is not found, fig leaves should be used; and they should be crushed with a little salt and applied to the ankle where the pain is, or to the body, or to the leg, and let it soak.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Let it remain for the quantity of three hours or until the patient can bear the burning sensation.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse that in bath and when the body of the patient is warm, put it on the sole, since the pain subsides and heals.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Know that it is not necessary to use a cautery with these medicines, but rather promote the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	However, Hippocrates himself says that when the vein is stretched with a goat's cut, it is cauterized, and this will be of more benefit; and use the cautery in this way: take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes and hollows.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry goat skin and inflate it with fire until carbonized; and place it on the wool and let it remain until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this treatment, and do not stop until the sensation of burning reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called "cauterization of cows."
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain in the feet.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the feet occurs for various reasons, such as overexertion, trauma, or excessive sweating, and for causes similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization should not be done except in this specific case that occurs due to the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, promote the evacuation of the patient with pills that are similar to them, which should be made on the foot where the pain is, three fingers wide according to its length, and then sow seeds along each line with caution or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the seeds.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	Make a puncture cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using a medium-sized cautery nail in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Beginning of cauterization for jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Observations of this disease in infants; and the sign of its beginning in infants is that the structure swells and lifts up, and it moves (shifts).
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it thickens in the lower part of the back and the neck that begins to protrude above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when you see this and want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery of this shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	The cautery should take all the protruding parts of the vertebrae surrounding it (the affected area).
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, you can cauterize around the vertebra with a linear cautery of two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And make small points between them (the cauterized areas).
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Cure the area inside where healing should occur according to what has been said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cauterization is not administered in jaundice caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore, when gout is treated due to cold and the pain is not alleviated, then you should use cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is that you cauterize around the affected joint of the foot with multiple cauterizations.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the shape of the olive-oil cautery is as follows: (I'm unable to provide the image requested, but I can describe it: It is an oval or elongated oval cautery tool, used in medical procedures for cauterizing or sealing tissue.)
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads into the nails or other joints, and this movement is observed, then you should cauterize each nail with three or four cauterizations all around using the olive-oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauterizations are needed, you should cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, but only touch the skin with the tip of the cautery.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain spreads to both nails, administer the cauterization as described in its own chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the toes and it is called pyaemia (an infection of the bone marrow), then you should make points along the edges as follows: make points along each line.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in those areas, you should make points along the edges of each toe and at the base of the thumb (palm area).
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain spreads towards the joints or muscles within several days, you should cauterize all the affected areas with helpers (assistants).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the patient from proper care and administration of medicine, for if good treatment and rest is administered and this cauterization is performed, may God help him heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of ruptures (tears or lacerations).
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the groin and you say that it is starting to heal, then you should command the patient to rest on his day (bed rest) and to use calming substances (medicines) so that the tear does not reopen from his stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then keep the patient under your hands on his back, and command him to keep his legs together until they are healed or until the hernia or intestine appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return that to its previous position, and press gently on the rupture over the pelvic bone with your fingers at the area where the separation of the abdominal muscles is similar to the size of a circle above the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And heat the cautery that has this shape: (I'm unable to provide the image requested, but I can describe it: It is a small, sharp, and thin instrument, used in medical procedures for making punctures or incisions.)
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red and sizzles.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And press the cautery onto that area with your hand and cauterizing tool in position, and hold it until you feel the pelvic bone touch the middle of the perineum (the area between the scrotum and anus in males, or the labia and anus in females); repeat this process if you did not achieve this in the first observation.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the intestine carefully during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn the intestine, for if you burn it, the patient may suffer death or some other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you do not touch the bone with the cautery, your procedure is invalid.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And the cauterization for infants should be delicate according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And cure the area of the cauterization for three days with a bandage until the burn wound heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Treat that person carefully among other wounds until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should lie down on his back for 40 days until the wound and its place are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary to stop feeding him according to the duration of his treatment, and to keep his stomach empty in order that the intestine not come out during the healing process.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When you want to move him after 40 days, give him appropriate food carefully, and keep him for other 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let him rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and abstain from excessive talking, because when he uses this method of treatment completely, he will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	I will explain the treatment of abdominal ruptures in other parts, and it begins by not stopping, therefore cauterize the rupture of that person with a heated iron corresponding to its size, and let it come out as the third part of it does; then care for him as we have said, but do not adjust (it).
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	It was also said by some earlier ones that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this form, which is called trial by fire.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is drawn that goes along the long side of the wound and above it, and another line at the top; then lay your hand on the rupture with one heated iron, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of twisting (worms).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a wound occurs in some body part by accident or blow and the pain persists for a long time without being cured with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery should be of all body parts according to its size and smallness, as well as the strength and effectiveness of it, and the location of twisting and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; otherwise, continue to cauterize it; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured in a body part near the affected one, so it is necessary to achieve that with cauterization until the patient is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some types of leprosy are observed to be cured by cauterization, especially the type that is caused by the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division (of the text) and not deny or doubt, nor is it present, and fear that corruption may affect the entire body of the patient and his complexion, then cauterize it on the head with 5 cauterizations: one in the middle of the forehead, one below it, turn the face to the end of the hair; one on each ear; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Lastly, place your hand on the cautery a little away from where there is slight pressure on the bone, and thus the scabs are moved, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; then cauterize it on the sole as previously prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries that we have mentioned on the head; on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both cheeks, and two on both shoulders, and 6 cauterizations on the spine, and a large one near the backbone, and one on the coccyx, and two on each ankle, and one on each heel, and 2 on each elbow, and one on each wrist, and 2 on each finger joint, and on each toe joint, and on all the joints of his hands and feet, and on each tendon of his limbs; then cauterize it over all the joints of the aforementioned parts, and on each talon of his feet, and on the phalanges of his toes.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are over the heel (talon).
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Sometimes it is cauterized with a single cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You should know that the more cauterizations you make, the more beneficial it is and the faster the healing; you should also know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as has been said, because the body of the patient is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It is necessary that the cauterizations be large or few depending on the body parts and joints according to the characteristics of the tools (used).
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Care for the cautery with flour of eggs beaten with honey and the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization of numbness (paralysis).
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some body part is paralyzed or numb and cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but not healed, then you cauterize the paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the body part or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Let your cautery enter the intestine a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Approach care for that which is swallowed until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	At certain times, some paralysis is cauterized that affects the limbs and feet, the spine of the back and causes numbness in the nerves that affect that member, and the paralysis is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	However, do not presume this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body moving them.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of ulcers that are morphous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the swallowed medicines, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, using a small amount of the substance according to the size of the wound until its whiteness and color is removed, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Approach care for that which is made of errors and lentils with roasted oil and fennel leaves, and pigeon or hare blood, each one is divided and all are mixed, and let a strip be sewn over it until healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization of cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle position; however, I have not seen this, because I fear that it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is therefore correct that it should be cauterized in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of adubilati.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	If an adubilati is delayed in ripening, either due to the excess or the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or by time, and you want to hasten the ripening of adubilati; then cauterize it in a circular manner with multiple small puncture cauteries, and apply leeches to it so that it will ripen quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	However, if you want to perform perforation with cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows, and place it in the middle of the adubilati until it penetrates the wound.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that location which is below, to relieve the body of the arm; then care for it until healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization by corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is decay that spreads in the member, which consumes it like fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that decay in a location that requires cauterization with fire, then you should make small and large hot coals as appropriate for that location where the decay is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And cauterize it entirely over all parts, so that you exterminate all decay and there remains no cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Leave it for three days, and keep pressure over the cauterized areas with oil mixed in, until all scars are healed and all corruption is exterminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And apply cure to that with tender meat-producing flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days the flesh born is healthy and there is no corruption, that's good; however, otherwise, repeat the cauterization over what has rotted in the corrupt locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Decay is treated with certain medications at times because it is a medium for cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterizing with fire is of little help in healing.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And as I have already said, the cure for it with sharp medicine should be taken when necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Cauterization by nails and similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Observed in the feet of patients suffering from what is called a nail (claw), which is large, deep-rooted, and penetrates the foot; and cauterization for these is performed in two ways: either by fire or water boil.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, caution with fire is that you make a concave cauterization in the shape of a nail head, which should be made of iron and the size required to fit entirely around the claw, as well as being thin-walled.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And place the heated cauterization on the nail and rotate your hand with the cauterization around the circumference of the nail until the cauterization reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it for three days until pus begins to appear.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Apply a plaster made of crushed wild mustard mixed with salt to it, and leave the plaster on it for a night, as this will exterminate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Treat the area with tender generating flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not improve and other observances occur on the surface of the body, particularly in the more important areas such as the chest or feet, then you must administer cauterization with water, which means you take a spoon (cucurbita) or needle or nail and place it over the claw; and apply a little hot water to the spoon, keep your hand, and rotate it around the spoon with compression of your hand from all sides, pressing the edge of the spoon against the root of the nail, and allow the hot water to flow through the root of the wound; wait for the patient for an hour for the water boil to subside, then remove it, as the claw and its roots will be exterminated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	Do the same with these and the others until you have treated all those in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Treat the pus that results from the roots of the nails being exterminated with what generates flesh, which is what causes the flesh to grow in.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When tremors occur due to friction on the nerve or fever caused by friction, or for any similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauterizations or five on the spinal column, between each spinal vertebra there should be one cauterization; in the feet, and on the stomach, use olive oil as a cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of it subsides, and hastens the healing of the frigid disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Cauterization for accidents involving ulcers on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When ulcers or pustules appear on the body, and are made of gross, corrupted materials; then at the beginning when it appears, it is necessary to cauterize over the entire fistula with a thin cauterization made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with a long razor from erestology; or with a slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And at certain times, the cauterization is applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and it is not believed that it is destroyed, but rather, it is ruptured, making them heal from it.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it should be done with appropriate evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of fluxes of blood caused by an accident through the incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	At certain times, flux of an artery that is cut must be stopped by sewing the wound closed, or the incision of a postemate (a surgical opening to evacuate pus) or cauterization of the member, and then it seems so, but it is difficult to prevent its return.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it happens to someone, you should immediately tie it with your hand at the opening of the artery and press on it until the flux of blood stops within a certain number of moments so that it does not come out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then press the olive oil cauterizers (a tool used for cauterization) few and large, by name, and exhale on them until they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the place and the wound where the artery is broken, on that vein as quickly as possible after stopping the blood flux, and cauterize it until it is sealed and stopped the blood flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you stop the blood flux and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery cautiously from those in the fire that have been prepared, and do not cease this until the blood flow is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when the artery fluxes blood, it is not possible to stop the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with cauterization as previously mentioned, or extraction when it has not been extracted, because when the extremities are burned and the blood flow is stopped, or by being tied with thread or by strong ligature, or by placing medications on it that have the property of stopping the blood; and they should be strengthened with pulvinar (a surgical instrument) or compression in a decent manner.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	However, the one who applies a decent ligature with thread and strong compression with cloth or by heating the causes and similar ones should not be trusted completely.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	However, if this happens to someone who is not a doctor or does not have medication present, then close the wound on that vein as previously mentioned, and be aware of the great caution required until the blood flow is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and the artery should not be touched; and over the artery it should be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and moreover, sew where cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins. (This text snippet is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather the start of another section in Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions, perforations, ventosas (sucking cups), phlebotomy, wounds, and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Avicenna.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization with fire is appropriate and medication is needed for all illnesses where it is necessary, and the occasions and causes of its use, as well as the instruments required in these cases, and the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters on the upper part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter I will proceed with that method, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved, then I will speak about what is needed for it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, know that in this chapter it is for the fear of what is in the first chapter on cauterization. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather an introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary to be in great caution, because the operation that is in this chapter requires evacuation (that is with blood which is life-threatening), the aspersio (sprinkling or irrigation) of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of a postemate or purification of a wound or extraction of splinters or incision of stones and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these should be accompanied by fear, trembling, and in the most extreme cases by death. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather another introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is uncertainty, because some cases you must act as a doctor with cases of illnesses of many kinds.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there is one who goes with his illness and it will be light for him to die, because of the severity of what he finds from his illness, because of the long duration of his illness, and because of the illness that signifies death. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather another introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And there is one who gives you money and says that he hopes for your health, but his illness is destructive. (This sentence is actually not a continuation of the previous lines but rather another introduction to another section within Chapter LVI of "Chirurgia Magna" by Roger of Salerno.)
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, you should not agree to the method of the one who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause regarding it except certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and to which success leads praiseworthy results.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication of the one to whom recovery is turned, because in that lies help for you in gaining fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding, do not let it deviate from its direction and protection, for that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter to be divided into sections as it follows in the chapter of cauteries, regarding the treatment of the head to the feet, so that what you seek and require from it may be alleviated for you.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water, which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs in infants, and when the newborn girl has difficulty passing through the head of the infant with her head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a concealed cause that is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	However, I see this disease only in infants; and for all those whom I see, it is a certain work of death, and thus it seems to me that it is useless work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen an infant whose head was full of water and his head was so magnified that it could not cease on its own due to the greatness of his head, and moreover, the increased humidity led to death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity can be added between the scalp and the bone, or it can be added below the bones at the fontanel (the soft spot on an infant's skull).
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on this case if the humidity is between the scalp and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in length about two inches to allow the humidity to run out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bones, it is a sign that you see the sutures of the head opened on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress it with your hands at the joints inside and not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Remove all the humidity; strengthen the incisions with linen and feathers; apply oil and bandage it for five days, remove the poultice and cure the wound with ointments and cauteries, hold the head in balance; feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital region, or in front, or on the left, or on the right; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and that fluid blood flows out, causing the death of the patient by this flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Second Chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries that are called auricles (arches).
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When the cataracts or tumors occur on the eyes or feet, and it is an old custom that does not confer healing through medications, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two auricles (arteries).
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries in the head of the patient, first cool the area with rough cloth to make the arteries appear, and hold the neck of the patient with some cloth; consider where the vein is pulsating; and press on the locations above each of the areas near the auricles, and they will only become visible in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And hold the artery with tweezers and incise each one with a sharp spatula that enters into the bone along the incision, and this should be done for the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incision sites above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	The length of the incision should be two fingers' width, because when a vein is incised, the blood is expelled with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently due to its pulsation.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the hernia does not appear at the waist, then it is necessary for you to measure the amount of space with three fingers and place your hand in that space, and force it back into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the quantity of blood to be let out is one pint. and the blood must not be let out less or more than this, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the nature of the patient and the repletion of the hernia in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of pain on the bone, then cut this to prevent an abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster and linen to the wound and care for it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of hernias that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or new abscess occurs in the temples due to unhealthy humidity and quality of the eyelids, or a swelling of similar kind occurs suddenly and is treated with the methods of medical care without improvement, we have been taught in these conditions to perform the extraction of hernias in the temples, or cauterization of them as shown previously.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of these is to shave the hairs that are in the temples; and understand that the hernia appears on the temple when it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in a few men due to the strength of coldness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then you should tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and warm the area with a rough cloth or moisten the area with warm water until the hernia appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the forceps, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And you should score the hernia with that instrument until you reach it; and then take out the hernia at the upper parts, and remove it from the membranes above until you have removed it from the sheath and exposed it from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, you should tie it with the tip of the scissors and then cut a part from it according to the length by which the ends are contracted, and there will be no bleeding, for if they are not cut, blood cannot come out from all sides.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate one pint of blood. Until three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the hernia is large, it is necessary for you to tie it in two places with strong silk or thread and not cut it until its decay before the healing of the wound and prevent bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And remove the excess between the linen; do it at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone using a cautery knife until the ends are incised, and remain in place of that procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to perform the procedure if the patient has fever or complete heating, for cauterization helps in drying humidity and thus it is more beneficial.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is appropriate for the extraction of arteries which the ancients called the groin, and they should be punctured properly, and let them be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh swell and warm until healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during another examination, bleeding from the artery occurs, then you should attempt to stop the blood, either with a cautery or by compressing it, and press your hand inside until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if the cause of the bleeding is not present, then place your finger on the area until the blood clots, and irrigate the area with very hot water until the inflammation subsides, and bind it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	What is easier in the extraction of arteries is to cauterize the vein with this two-bladed cautery, as you have marked both locations and waited for them to appear at the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that the section between the extremities may be lengthened, since it is not consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let the heat of the two blades be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the heat of one blade is sharper than the other, it is better because if they are both hot like two close fires, they will not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in these cases, the heat of the fire should be kept in them and the flesh should be cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This operation is better than any other and more convenient.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let the space between the two blades be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of sharp and sour throats in men.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When sharp throats occur and the veins that are above the head of the testicle do not have any cause for healing with medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient swells and they walk as if they had a form of ants, and their throat becomes extended, moist to such an extent that their skin is known, and their scrotum is scalded by the acidity of tears, the ancients treated this condition with this operation, and I name this treatment as "spassa".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to raise their hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelashes which are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful when making the incisions of the arteries which are in two places, and stretch out your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is adjusted to three fingers.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry cloths with which you extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And introduce the spatula into two sharp edges, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	from the part between the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove the entire chain that is between two incisions with the saw which is on the bone, and do what remains of the median incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And use this spatula again and enter the first incision with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Pause the incisions of that sharp area, the attached flesh should be bound, and the latches of it the bone, and push it into the gaping fissure, and bind all vessels that descend from the head to the heels with it.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May it continue uninterrupted along the attached flesh and bind it into the other gaping fissure. (This line refers to continuing the suture or stitching process)
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the correct amount of blood has flowed out, press the places of the blood clots with a cloth. (This line refers to applying pressure to stop any bleeding)
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And bind each gaping wound that is not fully healed, and bind over those pus-filled blisters that have been soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess forms cautiously. (This line refers to dressing or bandaging open wounds)
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the linen and administer large infusions of hot water or tea, and treat it with basil oil and rose oil, and others until the sores are healed. (This line refers to changing bandages and using medicinal oils)
Capitol .v.	Chapter V. (This indicates a new section in the medical treatise)
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of abscesses by purges and the sores that descend from within the head. (This line indicates a new topic, specifically treating abscesses and sores originating in the head)
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When an acute and persistent catarrh or a series of small sores in the patient's body occurs, and their weakness is noticeable, and the eyelids are ulcerated and peeled back, and there is sharp pain at the front of the head along with extreme pressure, then you should know from these symptoms that the matter and catarrh do not come from any other source than the veins in the brain. (This line provides additional information about recognizing when a catarrh or sores are coming from the brain)
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in that place at the midpoint of the forehead, a small one along its length (and begin from the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision go through the bone; extend your hand from the temples which should be avoided due to masticatory muscles), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and fill between the two lips of the incision with cotton or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And bind over it with pus-filled blisters in wine and oil to prevent abscesses from forming cautiously. (This line refers to dressing or bandaging the incision to prevent infection)
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has decreased in size, then it is necessary to cauterize the bone starting where the muscle tissue begins, and treat it with an astringent remedy that promotes healing, for example if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, make a plaster from it and administer it to these sores in order to promote healing of the native tissue. (This line refers to cauterizing the bone to prevent infection and using an astringent remedy to promote healing)
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI. (This indicates a new section in the medical treatise)
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of that which catarrh occurs in the ears. (This line indicates a new topic, specifically treating catarrhs in the ears)
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause of catarrh in the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral poison or similar to poison such as iron and lead, or it is from plants such as cheese or beans, or it is from fluid-like substances such as water and vinegar and their likes, or from animals. (This line provides information about the various causes of catarrh in the ears)
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore when poison or another substance similar to these causes that do not fit the ear, and if the poison is visible, distill it in some volatile oil such as oil of roses or sage, and administer the extraction of it, make him sneeze with appropriate conditions, and open the nostrils to promote sneezing. (This line provides guidance on treating catarrh caused by poison or other substances that do not fit the ear)
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And bind the circumference of the ear with some fabric or wool patches and stretch the ear open at its edges, since many times it is forgotten with these causes. (This line provides additional guidance on treating catarrh caused by poison or other substances that do not fit the ear)
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, which has the following form: (This line indicates that the next lines will describe the specific instrument used to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is forgotten with the gesti, that is good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with an instrument called the uncus subtil, which has a small double bend. (This line describes the specific instrument used to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of silver and insert the end of the cannula into the opening of the ear and close the environment of the cannula with wax and softened oil to prevent any leakage except for the cannula. (This line provides guidance on how to use the uncus subtil instrument to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And draw it out gently with your breath and strong attraction, since many times it has been reported that this helps. (This line provides guidance on how to use the cannula instrument to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this way, then take some alum or white lead that has been prepared with the apparatus used to catch birds, and place it at the end of the ray, and bind it over that area decently bound. (This line provides guidance on how to use a different instrument to extract the poison or substance causing the catarrh)
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Approach the ear canal gently with ease, and then carefully remove the earwax from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if you do not forget all the causes that have been mentioned, then you should seek to remove that which is causing abscess or cramp.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of removing that is to first lance the patient from the saphenous vein and draw blood as per its virtue, then hold the instrument between your thumb and index finger and turn the earwax towards the upper parts, making a small hole in the base of the ear canal where the pressure should be applied.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The incision should be in the shape of a crescent moon that reaches the bone, and, once the bone is broken, remove it if possible with suitable instruments; then sew up the incision at that time with speed, and heal it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is in the earwax is one of the fats that grows and swells, administer treatment and removal of it; but if you do not succeed with your efforts, then you should take thin cotton wool according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the aspiration of that fat that has formed in the earwax.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the earwax, and wait for it to settle into clumps, and then remove them with scissors or fine tweezers, or with such an incision as I have described, because the removal of it will be relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in water that enters the earwax, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning and fill his ear with old cotton, and rub over the ear where the water is, and if this is done, good; otherwise, take many small pebbles thin and long according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of these into the canal of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike another pebble on the pebble that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop with pebbles until all the water has been removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water is removed, take paper or gauze. and put one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until the cotton burns as much as possible.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then put another piece of gauze and perform this many times until all the water has been removed, and strain it through a canal as described above for the pebble extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the removal of a foreign body entering that earwax, if it is small, this can be done easily and similarly, treat it as described in the division; but if it is large which causes the swelling of the eardrum, administer the removal of it with forceps and scissors, and the cause of this is easier to deal with than all other causes that occur in the earwax.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the removal of worms generated in the earwax, when you treat it as described in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not achieve success, then you must observe the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears, remove it with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause is apparent, take a canal that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and carefully suck it out with a strong suction, and perform this many times, until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not succeed with your efforts, you can use oil and stop up the circuit of the canal with wax as described; administer distillations which have already been tried in the treatment of worms, and apply it in the treatment of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your effusion with which you infuse the medical oils into the ear with this instrument, its form is:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole in the center and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And ensure that it is curved to fit the concavity of the infusion canal where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the rod and cover its end properly with a suitable cloth, then pour oil or juice from any herb, or whatever medicine you want into the infusion canal - this is in the ear -, and insert the rod with the proper pressure and compress it gradually until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the eardrum and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	That which is infused in the ear should already be heated slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because the substances of the earwax do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Title VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of auricle excision (removal).
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some warts grow out of the bellies of the elderly men without perforating, and this condition sometimes occurs in some men, an excision in the auricle's tissue due to a wound or lack of tissue at that site; and this excision is sometimes performed in the area before the ear lobe that does not heal, and sometimes it is outside of the partitions.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	The one that occurs in the area before the ear lobe that does not heal is more difficult to cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the one where healing occurs, you should keep the patient's wart on the sole and watch it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore, if an excision is observed to have healed, open that with a thin spatula in this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the area to be excised has a small width and one side is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be two leopard lengths wide so that it does not damage the wart.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the excision is due to tissue born in the auricle or its surrounding area, then make a shallow and wide incision, cutting through the tissue as quickly as possible while leaving all the tissue intact.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the excision is in the area before the auricle, take a thin wire a lion's length and heat it slightly with fire, then place it in the auricle tissue.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you observe an excision with what the patient experiences relief, because of pain, release the pressure on it with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the auricle.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then you place a linen cloth on the excised area according to the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian balm; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some herb and place it in warm water and grind it, then apply it as a poultice and use it; and if you see the excised area already healed, then you must remove the herb and replace it with another that you will wrap in beeswax that has been made with rose oil, until the cauterized wound is healed; and take care of it until it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, immerse sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the excised area, and use the other treatment that stops the bleeding, which is called in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Title VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the care of athazel, which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazel is sometimes moist and other times dry in the eyes.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must have them with tweezers or scissors, and cut them with the spatula of their roots, and place a poultice on them as described above.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with bleeding occurs, you cauterize them with a fine lancet cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is near the incisions and when the wounds heal properly, they do not return; and when cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and they do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Title IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of swelling that occurs in the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some causes that resemble swelling in the eyelids of humans are characterized by their intensity and duration, and because of this swelling, they are called swellings.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation is that you examine if the swelling is increasing in the area appearing from the eyelid and spreading all over; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision in the swelling with a scalpel and remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and then suspend it with a hook and cut off the affected area.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the incision of it, do not push too hard so that you pierce the eyelid with a small incision, otherwise you will not notice any effect.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from the puncture since the heat of it restores and fills it in.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, then shave the area inside the eyelid, and lift the swelling with a hook, one that you do not need to incise, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated due to an incision, you will not notice any effect.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Treatise on the cure of an eyelid abscess.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	An abscess occurring on the eyelid above, which is generated in the tunica of the eyelid, especially in children, worsens the eyes of those and contributes to their catarrh more; and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow into them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you often find them on the cheeks all the time, and they sleep with their faces on their cheeks; and the underside of their eyelids is moist, which has already been inflamed, and the imminence of infection is apparent in the eye; and whenever you press the area with your fingers, you feel pus coming out into them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is some method of operation in the one where the patient bends their head towards you and lays a piece of cloth over it, and boil water, and make a circle according to the amount that contains arsenic on all sides, and place that over it and press it with your fingers all around so that pus is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of the moisture at the wound and the wound should not be larger than the wound made during a lanceotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the former case it is necessary that you cut open the wound completely until you reach the pus, because in the most serious cases, pus will be drained through an incision according to the shape of white cheese.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, you remove it with cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers on the sides and turn it between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to close the incision because with pus you will not reach the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, but you notice that it is present in the incision, then close a small part of the incision with ease until pus appears; and remove it as I have said; submerge cloths in water and wipe it and place them on the area and tighten them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And also, those who suffer from salt and wipe it in the concavity of the incision to remove what remains of the moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the cauterized area, then take care of it with approved plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of eyes that are caused by tightening of the natural eyelashes and are ancient, you should apply them to the eye and make methods of diseases such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth inside until it causes destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye; and it is cured in four ways: either with cautery by fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated with touch by incision and suturing; or with canes as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is necessary that you turn the patient's head towards you; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into the area where there is pus behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the area above it, and what is - near the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are - near the lashes, and pull the thread above the eyelid with your right hand, and turn it towards the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And make an incision in the corner of the eyelid behind the lashes, and drain the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and remove the thread and place it beneath the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and then sew it over the eyelid like a fig leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary for the figure to be shaped according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it has been diversified among men, because there are those who require incision of the eyelid in a large quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then draw an arch over both lines that you have marked, and start from the greater lacrimal to the lesser one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural furrow as is the thickness of a coin.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the coin in one of the two corners of the wound, and scrape off all that layer, then adjust the incision with a thin scissor or fine needle, wash the blood away, and make excess hair on both eyebrows adhere to each other using some sticky substances, if you wish to do so, otherwise do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Stitch the hairs together within three or four days and take care of them.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, leave the wound unsutured, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is swollen due to the sealing of the wound and its accumulation; however, stitching is better, and therefore the ancients preferred this.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, it should be cautioned for the patient, and it is a good action, and there is no need to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Another method of treatment is to draw a figure on the eyelid like holly leaves, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and joined needles according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, hold the needles and do not let them touch each other, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and put the other needle near the greater lacrimal, and the third needle near the lesser one, adjusting them between the two as evenly as possible, and lift your hand with that elevation, lift the entire wound area above which is marked in the way we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two sides of the wound with stitches and take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess should occur in your incision or wound, treat it with hot irons and similar instruments, and with warm water.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Sometimes hairs grow into the eyelid, so it is necessary to use what has been said about incision; however, stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Treat with reeds in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and you turn the eyelid and cut the figure inside as I have described; then take two reeds or fine sticks whose length is the same as that of the eyelid and the width of them is smaller than that of the wound.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each divided area, where the threads are.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Moisten each area with a thin solution made of the excess eyelid skin and tighten the reeds of each divided area with strong pressure, then leave it for some days, because the wound will die due to the constriction and become necrotic and eventually fall off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it takes too long, then break the reeds with thorns, and take care of the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when the eyelid is raised, the hairs do not penetrate.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two reeds that you will make in this way:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	This line seems to suggest a method for dealing with hairs that are causing discomfort or pain in the eyelid, using a needle when the hair is tough. The exact meaning of this sentence may require further context.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When non-natural hairs are tough, harsh and painful to the eyelid, perform the operation by taking a thin needle and placing it on the soft leather or linen thread, and ensure that you adjust the ends of it carefully and gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the needles should be equal to one span (about nine inches).
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Take another thin needle and place it near it for later use, and cut the ends of it if you wish to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Place the patient's head on your lap and position it near the floor so that your work is visible, because this operation is delicate and small.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires surgery and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly but carefully until you extract it above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Pull out the hair above and insert the extracted hairs into alum, and let them be one, two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Pull your hand out with the extracted hairs and put them back into the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the alum has been inserted but not pulled out the hair, pull out the alum at the incision areas with the needle that you have prepared for this purpose, until the alum has been completely removed from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you observe the boil with the eye, then you should incise and lance it, and prick it and press the boil, and leave the pus to drain for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows back on that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is short, then you adjust a long hair from natural hairs, and raise it up with that, or let it grow until it reaches an appropriate space, and then raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capital .13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of this eyelid swelling that is above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eyelid swells, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on top, either right or left side, due to poor consolidation of a plague or section or burn, and it is called leprosy, and this swelling is natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of a plague or sections or burns, or similar to their bad care.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of operation in it is that you make an incision in that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to use treatment for the causes that dry up, constrict; because if you do this, it will cause the swelling to return worse and it will not heal at any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of the causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and wrap with water in which it is cooked and seeds of it, or guaiacol ointment, which is liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it, and heal with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you pierce everything that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have mentioned is not any correction of swelling that does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capital .14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of swelling that is made in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This swelling that is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called swelling; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental is caused by a plague or section or burns or similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and pierce it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And stretch the skin to the upper divisions with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if it returns the shape of the eyelid as required, it is good; otherwise, take the root and place it in the divided figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two splits on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of both splits are two angles of the incision, which you made until they converge, and make an angle between them until when they come together is formed a figure of their ends.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And stretch the skin that much to the width of the sharp angle below it, so that the eyelid is opened.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts and sew them with thread of wool; and heal that with what we have mentioned about the softening medications and poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the swelling develops due to a split or suture or burn, then it is necessary that you make an incision with a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, in the treatment of swelling that is above or below, follow the operation as prepared according to the type of swelling, and that is in the form of diverse motes (small rounded masses).
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsman always prepares means in every way that is possible to return the shape to its natural form or as close as possible, and the patient according to what is appropriate for the operation and tools in the best possible conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Capital .15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men whose eyelid is solidly attached above the albumen of the eyelid, and it is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural workings, then it is necessary that you cut off the external edge of the lower eyelid, raise it up, or stretch it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Approach and incise the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be too sharp for the operation, as it has a blunt tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the procedure, and remove the spatula carefully without causing pain to the area.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Let your incision be made gently enough so that the eyelid can return to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply salt water to the wound, or distill it in oil of rosin dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Approach separating the eyelid from the wound with cold water and place wool soaked in alum of hog on it, and after three days apply healing agents to consolidate it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of nails and removal of the prominence of caruncle tissue.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that nails are of two types: either they are nervous and resemble hard, subtle matter; or they are non-nervous, similar to white, congealed moisture. When you touch it with a probe, it collapses and is separated from the probe without being implanted in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types do not start until the larger tear duct covers part of the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of working on the incision is that the patient bends their head towards you and opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, collect the nail with a probe of moderate length and extend it to the incisions above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and pierce through a hair from the horse or ox or cow, or similar animal, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and remove the nail; extend it to the incisions above, and excise the hair around the edge of the nail that touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way, you follow the hair towards the end of the incision.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you incise the remnant of the tear duct at its root with a thin spatula or small scissors, and excise the natural tissue of the tear duct so that continuous flow of tears is not caused by the incision of it.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And at times the nail with only the tip extended or removed, as mentioned above, should be excised with a lion's hair spatula, which is its shape.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care that the spatula does not touch the corneal tissue and causes a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Make the incision in the eyelid with a little bit of salt or lime made from cinnabar, and leave it for a day, and take care of it with water that should be applied until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or it collapses with the probe, this type of nail should be cured with medications, and healed in the same way as described above and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, you open the patient's eye and take a thin lion-shaped spatula with sharpness as follows:
am subtilitat.	with fineness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is rarefied and contracted and enters the tear duct, you distill your own oil of rosin made from sulphur or rosin or salt-water, and place it in the eye for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And approach the operation repeatedly until everything that is from it has passed, unless the counter-abscess appears in the eye, in which case you should excise it, and treat the abscess at the beginning until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And approach your operation repeatedly over it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of tear duct tissue, if noticed in the eye due to harm, should be stopped with a probe; and incise it from one side, without extending the incision so that tears do not flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And approach distilling oil of rosin made from sulphur in the eye until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On incision of ingrown hair and what is born of skin attached to the eyelid.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the heels of some people, raw flesh is born and swells up until it covers the pupil or approaches or presses on the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids at the outer corners and resembles a rose-bush balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The procedure is that the patient holds his head between your hands; and you open the heels of that person and collect all that flesh appropriately with scissors or a knife; and you begin to cut the flesh from the beginning until it is finished with the knife, and be careful not to cut into the heel while you perform the operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Use the incision that you will make or use the spatula that we have recommended in toenail incision, or small forceps with which you can grasp the nail as appropriate according to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Since your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, you fill the heel with saltpeter or distill it into red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place it on the heel covered with alum until it is certain that the wound is cauterized.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of inflammation and the wound cauterizes blood, and you fear that it will become cauterized, you must lance the heel and treat the cauterization with whatever causes it to subside, and then apply the operation until it heals, and do the same for the surrounding skin affected by this type of inflammation.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that the healing of the heel occurs naturally or by accident, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered enough from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collecting knowledge in the heel.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge is gained from red veins that are hard on the heel and forbid clothing to apply any pressure on it, and uncover the heel for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the heel in which knowledge is gained is strong and there is no other disease except for knowledge, and then you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to hold his head between your hands and suspend those veins with a thumb or a finger according to your discretion; and the thumb should be of subtle doubling in this way:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two thumbs gently in the body like this:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Gather those thin veins carefully and gently, and repeatedly clean the blood that appears, until you see them become congested with blood and swollen.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Keep yourself away from the heat of the sun and if your operation is in the middle of the day, be firm in your actions, do not make any incisions except for those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed [the procedure], then distill in the wound the green or red vinegar to dissolve what is congested with pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to gather everything at that time, then collect all the pus and cover it with something that eases the pain of the wound, and leave it for several days until the pain is alleviated and the abscess is securely cauterized.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the procedure as necessary until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Capital XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of arising nosebleeds.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating a nosebleed with cautery or acute burning medicine as described earlier and it is not healed, do not be deceived but rather make an incision on the abscess when it matures, and extract all the humidity that is in it and pierce the bone until it is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, scrape it with an instrument that has this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp-headed instrument, made of iron and rounded like an ass's head that is pierced by a punch with a small hole (such as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place it on the corrupt area of the bone, and turn it with your fingers until it is rotated, and press gently until you know that the corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Let it be done for several observations, and then restore the area with drying and stiffening agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown there and it is separated from the body for 40 days without being renewed or developing an abscess or any accident happening, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, do not be deceived but rather reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and proceed as follows: First, you should discover the bone using forceps or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take three pieces as shown below:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The handle of the forceps should be triangular in shape and its shaft should be extended to the tip as shown sometimes.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Place that one on the bone and it should be the lacrimal piece; extend your hand a little from the wound, and turn your hand with the three pieces until they penetrate the entire bone, and the patient will feel pressure as the vent closes when you apply your hand to it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you should restore the area with drying and stiffening agents as directed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Once the flesh and area have hardened, you should return the material that was flowing from the incisions to the nose, as this is lighter for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the swelling of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose swells completely and no harm or diminution occurs from this, you should make the patient lie down and follow these instructions: keep them quiet without strain or injury and use good suction; apply a linen poultice to the swelling that is made of catnip, aloe, elder, and colocynth, and strengthen the bandage over the nose without powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method for the powders is to take fourfold strips of lion's wool and make powder from them.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place one on top of another according to the amount that the patient needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Strengthen one over the other with a thick and strong binding, then apply cupping glasses with suction without cutting, and remove the cupping glasses and let the wound heal during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament becomes softened in the meantime, then it must be tied more tightly.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then return the ligament during the day and night as previously stated.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has already been reduced (healed), that is good; if not, continue applying the plaster, powder, binding, and cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunica.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes prominent, proceed outside the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, shape it like a man, and if you want to incise (make an incision), perform the operation as previously recommended, by entering the needle into the uvea from the lower part towards the upper part, and then place another needle in the area where there is double thread (the lacrimal duct) and make it penetrate and leave the first needle in place according to its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle, and tighten that area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on the cotton wool soaked in oil and wait until the thread comes out with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the wound with something that supports it until the ulcer is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	After some time, put a circle of fabric around the entire wound and adjust it to cover the prominent area, then perforate (pierce) with a thin spatula that reaches the underside of the wound and let the whitish substance (the aqueous humor) flow out and descend immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On treating conjunctivitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called conjunctivitis is not only an inflammation, but it is also an infection similar to water flowing down (running) and not just that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the method of working on it is that you have the patient sit with their head straight and properly supported (reclined) on a seat or bench, and then take hold of the head with both hands from two sides and bring it towards the affected side to see the infection reach the opposite side, and make sure it dries up and does not descend, and keep the eye open, and have the patient watch the process as they used to.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, know that it is water (discharge).
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the discharge is not prepared with what has been said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the conjunctiva near the cornea at the cornea's edge (the limbus), until the discharge is pushed out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when the discharge is expelled, you distill (distillate) in the wound water that has been mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On treating watery discharge from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the types of water and which one should be used to puncture with a needle according to the declaration in the division, so you should do it according to the health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You must have the patient sit between your hands on a chair and hold their head steady, keeping it straight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye that has watery discharge, or with your right hand if the eye is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take the almada (a thin piece of wood or bone) with your right hand if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand if the eye is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Approach the limb near the crown due to the swelling of the bone in the eyelid area from the lesser lacrimal, and approach with a plaster and rotate your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Enter into the eyelid and feel that the limb has already penetrated due to swelling.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Determine the measurement of the path of the limb to the puncture, which is from the pupil to the end of the black part (cornea), and this is the crown of the eyelid; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea tunica.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Approach the limb inside the place where the water is located, and approach it again with your hand below, so that if the water descends quickly, then you immediately put the patient under the knife to cut their eye quickly, and in the same way into their eyelid.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Approach it again after a short while; therefore, if the water has descended, then you pause that other hand below to prevent the water from being spilled out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the limb easily, and rotate your hand slightly at a time, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt gemma and water in it, and wash the inside of the eye with this; and apply outside the eye cotton or stopper or infused wool and oil rose and alum and ligature with water the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	However, we of our time apply this mixture of alum and rosin to the eyelid.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the limb does not enter the eyelid due to its hardness—for some men have a very hard eyelid—then you must take the spatula, which is called alberid, whose shape is:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore, pierce that junction, and do not go too deep with your hand, and it is not the case that you make a hole in another place nearby.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Approach the limb as previously stated.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must prepare the work of the patient, a bed placed gently made in which they sleep on their back in a dark room, and it is forbidden from any movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place the patient facing north to calm their nature, and do not turn their head to the right or left in any way.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let them remain in the same position for at least three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Approach the patient in that dark room and expose their eye, make them see some causes, and return them to their bed on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	It is not necessary for you to do this during the hour of cure or as soon as possible with an injection.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary to remove this because water can easily and violently flow out due to great and strong gazing.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	However, if there is an abscess, you must remove the eyelid after seven days and correct it with something that dissolves abscesses.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	You then wipe the eye of the patient and place it on their face so that they can rest for several days in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Approach the patient gently from that room and converse with them about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in the hospital, the disciple is not allowed to see anyone for several days, and you then dare with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has come to us of one of those who are called "The Physician", and another said that they made fire in the eye socket pierced by which water is drained.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen this done on our land, nor do we find it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the species of limbs that are unknown to the one who does not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These are made of ivory or iron specifically, and they have the tips with this subtle triangular subtleties, the sharp tip being in this shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capital XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the healing of flesh, do not take anything in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various fleshy growths are born in the nose, some of which are caused by the type of scorpion motez pes or polyp feet; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from this is cancerous flesh, called "lepada" of a dark color; and this is the origin of flesh that is not dark colored as a lion.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous, the patient must be made to lie face up, expose the affected area to the sun, and dig into it with your finger at the point where these non-dark colored fleshes are found.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract that to the incisions made in front and make an incision with a sharp pointed spatula under the one partition that you know has all the flesh exposed; for if it remains due to some reason for which abscission is possible, then take care to do so with one of the subtle tools with ease until it no longer remains for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if the lord has an abscess or a pustule, you pause there; or if it is malignant pustules, you cut and cauterize that area after it has been drained of pus and all the cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And apply a poultice to the nose near the incision with vinegar or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and moisture enters the palate, you know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that inside there is no flesh in the blisters or bones of the nostrils where abscission has not been achieved.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must insert a clean probe with some thickness into it and move it in and out like a needle, pausing between each thrust the amount of finger or inch, and gently guide the patient and introduce one end of the probe into the nostril with the rod or another possible method.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And so that it will happen, you must draw the patient's odorant into the nostrils and let it sit on his forehead, because many observed children at school do this, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two ends of the probe, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a surgical instrument for cutting meat with needles that are on the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is around the probe's needles.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the probe and pause in the nose near the drainage of pus, and do this for three days or more until the sore on the fleshes is completely corroded.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a lead pipe for some days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if it needs further treatment, use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the shape of the instrument used by the snuff maker who distills oils and medicines into the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or brass, similar to a small open lamp, like a small cavity, and the metal should be similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the cannula of the snuff maker's instrument should be flat, open; to which you have access at the rear end, with which you will hold it when you scoop oil or any liquid substance and extractable substances.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this snuff is precious: the recipe for enforced castor oil, white balloon flower, ginger, pill of saffron, long pepper, asafetida, and the epitome of spice anamucca. Mix with juice of beet and cabbage, make pills, and dissolve a pill in distilled water, then give it to the patient sitting facing.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of teeth that are at the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many observed that a tooth is located at the ends of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in some days before it becomes law regarding its observation.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you must incise that at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause over the location or burn or medicine to cauterize it where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, consider whether it is hard, dark colored and of little sensation; in that case, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous abscess; for many observed that the one who incises this cancerous abscess suffers greatly from it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is touching the lion (meaning a large abscess) and not of dark color, and at times it can be drained completely, then drain the patient and incise it without fear, heal the wound with anything that drains and binds it tightly until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	This seems to be the title of a chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-sixth.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	This is about stitching the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been lost due to a wound or similar issues.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when continuity is lost in one of these cartilages, such operation should be performed only in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when dealing with that part, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound using stitching, and place a dressing over it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of lost continuity are already separated and each part is healthy, then you should carefully remove each part of the skin that appears outside until it stops bleeding.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips using stitching and tighten them, and on top of that sprinkle dragon's blood powder (or triturated), place a piece of diaphanicon ointment or another consolidating ointment over it, leave it for two to three days, and then remove it and replace the ointment, leaving it until the flesh separates itself, and care for it with saliva until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of stitching is to add the lost continuity or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal surgery, or to use sutures with skin as you have learned.
Capitol .xxvii.	This seems to be the title of a new chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-seventh.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	This is about the extraction of causes that occur within the two lips during divisions (surgery).
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Observed in many men during divisions of their lips, there are some hard abscesses resembling goose fat, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should fold the lips and incisions of each hard area completely, and apply sulfa powder to the abscess site until the blood is stopped, wash it with vinegar, and care for it with astringent water until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	This seems to be the title of another new chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-eighth.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	This is about incising the meat adjusted in the gums (teeth).
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large sore is often observed over the adjusted meat (gums), which was previously called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and make an incision in it to drain the pus or blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And apply sulfa powder or another astringent or caustic powder to the site.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the meat returns, make another incision and cauterize it because the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	This seems to be the title of another new chapter or section in the treatise, numbered as the twenty-ninth.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	This is about tooth abscesses with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of teeth during divisions or openings, and between the gums, there are sharp, rough, and sometimes black sores that become citric or green before causing decay to the gum and making the tooth loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, you should hold the patient firmly and grasp their head with your hand, pull out the teeth where these sores appear, removing all causes until there is no further cause, and remove the blackness, citrinitat (yellowish discoloration), and other impurities.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if it remains what is at the beginning of the reasoning, that is good; otherwise, you must repeat the reasoning on another day and on the second and third day until it reaches the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth have a need for resorptive (reabsorbing) mechanisms of various shapes and forms according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For this reason, the razors with which the tooth is extracted from inside are different from the razors with which they are ground between the teeth according to other shapes, and these shapes of razors should be prepared by you, which you will soon see.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital thirty (XXX)
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary to care for the tooth from its pain with all care and patience throughout the entire extraction process, because it is not a good thing that you leave behind the root when it is extracted, as it is a superficial substance until it is excavated during the extraction process.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Furthermore, when the patient is to extract that tooth in pain, it is important that you are certain which tooth is causing the pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and causes them to believe that the healthy tooth is causing the pain, and you remove the healthy one instead of the painful one. The pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have already seen in barber surgery.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, since you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain and know it well, you should then score around the tooth with a spatula containing some medicine, until the tooth is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and apply it gently using tweezers or fine forceps, starting with a small movement, continuing until you have reached the desired goal.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Apply oil or ointment with strong holders and large tweezers for good grip or strong structure, and support the patient's head between your thick fingers so that you do not hurt it, and carefully move the tooth in a manner that does not break it or cause the patient more pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if the above steps are followed, you should then take one of those instruments and place it near the tooth with ease and effort, removing it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	However, if the tooth is broken or corroded, it is necessary that you wrap it with cloth and tighten it at the root end using fine wire to prevent it from being crushed during your compression on it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	It is necessary that you work carefully with scoring around the entire circumference of the gum and use caution to avoid breaking it and leaving it fractured, and return to the patient for the worsening pain that may be greater than the initial pain they had.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember that you should not do what some ignorant barbers do in their procedures and audacity with tooth extraction, because they do not administer what has been recommended; for many times they cause great pain in the sick person, which are difficult to be relieved, and all or some of the roots remain, or the tooth is extracted along with bone fragments from the jaw as it has been shown in many cases.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And during the extraction process, wash the mouth with warm water or saltwater.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If bleeding occurs during this procedure, such as in many cases, you should first apply some vinegar or vinegar-soaked cloth to the affected area, and if it does not stop the bleeding, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the fine forceps and tweezers used for extracting the tooth at the beginning should be long in length, short in width, and thick, to prevent them from being bent when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	They should be of such a size that the handles are not bent when gripped firmly, but rather have short lengths.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Iron bands of India, properly made and correctly applied on the outside, have teeth on them that enter into each other and tighten with strong constraint. Sometimes the area where these bands are applied has the shape of a stork's beak, which is called "guanta," and they exert great constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	The following sentence seems to belong to another section or chapter, so let's start translating from this point:
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On removing teeth and extraction of broken bones in the jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a broken tooth, it is necessary that you place something soft over the area and bind it for one or two days until the area is softened; and insert tweezers or forceps with the tips shaped like a stork's beak called "guanta" or "ciconia," the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The dislocated joint's edges should be smoothed out with a file or alum.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If the broken tooth cannot be removed with these forceps or tweezers, it is necessary that you cut through the gum and insert an instrument called "atali," which is a small lever shaped as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Make a small incision in the affected bone with a scalpel or knife that is not too deep; then use a chisel to break the bone into several pieces.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the incision is made in the wrong place, it may cause complications or make the treatment more difficult. Here are some guidelines and shapes for the instruments to be used in this procedure: The first instrument's shape should be triangular with a notch or groove on one side for guiding the scalpel or knife during the incision:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and have a thin pointed end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help yourself with this instrument, which has two slopes, the shape being as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And for other instruments that I will mention in the context of dental work, it is useful to have this one, which resembles a large onion and has the following shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a rounded or short, triangular tip that is somewhat thick, but not too thin to avoid being broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	You should also know that dental tools are similar to other medical instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Wise and skillful artisans, however, find for themselves the appropriate tools according to the operation and various diseases, since some diseases were not previously identified or treated with specific instruments due to their various forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured or if they are pulverized, place a cold compress on the area with the appropriate instrument and forceps as discussed in the extraction of teeth, and assist the person using this procedure, which is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Gradually reduce the swelling, and hold it in place with the mouth to prevent it from escaping or spreading until the fracture has healed completely. Then, restore the area using appropriate medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pitting in the bone, remove that pitting and its surrounding blackness, and treat it until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	The care of teeth is more important than that of other body parts.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	If a tooth is not properly aligned with its natural shape and cannot be repaired or treated, it must be extracted. However, if the tooth is not connected to another tooth, you should cut it out with this instrument that has the following shape: resembling a pig's trotter, made of Indian steel with a sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Make the incision with this instrument in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not affect other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the tooth is excessively prominent, file it with this Indian steel file that has the following shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It should be made entirely of Indian steel and have small, sharp points like a file used for making needles. The tooth should be filed gradually each day with ease to avoid damaging or affecting other teeth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Straighten the tooth at the end, and remove it with another instrument.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If part of the tooth is broken off and attached to the tongue, you must file it until the fractured portion is removed and filled in so that the tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On repairing damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	If teeth are damaged by impact or removal due to blows or accidents, and the patient cannot withstand eating, and you have treated it with specific medications without success, then as a last resort, use gold foil instead of silver, since silver becomes tarnished and should be changed every few days. Gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The first sentence translates to: "The file (instrument) should be as delicate and thick as the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the reccio (a medical tool, possibly a probe or forceps) is such that you grab the file and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and near where it curves towards two bad ones, or if one or more, enter until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side."
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then push the suturing thread into the division from where you started, and hold it with ease and skill until it is not harmful.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your string (used to secure the file in place) should be strong enough to hold the file between the teeth without escaping.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excessive parts of the file with forceps or scissors and place them at each location where they are needed, and twist them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the diseased tooth to avoid injuring the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then tie it tightly with thread like a Roman knot.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it with another file in such a manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape and figure of the teeth and the form of the reccio (probe or forceps) between two healthy teeth and two diseased teeth, as shown in the following illustrations:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When a tooth or teeth return to their respective cavities and grow back as we have recommended, they will remain healthy and strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is the work of skilled and wise craftsmen.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes, cow bones are used as a replacement for teeth in certain cases, shaped like teeth and placed where the tooth has failed, tied and strengthened as we have described, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament that is found in the tongue and prohibit speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is found beneath the tongue sometimes is natural and which man is born with, or accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth and lifting their head so that their chin is on your chest; raise their tongue, and make an incision in the ligament nerve at a width sufficient to release the tongue from its recent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or denseness and that is due to consolidation of an injury, then you throw water on it and cut through the ligament at a width sufficient to release the nodule and relieve the pain.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Ensure that you do not make a tear in the skin and that you cut through it arch-shaped and bring forth bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the incision site with water or vinegar or warm water, and place a clean cloth on it; this is what will keep the patient from re-injuring their tongue every night.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If bleeding occurs, place a piece of vitriol gauze on the spot; if the bleeding persists, then cauterize the spot with a luminous cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Approach that cure with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the removal of frog wart from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, the tongue swells up like an abscess resembling a small forbidden fruit that hinders its natural operation; it becomes inflated until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure is to open the patient's mouth wide before the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see it black or dark, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, do not touch that one, for it is a cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it turns white, with moisture in it, you put onion in it and incise it with a thin spatula from all sides; if blood comes out during your operation, pause over the area with this bandage made of vitriol until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work after you have removed it completely, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses with two ears and those that are not in the auricle, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a boil appears in the auricle, it is glands that resemble cheese, which appear outside and are called two ears; when you treat them with what has been said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, black in color, with little sensation, do not touch that one with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is red in color and the root is thick, do not touch that one with iron due to blood flow; leave it alone until it matures, and then you can either drain it or let it burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is white in color, round, and the root of it is thin, that one must be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure is to consider whether the abscess has already rested after being cauterized or if it has diminished with some reduction; then bring the patient before the sun, place their head in your lap, open their mouth wide and the servant holds their tongue from below with a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or iron and be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, as you press the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, catch it with your instrument and place it in the opening; then pull it out from all sides as far as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If some cause of the membranes is pulled, then you should incise that with an instrument of this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is similar to forceps, but the extensions of it are curved so that the orifice of each one is opposite the other, very sharp; the handle should be made of iron but covered in ivory.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at hand, then incise it with a spatula of this shape:
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one abscess, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then immediately apply warm water to protect the patient from cold.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood flow occurs, apply water of the boil of milkwort or leaves of myrtle and similar to those of cauterizing agents until the blood flow stops, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes in the auricle other abscesses appear besides these two ears, and you incise those according to what I have said about the incision of two abscesses equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her auricle, which abscess turned black, had little sensation, and had already closed the auricle of hers; the woman breathed with difficulty and had already prohibited herself from eating or drinking water, and would have died within one or two days if she had stayed like that.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess was already so swollen that it had been three months before it burst through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I cut it fistularly and placed the instrument in one of its openings, pulled it out and took out a large part of it; then I incised the other opening where I could find it, and closed the mouth of it, compressed its tongue, and placed the instrument back in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I incised a large part of it, but only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the woman's auricle was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately and took care of her diet; therefore, I did not continue incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess appeared in its place, which I incised until it prolonged the previous one.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And in this way, I cured the woman's auricle and cauterized it so that it healed; but I did not know what God had in store for her at that time.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Incision of ulcer when it is opened.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarr in the ulcer becomes opened and is long, it is called a perpendicular incision; and if it is in the thick and round part, it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what was said earlier in the division, and does not respond to your care, and often an ulcer cautery is still present there and is subtle, then you must incise the one that has grown round; and if it is long, and is blood-like or black, and is not centered, then you must be careful with the incision, for in this case there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see the ulcer according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you hold the patient down and press their tongue with an instrument for shaping its form and then insert your thumb into the new opening, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of the two boils.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	It is necessary that you do not incise it except where it is adjusted according to the natural border, for if you incise more than this, you damage his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for the incision, use what was recommended in the incision of the two boils, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterization in him should not be with anything other than sharp water, and hold his head on your lap, press his tongue with the instrument that was said, and take some of the sharp water mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living part, and let it stop there neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument of this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the exterior of the cavity where the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and let the instrument with the medicine be placed on the ulcer, and the patient coughs on his side so that saliva or nasal discharge from the mouth goes through the internal medicine, so that this does not happen because of any cause on the neck of him and that it does not infect this.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the ulcer for about an hour until you see it become darkened and soothed by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take care and wrap that around the tip of the ray, immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray into a cannula so that the cloth adheres to the cannula, and do this as many times as you want for the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry and fall off about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and let the cauterization be cleansed in the circuit of the grape with a cloth wet in vinegar, and clean it with what is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and let it be washed with warm water, and healed outwardly with an embrocation, and inwardly with ointments until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and deeper fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the grape is cured with something subtle that cauterizes and incises, for it is healed by subfumigation in this manner: prepare carefully, hyssop, orgean, rue, scordium arabicum, camomile, crushed leaves similar to these, and adjust all of these ingredients or some of them in a pot, immerse them in vinegar and cook; and let the pot be boiled gently with a lid on it, and on one side of the pot place a hollow instrument of iron according to this manner; make it out of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the tip be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the ulcer on the cannula, until the ulcer is somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And let this treatment be repeated many times until it dries, and take care that you do not apply this treatment at the beginning of the onset of ulcers, for it would tighten in the ulcer, and it is not necessary to do so, but rather the declaration of cauterization of the ulcer.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a cane and make a hole in the end of it with yew wood, so that the mouth of the patient is narrowed, for the yew wood closure prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres to the neck, and on other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Sometimes a thorn or splinter adheres to the neck or foot, or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore it is necessary that you extract what appears from those, looking at it carefully, because you press the tongue with an instrument before this, so that it may be clear to you what is in the neck.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and is hidden in the neck, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food becomes softened in the stomach, for this causes annexed to the neck will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or lye of linseed oil, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and press it firmly with alcohol, and then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where the thorn is hidden, it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take a eel and boil it well with a faithful ligature, then remove it from the pot; or take a pig's bladder and put it in and squeeze it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes are not forgotten, then use a lead instrument in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Make the instrument larger than a finger, and in its extremity there should be a concavity which you enter easily into the opening.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Lift the patient's head upward, and ensure that you touch only the bone of the jaw, so that it does not harm the gullet or the bones or spine, or that the doctor touches it with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient enters into that state, it is better, according to his knowledge of the location of the associated cause and pressing downwards, to grasp it with his hand and pull the instrument upward, all this according to the quantity prepared beforehand.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a bloodletter attached to the jugular vein.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the bloodletter is treated with the remedy mentioned in the section on treatment with medicines and it does not improve, consider the following in the jugular vein of the patient at the neck, as you have compressed the tongue of it with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the bloodletter, extract it gently and carefully with small or delicate instruments.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the jugular vein of the patient, and place your hand over the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron tip. Do this as many times as necessary (until the bloodletter has died and is removed from the jugular vein) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel full of water, open its mouth in that place, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any cause pass through it or change the water for an hour, because the bloodletter will soon feel the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if what has been recommended is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument that you have recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, where it has fallen down.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in sufumigation of that, is to take an oil in which charcoal has been ignited and the oil should be covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument should be compressed in that hole; and place it near the subfumigation; and hold the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and clamp down on their mouth so that the subfumigation does not escape before you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood, because the blood will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if there is no catarrh, then you should repeat the subfumigation many times, and keep the patient from drinking, and make them eat salty foods and almonds, and not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood in the gullet when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps like this, but with some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The end of the instrument should be placed in the gullet, and its extremity should resemble a stork's beak, which is hollow, and polished with a file, so that when it compresses something, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	This is where the summary of the sermon on abscesses and their incision comes to an end.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of many species, in many ways, as remembered from their occurrence, and each is described in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in the perforation and incision of them through two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses themselves; and by pressing on the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for those places where accidents of the body occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is another than one that occurs in the anus; and the abscess that occurs in the flesh is another than one at a joint; and to each of them there is its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Furthermore, some abscesses require that they are not perforated unless the pus matures in them or their completion occurs.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses require that they be drained when they are hard and have not matured according to their completion, such as the abscesses that occur at joints, because an abscess that is near a joint extends until it reaches the surrounding tissues or nerves of that joint, which causes contraction of the affected member; or is an abscess on a main organ and if you delay the perforation of it until it has matured it will damage the main organ; or is one in the anus, therefore you should not perforate an unripe one; and you should not perforate hard ones unless there is no digestion completed, but rather the one that is on the anus, because if you do not perforate it soon enough it can penetrate into the cavities inside the anus and become a fistula or be made near its edge so that it does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Furthermore, you must know the time for draining the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is matured when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and an increase in the swelling and pulse decrease, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you must know that draining should be performed in the lowest place near the abscess and from where the pus flows during treatment of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And draining is sometimes through the length of the flesh or body if abscesses are in the armpits or feet, and in the joints, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places that are not reflected; because in those where it is reflected, use the method according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Furthermore, when the abscess is in the flesh, it is better to perform draining after confirmation of digestion of it according to its completion, as we have said; because if you perforate it before, the body swells and is full of pus, and the lips are hardened and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Other abscesses should be drained according to the depth of the flesh or body depending on the need, or according to what the affected member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must make a small incision in the abscesses, and a large and wide or many incisions according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses are those in which the wound must be concave and incised when it is done in such a way that bread and cheese can be placed on it, like one that occurs in double or bubo tumors.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those who are incised with a section, there are three angles; and of these is the one that is incised similarly as a figure of myrtle leaf, as in abscesses from gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those who receive round and crescent sections, they are similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for one who is not like shallow lion abscesses, you must perforate it with a superficial perforation or just plainly.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, perforate it but do not be hasty to remove all the pus in that moment; having removed part of it, leave the abscess for another day, then remove a larger part, and apply warm poultices according to the degree until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Moreover, if the patient is a child, woman in labor, or an elderly person in decline, for their animal spirit moves frequently and resolves pus with its exit, and the patient may die quickly as a result, so treat them carefully.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this chapter, and when you perform the perforation for these abscesses, make sure to clean the wound and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a simple incision; in that case, use one of the remedies from ancient times. But if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, you must be careful not to push too hard until they meet.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If a part of the skin is detached from the abscess or you have created a concavity in its circumference, you must close it with old linen or thread made of cloth similar to when you treat bread or razors, without moisture; and leave it for three days; then process it and care for it with remedies that require gargling until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during your operation, administer warm water and wine on a cloth and place it over the area of the blood flow for a while until the bleeding subsides.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, you must administer treatment and care and apply powders that I have recommended in multiple locations of this book and section.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you must apply powder in vinegar and hot oil and leave them on the area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the locations are fleshy, you must leave powder in warm water or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be heated until the third day as we have said, and then you must remove the abscess and clean it and provide care for it with remedies suitable for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but as I have already said in a different way, according to the distinction made for each type of abscess, the cure for it will be described in separate chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On sectioning abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses on the skin of the head, which have specific types that contain tunics made by them; and these specific ones are more numerous.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are blisters, and of these are those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those [substances] that contain moisture similar to powder and resembling them, and from those that are stone-like and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in this section, and in the removal of those [substances], there is no fear, as you should not counteract archery when extracting them.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the procedure in extracting those is that you shall examine them with an instrument shaped like this, which is called entromesso, until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	But if it contains moisture, then cut it with the section as shown in this form, along the length and into a shallow section.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Start the incision along line B to line G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off that part which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, because too many observed returns if there remains any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if present, or in water and salt; fill the wound with it and leave it for another day, because with this it will dissolve everything that is broken from that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And apply Egyptian ointment on the wound repeatedly and clean it if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin layer; then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The incision should have a cross shape and make an incision between the two lips of the incision and cut it through from one side, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your archery is counteracted, then do as I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And do the same with the lapisated abscess, both incision and care, as I have told you; incising an abscess is easier because it contains little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes these abscesses are ulcers of this type found in the head in some men from whom there is no moisture; the cause being that I made an incision on an abscess in an old woman's head similar to a stone-hard, rough, white one, which could not be crushed, and if someone were to strike it, it would cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not applicable, such as abscesses that come to the heads of children and you must remove the scabs from the ears, but the incision for these should be a shallow one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Stop the perforation of those from the lower parts, so that the body may be relieved at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And care for them with what is appropriate for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often appear in the neck and ears and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are the ones that are generated between them, and every scrofula of these is part of its own membrane, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned before.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofulas are hard nodes, for some of them are stone-like, and others contain moisture, and the malicious ones that do not respond to healing.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see with good arrangement in the incision, of which the color of what is visible is similar to the color of a codpiece, and it is found everywhere except near the nerve of the neck, nor the veins, nor the artery, and it is not an appendage, therefore, you must incise it superficially along the division above to the division below the body from the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it entirely, and extend two flaps of the codpiece at once, or two flaps as many times as necessary if required by them, just as mentioned in the cauterizations of the head, and extract it gradually.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is more careful not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not hurt your hand or disturb the patient, and that you incise only what is necessary to incise; for if you should incise a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause in the cauterization that has been stewed with vinegar or other powders that cause bleeding, and let it dry, and leave it to rest until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes pus-like.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation when you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And examine with your finger whether there are any other small abscesses, therefore incise them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if the large abscess is near a vein, it's necessary that you do not incise the abscess at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then fold it back strongly and let it fall by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old lint that you have already moistened with Egyptian ointment, and heal it thereafter.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you incise the entire abscess, it's necessary that you bring the two flaps of the wound together and suture them immediately without leaving any superfluous opening.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you find that there is superfluous opening due to the size of the abscess, it's necessary that you understand to incise the root of it, and remove it and administer suture and what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And the abscesses that contain moisture, perforate them with superficial perforation at the location of their maturation, and pause perforation of what causes the pus to drain from the body, just as has been said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer perforation, with lard and similar substances, so that it dissolves what has been removed from the decay.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, heal it with a generative lard until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter forty-three.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the aphthae in the throat, caused by gout.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to make this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone on our earth that has made it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with obstruction, it's necessary to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, for it is not done as a help because all the veins and arteries of the patient are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses or tonsillitis or double auricles, when the disease is not in the trachea, it's necessary to make the incision of the epiglottis to avoid the danger caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do it, we should incise the epiglottis below three circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small incision in the length between two circles according to size, that the incision be in the cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision, because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood from it are hidden.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is poor, it's necessary that he extends the tongue of the tonsil at once and opens the tongue up to the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you find any reason for them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And open the cribriform plate according to what has been recommended, which is about the incision of the channel through the flap that comes from the breakage and the abscess of the voice box.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound be kept moist for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, since the hour of perforation is feared, gather two flaps of the tongue of the wound, and sew it alone without the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And heal it with medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon that we have recommended is nothing but the veins that some of those with abscesses have already pierced the epiglottis of the patient and the patient has come to death, and the wound is closed, and others go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the location of the wound for any respiration, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, command to keep the wound moist until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice lasts for three days; and therefore, command to sew the wound, and heal it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	What I have seen in my experience is that a servant took a dagger and struck it into the patient's chest and incised a part of the lung, and I was called to treat him. I compressed the wound as one would compress a dying man, and I uncovered the wound and drew out the blood which had come out from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	This means: However, it was not found that the wound had punctured a vein or artery, and the blood flowed out of the wound. I healed it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	If the servant did not regret what he had done, and after several days his condition improved, he should return to his duties.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	This means: Now I tell you that in the section of the epiploic there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	The chapter number appears to be 44, but it seems that it could also indicate a title or heading for the text as well. Without additional context, it's difficult to say for certain.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	This means: On the section regarding an abscess that occurs in the chest outside and is called a hernia of the chest.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This means: The hernia of the chest abscess is called a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is a malignant condition in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This means: And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	This means: In the case of a natural hernia, there is no remedy to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	This means: The accidental can occur in two ways of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by constriction of an artery, and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	This means: It should not be presumed that it is iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	This means: And you should examine it with the above mentioned method, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes and not suspended from any vein, then you should incise it in the same way as the nodes and remove it along with the tissue that contains it from the skin and bursa; otherwise, you should explore its entire being and treat the area with whatever is needed for treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	The chapter number appears to be 45, but it seems that it could also indicate a title or heading for the text as well. Without additional context, it's difficult to say for certain.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	This means: On the section of types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	This means: There are many species of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	This means: And it is important to distinguish between a node and an abscess as if there is any doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	This means: Therefore, you say that with an abscess there is heat, fever, and intense pain until the boiling of the superfluity subsides; and it is a complete putrefaction that now stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	This means: But with a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a cystic lion that belongs to the same substance as the body.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	This means: And according to the color of the body, it begins like a pimple and is formed in the same way as a vesicle, whether larger or smaller, and there are two species of them, either fatty with moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I mentioned in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	This means: Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, expose it and investigate it at the beginning with a probe that is called an intromes, according to its shape which will be described in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This means: And this is the method of investigation of abscesses and all nodes, namely that you take this probe and insert it into the moist area that you find in the abscess, and you rotate your thumb slowly against it until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	This means: And finally, place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and finally extract the probe and observe what comes out as evidence.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	This means: And if the running moisture, whatever its color, is missed, you should incise it with a superficial section as I mentioned in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	This means: And if there is no running moisture from the probe, you will know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	This means: Dry over it with a section in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	This means: As you have been taught, suspend it with a cord, and cut the capsule from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sac over it if possible, and extract the pus along with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	This means: But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract healthy material, and as many times as observed, it should be extracted in pieces until there remains no cause for concern.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	This means: Because if there remains any cause, either a little or a lot, the node will return, according to the more.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	This means: And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders and dress the wound, and treat the remaining abscess with another treatment until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	This means: And if it is a large node, you should cut the two lips of it and treat it with whatever is suitable for it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	This means: But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or not pulsating, you should sew it up and fill the area with zegi trissat (a type of ointment) that contains vitriol and let it stay closed for two to three days until the wound heals and stops the boiling of the pus; and then return to incise what was broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the necessary forms of instruments for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of trepaning instruments, and there are three species, one large, another medium, and another small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large trepan is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium trepan is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small trepan is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, lead, or cut blades properly, to fit the trepan into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of probing instruments, and they are called lancets, and one of them is called lancet.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They are of three kinds, one large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large probing instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a more experienced man, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The method of an experienced few, the method is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is necessary to be aware of abscesses, wounds, fistulas, and boils that are related to bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And prepare (or make) redots, large leeches, ashes, in this way with large needles that are sewn to the flesh, and made of lemon juice, or iron, or silver, but the best are those made of lemon juice.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	The experienced ones make black plums, which they remember to open the cavities of the fistulas in such a way that the reflections are reflected back with their flatness against those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And this is done in three ways: some (of the plums) are long, others medium-sized, and others short, depending on the size of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Method of a skilled large plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Method of an experienced medium-sized plum:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Method of an experienced small plum:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The methods of the scissors are of many types, some of which are simple with a single curve, and there are three types: large, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And some (scissors) are sharp, and these are of three types:
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those (scissors) some have two curves, and these are also of three types:
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those (scissors) some have three curves, and these are also of three types:
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these (instruments) are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Method of a large simple scissor:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Method of a medium-sized simple scissor:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Method of a small simple scissor:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Method of a large sharp scissor:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Method of a medium-sized sharp scissor:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Method of a small sharp scissor:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Method of a large scissor with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The formation of a unguis major (big toe nail) has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The formation of a small toenail (unguis paucimanus) has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The formation of a big toe nail (unguis grandis) has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The formation of a small toenail (unguis paucimanus) has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The formation of a small toenail (unguis paucimanus) has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the shapes of the scalpels with which they cut and scrape knots and abscesses, and there are three types: one is large, another is small, and the third is very small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma de scalpel pauc:
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of the middle scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those which are cut during surgery are sharp, while the other edges are not serrated, but are performed so that they are made simultaneously in the scraping of knots, to avoid injuring a vein or a nerve. For this purpose, the patient is healed and brought a small amount of peace through the cauterization of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the shapes of amygdalae (almond-shaped cysts), and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large magdalena:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of the medium-sized magdalena:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of the small magdalena:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are made from iron and resemble a ray that is used for alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And on the pointed edge of the spatula, hidden, it should go to the incision inside and outside, wherever you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spatulas (used for perforating abscesses) should be hidden from the patient and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of the following:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of drains used for removing blood flow are of three types: large, medium, and small. The shapes are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They should be made of iron, round with some length, and thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	It is necessary that the following types of drains (large, medium, and small) be available to you in order to remove blood flow quickly when needed, and at first, before medication is administered.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy areas such as the armpits and thighs, the elbows, breasts, abdomen, genitals, and their equivalent in fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some observations are made with instruments similar to small forceps shaped like this: to drain blood when it is performed by phlebotomy or during the insertion of a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some observations are rounded in shape, as follows:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter xlvi.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of male breasts that resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some observations show that the breasts of some men are swollen like those of women, and they should be treated with rest, as they begin to itch, and when the breasts are swollen, they resemble the breasts of women, and abscesses develop, which require treatment.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those with this condition, it is necessary to incise the area with a lunar section as follows, from line B to line G, and then to excise all the pus, apply a layer of carnation-colored medication, and stitch the edges of the wound together until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast descends towards the groin and becomes soft like a woman's breast, then it should be cut in two layers with two lunar-shaped incisions, each of which should contain the other until the end of one reaches the other as follows: the larger line should contain the smaller line according to this form from line B to line G. And excise the gland that is between the lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what was mentioned earlier about suturing and powders until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be incised due to the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then it is necessary to apply a plaster of soft material soaked in corrosive ointment, allowing it to enter where it corrodes the rot, and attend to the area until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Title: xlviii. (Roman numeral for 48)
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	The missing line appears to be a continuation of the previous one, describing how to treat an abscess or boil that has not been drained properly:
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The abscesses or boils that have not been drained belong to the species of scrofula (a swelling or tumor caused by tuberculosis), hard ones that contain pus: (Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.)
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	The abscesses or boils that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section, as shown in the following figure: from line .G to line .B. Once all the contents of the abscess are evacuated and cleaned, you should close it with sutures and leave it open until the next day. (E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.)
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Keep the wound closed and treated appropriately until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the abscess of the glands or boils is, and of the scrofula, then you cut it according to what has been said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is spread over such an area that pustules appear, then administer cautery as has been said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Capital forty-ninth.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on abscesses that occur due to archery or venereal disease.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arrow is broken and the sheath consolidated that is on it, an abscess occurs, and signs by which it is recognized that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an arrow, it is long and extends towards the front of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	That which is due to a vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Section on this abscess is incorrect, especially in those places where there are no sheaths, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities or head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For that which is due to inflammation of the opening of the arrow, cut the sheath section lengthwise; and open the section with scissors and remove the arrow, and separate the membranes until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place a probe on that needle and make it penetrate through the other side, and tighten the arrow with pliers in two places, which will cause you to extract two arrows that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And pierce the place between the ligaments with a lance until blood comes out from there and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer treatment that causes pus to form until the ligaments dissolve, and treat it with appropriate care until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to section of vein, then you must have at your disposal whatever is possible for the abscess and the sheath, and place a probe next to the site where you have placed your hand, and make it penetrate; and insert the thread double until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts and both extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the pliers with the probe next to the entire abscess and make an incision first around the tip of the probe, and tighten the pliers in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Cut the abscess in the middle of it until you remove what is inside it, then cut off the superfluity of the sheath and leave what remains.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place a cushion over the swelling that you have immersed in wine and oil, and administer the treatment that is made with warm and appropriate care until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on abscess caused by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	In the same way that an abscess occurs in archery and vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in nerves when it occurs due to injury or excessive work, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is done more in the places of the joints or ankle, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe abscess, and it is similar in color to the rest of the body, and it is in the largest parts of it, which are located away from the joints and when it is tightened with great pain, the patient feels like he is stunned.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	An abscess has not been added at the chest, and therefore the dressing is removed, and it is bad all over and does not go to one side or the other.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, one who suffers from joint problems should avoid bathing too often, as it will lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But one who has a headache or forehead pain should remove the dressing with spittle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the abscess is small, then you should squeeze it out and cauterize it with a hot iron.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then you should lance it with a lancet, remove the pus, and close the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On incision of abscess which occurs in the chest or belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When ulcers appear in the stomachs or other parts of the bodies of those who are called funguals because they resemble fungi, which have a subtle root and thick head; and the lips of these are covered, and it is small or greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one such case, and in his stomach there were two growths which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them in terms of color or smallness of the root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips were turned inside out and split open, and moisture ran from it at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise those and attach one in the foot at a depth of 18 lancets. And the other at a depth of 6 lancets.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation in incision is that you should consider whether the patient is moist and if the affected area is white, moist, with a subtle root; then you should lance it with a cold lancet, and be present as the cauterization is performed in the fire, for many swellings should be expelled without bleeding; and if there is bleeding, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incision with iron; but take a lead weight made recently, and heat it, using the method we've mentioned earlier; then leave it on for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead wire's loop; henceforth, you must heat the large lead until it is melted and falls off by itself without any effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If it is of large size, then any incision at that location should be done with caution and fear, especially if it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it may be possible to cut off the growth, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then take care of it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	But beware not to incise a blackish growth with little sensation and regular shape, for that is a cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And remember that this is related to cancer.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of protrusion of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Protrusion of the navel is caused by various factors; either due to a fissure in the cicaph (which is on the abdomen), with the intestine or hernia protruding as it does in other ruptures; or due to bleeding from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned, or due to compressed ventosity within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure in the cicaph and the protrusion of the intestine, the color of the abscess resembles that of the body; there is no pain, but it appears in various ways.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to herniation of the intestine, place its location with that which has been mentioned earlier, but with much more diverse symptoms; and when you press on it with your fingers as previously advised, it becomes concealed again; and strong pain occurs at the location itself, and it must be intensely bathed and vigorously massaged.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, there is no pain and it does not become concealed when you press with your hand, nor does it contract or increase in size.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to bleeding, the abscess appears darkening in color and descending.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to rotten flesh, the abscess is serious, large and hard, and it is filled according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to ventosity, touching it does not cause pain.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the procedure is to consider if protrusion of the navel is due to bleeding from an artery, a vein, or ventosity; in this case, you must be cautious about treating it because there is fear and dread as previously mentioned in the chapter where abscesses caused by arteries and veins were discussed.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, you must command the patient to lie on their side and remain extended; then grasp around the entire umbilicus, and command them to be facing towards you with their hands on either side; then circle the area around the umbilicus with a thin linen band over the location that you have marked with the probe; then extend the abscess's size towards its upper part using force or a scissors in a suitable manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then cut the middle of the extended abscess on the linen and insert your fingers into it as indicated and try to grasp the intestine; if you have not found or protected it with the linen, then you extract any excrement and force the intestine towards the inside of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the linen (or cloth), then take a small amount of oil; cut away the excess from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays si es contrario al tejido o venosa, entonces rodea ese lugar y regresa a tu operación; luego toma dos agujas y coloca en ellas dos flejes fuertes y mete dos agujas en el circuito que has hecho alrededor del absceso en manera de cruz, las cuales haces penetrar; luego fuerza el absceso en cuatro partes sobre las agujas.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Más si quieres, retire las agujas y permite que la carne se extienda y caiga por sí; o corta el lugar delgado e permita curarse con un suelo que cubra hasta que se haya sanado.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	Si la protuberancia del ombligo es de carne mala o por humedad, entonces debes cerrar el absceso tal como se ha dicho y extraer la sangre o la humedad que se encuentra allí, la cual absorbe en el lugar, y luego cura este con un suelo que lo cubra y que consolide la zona.
Capitol .liii.	Capítulo XXXIII
De curacio de cranc.	Sobre el tratamiento del cáncer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	Se ha dicho en el capítulo anterior sobre los tipos de cáncer y en qué forma es la mejor manera de tratarlo con medicinas, y que es importante cuidar no dejarla ulcerar; se había dicho que el cáncer se produce en la madre o en la cautela de su tratamiento.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Y dicen los antiguos que alguna vez el cáncer puede ser eliminado en ciertos lugares donde es posible su extirpación, como en el pecho o la cara y de allí similares en otros miembros, especialmente cuando comienza pequeño.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Pero cuando el cáncer se ha vuelto grande y ya no es posible curarlo, no debes preocuparte por él, porque yo nunca pude sanar de este ni he visto a otro hacerlo, ni que lo hayan logrado alguien.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	Y la operación en ese lugar, como se ha dicho, es que debes prepararte y acompañar al paciente y purificarlo de la colera negra algunas veguadas, y luego hervir el sagrado si está contaminado evidentemente.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Y prepara al paciente con la preparación en la que se haya localizado la operación, y prohíbies los instrumentos quirúrgicos que deben estar presentes; y asegura que todo el equipo esté bien limpio hasta que no quede ninguna razón para las razones de su ocurrencia.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Permítale que fluya la sangre y no hagas abscesiones ligeras de él; presiona los lugares y limpia la sangre gruesa con tu mano o el instrumento con el que puedes acceder a ellos.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Más si te contrariega el flujo de sangre gruesa en la incisión de una vena o de una arteria, entonces cauteriza aquella hasta que se detenga el flujo de sangre y luego cura esta con otra curación hasta que se haya sanado.
Capitol .liv.	Capítulo LIV
De curacio de ydropici.	Sobre el tratamiento de la hidropisia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Se han recomendado antes, en el capítulo anterior, sobre los tipos de hidropisia del agua, y las señales de cada tipo, su tratamiento con medicamentos.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Aquella que se puede curar con ayuda no es más que el tipo único de alitosis, y no debe tratarse con ayuda para el tipo de timpanitis o el tipo de hiperarquia, porque es mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	Cuando ya has tratado este tipo de hidropisia timpanitis con medicamentos y no confirma tu tratamiento, entonces debes considerar si el paciente tiene debilidad o es un paciente con otro tipo de hidropisia como si está en la tos o en el abdomen y similares, entonces debes cuidar que no le trates con ayuda ya que hay miedo a ello.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the patient with excessive thirst and no other illness but dropsy alone, not a child or an old person, then the method of operation for him is that you lift the patient onto your lap, and administer to him the compression of his abdomen with his hand, expel water from below the navel, and take a sponge shaped like this:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp pointed ends, long and sharp like a sponge, but in some shortness, so that it does not enter the intestine during the operation, and that you remove it afterwards.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Then consider if the production of dropsy is from the intestines, because in that case you must be cautious to separate yourself three fingers below the navel on the right side near the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the production of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your separation should be on the left side three fingers below the navel.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the production is from the spleen, then your separation should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is necessary that your separation be over the ribs where you wish to place the patient, so that excessive fluids do not flow to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate the entire cord with the instrument and enter that separation, lift your hand with the sponge between the cord and the liver, and extract it; if a drop or more comes out.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then I perforate the liver to where the sponge reaches the location of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract that, then insert an instrument shaped like this:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a silver thin cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; the tip is inscribed like a feather quill, as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the exterior part of it, put on the surgeon's apron, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately remove it from the instrument, thus evacuating the water in the best possible quantity, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient will likely die due to resolution of their animal spirit, or a complication called septicemia approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what you perceive about the patient's condition, and the quality of the pulse and their well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument, and hold back the water that is causing it, as soon as possible seal off the area where you have made the incision, and be careful to follow this procedure.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then return the instrument to the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, do this for some days with caution, and ensure that you do not leave any water but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and drain a large quantity of water, then care for him with sand baths, massage his body in the sun, and wait a long time; treat him with drying medications until he is cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the water extraction point, as I have previously reported in that which is related to this matter.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment for infants whose urinary tracts are not perforated. (This line seems to be discussing a medical condition related to infants' urinary systems, but it is difficult to provide a more precise translation without additional context.)
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, one of the infants is born with a membrane around their belly from the mother and their head's opening is not perforated (or it is narrow or not in its proper place). (This line appears to be discussing a birth defect involving an infant's umbilical cord or abdominal wall.)
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform a surgical incision as soon as the infant is born with a thin mouthlike opening in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then insert a thin lead wire and tie it in the opening, leaving it for three days or more. (This line appears to describe a method for securing the surgical incision made in the previous step.)
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the infant wishes to urinate, remove the wire. (This line seems to explain what to do with the inserted lead wire once the surgical incision has healed and the infant can urinate normally.)
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not remove the lead wire, it is possible that the urine flowing over the area will not be able to pass through this opening. (This line appears to caution against leaving the inserted wire in place for too long.)
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the opening is narrow, treat it with a lead wire as previously described, until it has been widened. (This line seems to provide additional instructions for treating a narrow umbilical cord orifice.)
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But in those cases where the umbilical cord is not in its proper place, the infant must be lifted by the tail towards the opening of the vagina so that he can urinate inside it; and this is not for procreation, because semen cannot reach the mother correctly in this position, and this is a serious illness. (This line appears to describe an alternative method for treating a narrow or misplaced umbilical cord orifice, but the translation provided assumes that "partidas" refers to the vagina.)
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, and you grab the tail with your left hand and pull it out with great force, then insert a sharp instrument into the tip of the tail where the umbilical cord meets the perineum (as if piercing a feather), or cut any part of the tail, so that the meconium (the first stool of an infant) comes out like the tip of the tail and the umbilical cord falls into the proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Be cautious in your surgical treatment of bleeding, for this can often happen; and stop the bleeding, and care for the wound until it has healed. (This line seems to provide a general caution about the risks associated with surgical procedures that involve bleeding.)
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About circumcision that occurs at the tip of the penis and infections, discoloration, and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis. (This line seems to describe a medical condition or procedure related to male genitalia.)
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often, this circumcision in the penis results in severe wounding of the flesh. (This line appears to describe a complication that can occur with circumcision.)
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	One type is malicious and the other is not. (This line seems to distinguish between two types of complications that can result from circumcision, one of which is considered harmful or malicious.)
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malicious, it is necessary to suspend the wound with a thin thread and drain it until all pus has been removed; then cover the affected area with Egyptian balm; and apply the medication daily until it is healed. (This line appears to provide instructions for treating the less severe complication mentioned in the previous lines.)
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If an abscess is malicious and discolored, you must administer cautery near its incision and drain it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If an abscess is located at the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, you must incise the abscess from within first, until it consolidates; then take care of the outside part because when you treat the outside at the same time, it's not guaranteed that there won't be a rupture.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it often happens in the genitals and darkened and corrupted penis, therefore, you must remove all that has been degenerated or is about to become degenerate or already degenerate; then apply linen on it that has been soaked with millet flour and three kinds of powdered and crushed herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then care for that abscess with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, apply the moon-shaped cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The moon-shaped cautery can be used in two ways at the same time: for bleeding and for an ulcer when it is rotten.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed at that moment, you must insert a lead cannula into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one who is circumcised, and it should not be performed on one whose foreskin is healthy; and when adhesion occurs due to ulceration or abscess), you must excise it with a blunt spatula until the pus is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to excise that part exactly, you must excise the head of the penis and foreskin with any cause, because the foreskin, when thin, is easily perforated due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin blade that has already been disinfected in hot water so that it does not stick again later.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then let it heal with a styptic until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 77.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuous problems like other diseases: but because it is of our operation and our will, and the need for it is specifically in infants, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and easier method to avoid losing health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, they did not say circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause being that I have discovered most artisans and barbers use circumcision and mundification with a new knife and with torches; they use soap with water and an incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	I have already prohibited all these methods and do not recommend mundification with scissors, soap, water, and an incision with the nail because many times it escapes the skin above, because the skin of the foreskin is double, and one layer remains below, and there is a high risk of another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the mundification that is done for alleviating itching and is digital, used by cobblers, is not safe because there is a high risk of incising the tip of the male member.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, you risk injuring and corrupting your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's belt is naturally short, and it often becomes tight in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen that. (or: The child's waistband is naturally small and frequently becomes tight without the need for adjustment, and I have observed this.)
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The modifications that are made with scissors and laces on the belt, according to my good experience, because scissors have proportional cuts, so the accuracy at the top is the same as the accuracy below; therefore, when you press your hands proportionately on two accuracies, and cut accordingly in a comparison within a time; and it creates pressure on the belt with the figure containing the entire waist, with which there will be no error from all sides. (or: The adaptations made with scissors and laces on the waistband, according to my good experience, are because scissors have proportional cuts so that the accuracy at the top is the same as the accuracy below; therefore, when you press your hands proportionately on two accuracies, and cut accordingly in a comparison within a time; this creates pressure on the waistband with a figure covering the entire waist, without any error from all sides.)
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is that you make the child remain, especially if it is one who understands a little, that you do not undo his belt except for when you read him into another day. (or: The method of the initial procedure is to keep the child, particularly if he comprehends little, and not to unbuckle his waistband except for when you take him into another day.)
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Approach him in every way that is possible for you, to inform him of his condition.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Be prepared and remain hidden from sight; hide your scissors in your hand or under your garment so that the patient does not see them nor any of the other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Place your hand on the patient's groin and exhale into the wound, then pull it out when the head of the ingrown hair emerges, and carefully clean it with something appropriate to remove any pus or filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Approach the designated spot with faith, bind it twice with strong threads and sew them well using a needle and thread, taking care to secure the stitches properly, and then cut between the stitches.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Elevate the wound slightly and carefully remove the head of the ingrown hair; let small amounts of blood flow out, as this is better; pause powder on it and over the powder place a linen cloth soaked in a solution made from honey cooked in rose oil and freshly ground garlic; leave it there for another day; and take care to treat it with healing ointment until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for cleaning, this is its shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	One of the handles should be non-cutting and the other should be sharp, but they should not touch each other at the joint, and their two cutting edges should have a length equal to that of two hands when closed together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in the cleaning is when the wound is forcefully opened too deeply or if you need to make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must widen the wound gradually with your nail before the incision and make the incision according to the guidelines.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it using tweezers and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it persists for more than three days and remains swollen near the ingrown hair, you should wait until the swelling subsides and then carefully remove the swelling with cautery, excise the affected area, and make an incision according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Be careful not to touch the head of the ingrown hair, as it may cause irritation.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And treat the wound with the plaster recommended in the treatment of wounds.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the incision is made properly and you observe the guidelines, there should be no complications.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And continue to treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or blood clot, or tumor or cyst, similar to those mentioned in the section on methods of treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not resolved and the retention of urine continues due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be placed in a supine position.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Approach the patient's feet and place them on his back, extend his abdomen from above his pelvis, and have him bend his legs as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, you must squeeze the neck of the bladder to expel the stone from the back side, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it is not resolved with the methods mentioned earlier and the condition worsens in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, whose shape is as follows: It should be made of silver and be thin and long, similar to the cannula of a bird's feather with the same thinness as a finger and a half, and it should have a narrow tube at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of emptying the urine with the syringe is to grasp it firmly and place the wool or cotton in its opening for good lubrication; then insert the wool into the area behind the syringe, and if there is any need to cut the cotton, do so using scissors, but insert the cotton into the cannula with force. Then advance the syringe little by little while pushing and pulling the plunger and the stopper at the same time.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Have the patient lie on the bed and apply warm oil to the bladder and groin area, as well as olive oil and garlic.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Approach the cannula with ease until it reaches the urethra opening; then bend the penis upward to the area below the scrotum; and push the cannula into that area; and continue pushing it until it reaches the bladder, which should cause the patient to feel relief from the pain and not be done in this order, but rather have him lie down with his back turned towards you.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Approach the field [area] with fine wool gradually, for urine absorbs the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Extend that area with fine wool gradually for urination treatment, and use a syringe without ceasing to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder cleansing using a syringe and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulceration, abscess or congealed blood occurs in the bladder, or there is a hardened stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then use an instrument called clampcedra, which has this shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If it is muffled on the outside, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that [bladder] there are three holes: two on one side and sometimes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a concave area, in which water is introduced according to the amount needed, and when any cause is drawn out of that, it should be pulled out, and when it is expelled, water should be drawn out again, and when it is expelled far, according to the clampcedra used, as is done with a clampcedra made of naphta in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and pull out with it the water that is pushed upwards, because the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And approach the external part of the clampcedra to the perineum according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and push the moisture with water, because that moisture reaches the bladder quickly, and the patient should hold it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of a fine catheter with which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, the head of which is shaped like a small feather, and below that the cannula slopes gently inward.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And when you want to catheterize the bladder by movement, pause the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and place it between two with a strong ligature using double thread, and heat up the moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And approach the external end of the catheter to the perineum.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And apply firm pressure on the bladder with your hand along with the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate that in its entire roundness; and insert a sharp point firmly into those holes, so that they are turned around; and fill the circle with water, oil and waters as you wish to withdraw from the moisture.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And apply that to the instrument in the same way as you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between bladder stones and lung stones, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that the stone is operated on with the hand and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The bladder stone is precisely the one that is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And we are explaining it with clear and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, say that bladder stones usually occur in children; and among the symptoms of it is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, appears in sand; the patient rubs his penis, moves around frequently, and stands still; and with that, an opening is created at the end of the buttocks.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	The healing of children from that is usually within fourteen years; and it is difficult to heal in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people, it can be cured with that method, provided.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is large and healing is easier, it is favorable to that; but if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we begin the treatment of that condition, first clean the patient with a christening basin which extracts all the fissure that is in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the emergence of the stone, therefore the investigation of it is necessary.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then place the patient on their back and make them lie down comfortably, in such a way that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder or jumps out from time to time.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Approach the instrument you have prepared between your hands and the patient's, so that the bladder is fully exposed, descending towards the sides.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Apply force to it and completely open it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, then you must cut it out immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not grasp it all at once with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint it with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if they are a young adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Apply force to the stone as it enters.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Turn it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your hand and expel it outwards through the incision at the bladder opening.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; command another minister with their right hand to extend the thighs to the sides, and with their other hand lift the undercloth that is below the thighs, in the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And approach a sharp spatula, of this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And make the incision between the anus and the thighs, not too close, moving towards the left side; and the incision should be on the stone, your hand should be in the anus, and the incision should be transverse, so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the size of the stone that can be removed, but not more, because too much pressure from your hand on the stone causes damage, and it should be avoided with difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that some stones have an angle and edges, making their extraction difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of this stone is one like a peach pit, round, and it comes out easily.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it is the one with angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not avoided, then you must press on it or squeeze it gently with a suitable instrument whose end resembles a file against the stone, and do not give up; or insert a subtle instrument of curved end under it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press on it, then widen the hole a little, and if you see bleeding, cauterize it with distilled vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stones, then first press your hand to the bladder opening, and then make an incision; and apply pressure to it little by little; and proceed in the same way with more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, ignorance consists in making a large incision, because it harms the patient with one of two causes: either death or it may lead to continuous urine distillation, because the location is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the extraction as soon as possible, or introduce forceps into the fracture to remove it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or rose oil and water, on it to promote the cauterization of the wound.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then raise the patient's head, and do not undo the ligaments for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you undo it, wash the area with water and soap, and care for it with antiseptic and diaper salve until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there is cauterized and corrosive aposteme, similar to if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and because of this urine is prohibited (and that is known as the emergence of blood with urine), then insert your hand into the wound and remove the cauterized blood, since if it remains it causes the bladder to rot and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the wound with vinegar and water, salt, and all opposition, using what is appropriate for its healing until it heals.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During the entire course of treatment, keep the patient's thighs together and administer the medication that has been placed on the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the scrotum and has penetrated into it, and passing urine is prohibited, then cure it with what I recommend before circumcision, because prolonged observation of this treatment is accused of circumcision; and I have already spoken about this, and it is that you take a pointed iron tool, whose form is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular extension, sharp, inserted into a stick.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take hold of a piece of cloth and use it to hold the scrotum away from the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the scrotum and perforate with ease until the instrument reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Turn the perforator with your hand towards the small stone little by little, and you will perform the perforation until the other part penetrates; because the urine is soon released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And press your hand on the crushed part of the stone outside the scrotum, because it is broken and forgotten with urine; and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this treatment is not suitable for some reason that prevents it, then hold a cloth under the stone and another cloth over the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then use a hammer to strike the stone in the scrotum between two layers of skin.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it (the crushed part).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then unwrap the bandage and clean the clotted blood from the wound, which is made in the area (around the crushed part).
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And there is no need for a cloth under the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other cloth is not necessary, because when the bandage around the crushed part is removed, the stone will return to its place and the wound will heal.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And in this case, when you remove the cloth over the stone, raise the scrotum above the affected area, or else it will return to its place and cause the wound to heal as I have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of female stones (or bladder stones).
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if stones are found in any of these women, their treatment is difficult and forbidden due to many complications.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that the woman who experiences this condition may be a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who knows whether she has had sexual intercourse with a doctor or with married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you cannot find women who know this art, especially with the operation using an instrument (likely referring to surgical instruments).
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for removing stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring a long incision, and this causes fear (in the patient and/or the surgeon).
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity requires it (to perform the operation), then you must take a woman who is well versed in this art and experienced.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you lack such a woman, then seek out an experienced and skillful one, or present a mature woman who is well-versed in the art of women's health, or a woman who has divided her time between this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore present her and command her to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone in its beginning; this is because she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case you must insert your finger into her anus and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that she is a virgin, extract her with your finger, and then command her to insert a probe (likely a thin, cylindrical instrument) over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, command the mature woman to insert her finger into the patient's anus and examine the stone, because she should rest her left hand on the bladder and compress it well with good judgment.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if the stone occurs in the urinary bladder, it is necessary to gradually guide it from the bladder opening towards the vaginal area with the help of its own virtue until it reaches the cavity of the vagina.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert the probe into that area of the cervix and guide the stone from the cavity of the vagina to a certain position where it is stopped, and place the pointed instrument there without removing it from the hardened stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	When the incision is small at first, insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the section according to its size, which you know will be broken by it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are seeds: for some are small and large, lion-shaped and sharp, long and round, and rough.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you should know how many types there are for what you are asking about.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to treat bleeding, adjust the location with vinegar-soaked linen and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is broken.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare your tools as you have said for the removal of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to stop bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is pierced, then you pause powder on the spot and press it with plasters and tighten it with a bandage, but do not repeat this, leave the stone alone and do not remove it, for fear the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the intensity of the bleeding has decreased after several days, and the wound heals over, then return to your operation until the stone is broken.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia in the groin.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia inguinal is not simply an accumulation of moisture in the white area below the inguinal ligament that contains the hernia sac, and it is called a hydrocele.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is in the proper abdominal muscle, which is prepared by nature in the inguinal region, until it becomes another hernia; and it is the covering of the inguinal area between the white cyst that we have called hydrocele, but it is not exactly that.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the inguinal region, so that this material collects there, and sometimes it occurs due to injury inflicted on the inguinal region.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture contains stones that are yellowish, either gradually turning to citrus or blood-red, or red, or black and putrid, or clear white, and it is that which is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are: if it is in the white cyst that we have called hydrocele, then there is an abscess that is rounded and slightly elongated like a hernia sac, and the inguinal area can be seen, because the moisture contains it everywhere.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper abdominal muscle, then there is an abscess that is rounded with a part of the hernia sac, and it is considered to be another hernia.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the inguinal ligament and the white cyst, then make an incision below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	In order to know the color of the moisture, you should explore the color of the moisture in the abscess by making an incision through the covering that precedes its shape; and according to the evidence found within the incision, judge accordingly.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of that with iron, it is necessary to command the patient to be phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty the body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then rest on the patient's back for some reason or other, and leave them covered with moist cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then lie down on the patient's left side, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who should extend his arm from two fingers to the inguinal ligament and the edge of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a long probe and divide the inguinal ligament at the midpoint towards the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision according to the correct angle and distance from the line that separates the pubic bone, until it reaches the white cyst encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excoriate that [part], observe, and be careful not to pierce it; and your excision should be made carefully and subtly examined according to the size of the excised area as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then, pierce the bladder with a wide perforation and drain all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two labia of the section with stitches, and extend the bladder at the sides; do not touch the cohana (cervix) or genital walls, and incise the bladder in the manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Incise that completely or in parts, especially the thin side, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound is processed from outside the cervix at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the bladder incision, return it inside; then sew together the two labia of the cervix of the genitals with stitches, and take care of that wound as with other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the wound becomes infected by other disease, it is necessary that you remove the instruments used for suspension and extract the pus, and take care of it with what has been said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is added to two parts, know that there are two hernias; therefore incise the part as you did in the other case; and if it appears to be an operation, perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should abstain from blood, and enter into the incisions with wool immersed in oil or oil-soaked wool; then place another wool dipped in wine and oil on top of it, spreading it over two genitals and the abdomen; and place cloths doubled and powdered on top, and let them rest on lint that is made in this way:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and take two cloths and saturate them with wool soaked in lime in this way; and make the ends of these with which you press with cotton or wet wool, and join them with the structure in the belt of the breeches; one end should take the anus from between the thighs, and the other end should take the anus at the perineum, and two ends on each side of the buttocks and two others on the inguinal areas, and the entire incision should be closed with the structure in the belt of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and you should take a subtle surgical cautery and incise the cervix of the genitals, and ignite it according to what has been recommended until the white bladder containing water is exposed, and then take caution as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and resembles Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce the bladder with it, and let it be ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the bladder with stitches, excise it with scissors and excise it with a subtle cautery ignited; incise that as possible until you excise everything; and be careful of the pus that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer lasting without bleeding than an incision operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if an abscess occurs during the incision or cauterization, or bleeding, it is necessary that you treat the problem that occurs to you according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horrifying nature, you should administer perforation as recommended; and when it is certain that you, according to what has been said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	It is necessary that you place the patient on some raised cesspool, then pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a thin lance and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	The opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place a cloth on the area and let it lie there, in order for the remaining water to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Take care of that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an obstruction of the water flow when you perforate that: this should not be done unless the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound creates an obstruction and prevents the emission of water, in which case you must put in the wound a pen or instrument with which the water is extracted from the edema, following the prescribed method; or tighten in the opening of the wound a small cloth.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is usually accumulated about six months or later; and when it has been accumulated, you should be perforated according to that method, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision on flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision on this hernia there is fear of losing life in the major cases; for which I recommend avoiding it and being saved by another method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	I remember the operation in that [instance] and the properties of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	The abscesses arise in the bodies that are composed of genitals and are done for various reasons: either due to sudden acute sour fluid being poured into the genitals, or due to injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the abscess is according to the body's color, and it does not occur in pain, it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A thick-walled abscess is lapified, whose color is dark and not tender to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some swellings are made due to the tying of the arteries, and due to inflation of those in such a way that the memory of it is already perceived, or due to inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	However, what is due to the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your thumbs; it is not necessary to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	However, what is due to the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed by any means due to pressing with your thumbs.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that on this type of swelling, incision can be made on the flesh and elsewhere; you insert the stitch into the genitals, extend the hernia upwards, extract the white membrane, release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and insert the suspensory stitches where you released it from all parts of the hernia of the hernia.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hernia is already consolidated with the flesh, then you must extract the hernia and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion due to some cause of the white membrane or between the vessels, then you must detach all that adhesion and insert it by round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	However, if there is the growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you must insert everything that is from it and extract the hernia as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Once your operation is complete, you fill the wound with wool soaked in warm oil and wine; then you treat it with other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernia that is due to childbirth.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A hernia due to childbirth is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to a bladder with the softening of testicles, and it makes difficult exercise, physical activity, and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the cure of this illness, there is fear due to which memory is recollected.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to perform an operation as we did before.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	It is necessary that you restrain the patient on an elevated bed; and spread the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at the legs; and hold the genitals with your thumbs near the vulva where they are likely to be found; and have another servant who assists you, and extend them with a strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And insert a sharp spatula through a transverse incision in the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And strip all parts of it as we said in the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And insert an awl with double point in that place where the hernia occurs, and pierce it through the first part of the swelling; and pierce the other swelling with another awl at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And insert the incision again in the same place by a straight incision according to the length of the body and extract what has been accumulated from the foul and rotten fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And treat the wound with treatment for other wounds in which you want healing to be generated so that the veins are not damaged, because it is not harmful for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However, if the hernia occurs in all the vessels, then you must extract the testicles or make them blind to the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels, and remain immobile, or made blind so as not to be beneficial for them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a tear that extends along the cephalic flexure on the abdomen of the unborn child in the womb, thus causing the intestines from that rupture to pass into one of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either due to the cephalic or excessive extension of the fetus, and this happens for various reasons: impact, pressure, screams, elevation due to a grave cause, or similar circumstances.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this rupture, when it is due to the excessive extension of the fetus, is that it happens gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms near the umbilicus because the cephalic presses on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it is due to a tear in the cephalic, as at first it causes intense pain suddenly; and an abscess appears, which seems to be different from the normal one, and this is precisely due to the intestine itself, and the body is swollen near the umbilicus.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the peritoneum (the tissue lining the abdomen) is forgotten with the intestine, and this type of hernia is called an entestinal hernia in English.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes there is a ventosity (gas accumulation in the abdomen), and sometimes the intestine is twisted and retained, and this is very dangerous for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and intense pain especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of illnesses, caution is required, so it is necessary to avoid hunting in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine with his hand into its cavity if possible, and support it on his chest and elevate his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then sew the peritoneum (the tissue lining the abdomen) that separates the testicles from each other, and cut through the entire peritoneum of the testicles along its length; and then insert your fingers into the incision on both sides according to what is necessary to open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is large enough that some of it can be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then excise those cephalic regions that are hidden by the peritoneum of the testicles, until the hard white cephalic is exposed from each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the testicle, between the white cephalic and the peritoneum of the hernia sac, and separate it from the adhesion that is behind the hernia sac.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then you grab the peritoneum of the testicles at each side, and with that extend the white cephalic on the sides with your left hand, and elevate the hernia sac to the incision site with the cephalic; and command the assistant to stretch out the hernia sac in front of you and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look for any cause of the intestine being enclosed in the hard white cephalic.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find a cause for it, then you open the abdomen to examine it.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then you take a needle with a thick thread made of five filaments, and pierce the bottom of the cephalic that is under the peritoneum of the testicles, which you see is sectioned; and then cut off the ends that extend beyond the thread until there are four filaments, and compare some of them to a certain figure in the shape of a cross; and bind it with a strong ligature of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Approach the extremities of the feet and bind them tightly with something so that any vessels which nourish those areas cannot transmit any cause, thus preventing a cauterizing ulcer from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Wait another day or two, according to custom; and between the two bindings leave a gap of the size of a finger, and insert into it a cord that holds the testicles in place, and sew up everything else roundly, and leave an opening for urine.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then insert through the incision made below the cord of the testicles, where blood and pus will run out as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and wait; then apply the linen bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes a white cord is cauterized, which we said should be placed near the incision to prevent blood flow, since this often happens), and leave the bandage in place until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the pain persists, then boil water and soak a cloth in it, and place it on the affected area until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the wound with another treatment for wounds until it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia (Swollen Abdomen).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has yet been found who has been cured through iron (treatment).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first physicians said that it should be treated in this way in the hernia that is visible: you press the vessels near the incision with ease; and you sew up in the same place around the abscess with what opens it, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Care for the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and in that case...
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Do not give any cause of hernias to the genitals; and if there is one, it is rare; and it always returns.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time extends with this [treatment], an incision is made in the cord until the hernia returns into the cord; and this happens due to the extension of the cord, which is in the ankles as we have said, causing it to be stretched out, softened, and the area becomes abscessed and protrudes even more.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with cauterization, as described earlier.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and you sew up the location of the rupture of the abscesses evenly with a suture according to the width of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Approach the white cloth that is under the loincloth where it should be exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the reed and place it on the prominent part of the cloth, and press that area against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then press both ends of the prominent parts on the edge of the cloth, and fasten them with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then extract the end of the reed, but do not incise the cloth from all sides, nor extend the opening, nor create any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat it with the cure of ulcers, and when you incise the wound, clean it and restore the wound to its proper place until it is consolidated; for the hernia is contracted and not adjusted at the site of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this case, as it is near to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On softening the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened by this because the flesh between it is softened, and the treatment is as follows:
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is consulted in the treatment of this condition that the patient lie as comfortably as possible, and incise the entire scrotum which has been softened, leaving only the natural scrotum; then the two labia are to be joined together with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, cut away the excess softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then make an incision between the stitches; and treat any other wounds until they heal and the sores disappear.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I bring it up in this book because it is relevant; and its remembrance is only necessary in two cases: the first is when a doctor needs to know about it due to his knowledge of its cure when it occurs; and the second reason is when we have had necessity of castration of other animals for our uses, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: by strangulation or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the method done by strangulation, the procedure is to restrain the animal in hot water until its genitals soften and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then grasp them with your hand inside so that they do not reappear afterwards.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie up the suspenders and make an incision through each hole until two holes have appeared.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make an incision on those (testicles) that you have cut off.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause for the bladder in it, but remove the bladder that is near the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better done by strangulation, because strangulation lessens the likelihood that the testicles will be desired by the animal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70).
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	In men, hermaphrodism occurs in two ways: one is when there appears a gap between the scrotum of the testicles, where there is a figure like a female vagina with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes it also occurs that the urine passes from the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, it is a special case: and it is that the vagina of the woman over the cervix is like two testicles of a man, but much smaller, like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one special type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary to incise the affected tissue and remove the pressure from there, and take care of it with other treatments for other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second type of men who have urine in their scrotum, there is neither cure nor action to be taken on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On scrofula (lymphadenitis) and hardened flesh due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Scrofula is naturally attached and swells until it becomes large, and in some women it grows so much that it spreads like it does in men, reaching the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore you must have the excess of liquid from the eye with your hand or oil and be inserted (into it).
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not insert more than necessary, mainly at the root of the wound, to avoid bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then care for that (injury) with its healing until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Born flesh is that which grows in the abdomen of the mother until it fills it, and it is called "caudated flesh" by some; therefore we must cut it open like cutting an eye, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter .lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of scrofula.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Scrofula is when the woman's neck is not perforated or small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has occurred before, and it is caused by excess flesh or a subtle or thick cyst.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It can be made in the mother's womb, on her ribs, or on the upper or lower part of her body, and prohibit coit, binding, and childbearing, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that (scrofula) is found by examining the mother, if the opening is obvious, it is palpable; but if it is not obvious, then you search for it with your fingers or the eye.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opening is due to a subtle cyst and it is close to the labia, then you cut and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers on both labia, and place your fingers close to the opening, then search for it more deeply later.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and stretch the labia apart with force until the subtle cyst is broken and the opening is open.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area, and press with a cloth for three days to ensure that the incision does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cyst is large and thick, then you must cut it open with a lancet or a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opening is due to a tumor, then suspend it with oil and cut it open.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medications that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and ennses, mixed with alum of hops.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And provide a wide lead pipe to prevent the wound from healing lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer warm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it heal with the other healing of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes it happens during the mother's delivery of other fleshes, and then you must cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to cancerous fistula, do not make an incision in any way on the cancerous fistula of the mother.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, of tail and of red boil that occur in the neck of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized as the openings of enlarged veins from which blood flows continuously; and when old hemorrhoids are formed, they harden.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those (hemorrhoids) and the signs of those, and I will say those that receive healing and those that do not receive healing.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and fistulas in the mother's womb and not appearing to the senses should not be healed with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the mother's womb and can be felt, those are the ones that are healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	It is necessary to put the woman in warm water and stretch her anus with forceps or rough cloth and cut it open with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And on those you must sprinkle the bleeding of the blood from one of the non-cutting powders without pain, such as acacia and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Put your feet in warm water for an hour and hold the area on ice water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the bleeding persists, then make a poultice with sumac and milk thistle seeds and walnuts and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And take barley flour, mix it with honey, wine vinegar, and make a plaster on the patient's back with it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the bleeding is separated, it is good; and if not, make it stick with two suction cups, and to the nipples without scratching.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and dip it in the juice of colandre or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier with wine and make it stick to the area, and heal the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the anus is hard to examine, then cut what appears from it according to what I said in the chapter on fistulas.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Heal that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter .lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an accidental hernia in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Multiple sores of abscesses happen in the stomach area, such as crabs, abscessed and ulcerated sores, hernias, eruptions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken about these diseases and their types and the signs of them, as well as their cures in the division (section).
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	It is necessary that I say in this treatise about abscess cautery which occurs in the stomach when it comes from abscesses that are filled with pus, and if you want to know what method should be used for its operation with iron (surgery).
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with impact and pain and fever, and sometimes it swells and if it catches sensation, then do not pierce it, and cure it with what helps in maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must make the woman lie down on a couch that has two couches; and recline on her back and place her feet at the edge farthest from the stomach, and spread her legs apart, and place her arms by her sides, and let each person have what is appropriate to them.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And follow the midwife to the right side and administer the instruments needed to open the stomach opening, the shape of which will come in the circumstances that are appropriate for it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary when administering this instrument that you place the ring finger of the midwife at the opening of the woman's stomach, and what enters the stomach from the instrument should not be more than the size of the opening and not harm the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the woman's stomach, then it is necessary that you place powder on the texture of the opening of the stomach to prevent the entry of any instrument into the opening of the stomach.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you stop the flow of blood coming out of the tool of the midwife above and that the person administering it hold the tool and rotate the blood until it is opened the opening of the stomach.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excision is performed, and it is touched with the hand and cut and moistened, then it is necessary that you dry it up with a suction tube.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you stop in the wound a plug submerged in rose oil or oil of roses in which there is some stypticity; and place the cloth in the section on the opening of the stomach.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the stomach and over the penile wool, pure wool dipped in water in which wormwood has been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let it be healed for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the stomach and wound are washed in this way so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and with water in which rosemary or long-stemmed asterisks have been boiled, and it returns to an enema.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the stomach and swollen, then it is necessary that you are forbidden from surgery on it with iron, having a cure for it as I have said in the division (section).
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner herbs should be treated when they are used abnormally according to the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth through its signs, and it is that when you see a woman expel at her outlet and desires to smell the air, and above her it is shaved where the birth is from, and she hastens the emergence of the fetus, then you will know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the top of it on its head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the fetus emerges easily, because when it emerges on its head, it will deliver the second one, and it should be cleaned of superfluidity with good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if that part is other than natural and unlawful, because when the fetus emerges on its feet and the body of it is born before its head and its feet, and one of its hands or feet is... or it is born with its head and one hand or its stomach, and it turns violently on its neck, and it resembles the figures of those unlawful things.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to avoid error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing the entire figure of these, and what trick is in those for it to be understood and stand for that purpose.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is on top of its head by natural expulsion, and it is very difficult for the woman and made with difficulty, and the strength of it has already diminished, then you make that incision or what women have, and evaporate the conch of it with fenugreek oil and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Approach the hernia between its own small septum and cut it open along the second layer, or dry that one with its nail into where liquid is within it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Push the woman's abdomen until it bursts (or ruptures).
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	However, if it does not burst, then the woman should be cleaned with chicken broth and fennel water using a scraper (or tool).
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then call for the cleaner (or caregiver), and have them prepare a compress and apply it to make her vomit; and hold her mouth and nose closed for an hour, as the fetus will be forgotten quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If both of the fetuses are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary to carefully and gently reduce them one by one.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	However, if the instrument (or forceps) slips out, then the woman should be placed on a flat surface and her feet raised up, and the forceps should be placed on the ground; the woman must be held so she does not fall during the procedure.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then incise them and remove the rotten part of the fetus or tie the body to her hand with a cloth and remove it, as it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the afterbirth on the infant's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the afterbirth is on the infant's feet, then you should press them upwards, and turn the fetus over, and tie it up, and grab one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	However, if it has come out between the thighs, then command them to expel it and turn it out with care, as it will be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If it is not forgotten with the water we have recommended, then you should return the fetus little by little to its natural position, as it will be easily forgotten with a slight movement.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited by everything we have recommended, then take alum water and dissolved resin, grind them well in the mortar, and apply this mixture to the woman's vagina, near the bottom of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And place that cedar (or cedarwood) in boiling water until it softens the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the births are softened (or relaxed), then fumigate it with myrtle and allow it to rest.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have fumigated it for an hour, then place it on a flat surface, make it vomit and expel it, and lift it up, and press the lower part of the birth gently with a compress, as the fetus will quickly be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Regarding the fetus on the shoulders and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus comes out in this manner, you should carefully insert your fingers little by little into its hands; and have the woman lean back on her neck, let her feet hang down, and place them on a blanket, and compress its hands together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And apply pressure on the woman's abdomen little by little, and remove what is left between her feet from the anus until it is ready to be expelled from the birth canal.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not forgotten, then grab its feet and shake them violently, and apply pressure on the hips little by little until the fetus slips into the birth canal.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert your fingers and tie up the fetus little by little, and command the woman to expel it until the fetus is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Regarding the fetus that hangs from one of its limbs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Either reduce the arm of the fetus, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If walking is not possible, then place the woman on a bed, and hit her buttocks violently, and provide her with painkillers that I have recommended in the form of medicines (or poultices).
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the labor has begun, then place the woman on a flat surface, and study how to reduce the arm, and tie up the fetus in its natural position, and make her vomit and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Regarding the fetus that extends its arms over the mother's neck and the opening of the birth canal is at the mother's waist.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus and turn it little by little with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is tied up, then pause over the affected area using the oil and medicines that we have recommended.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command her to urinate little by little, and when she has done so, place the cedar (or cedarwood) on a flat surface and have her lean forward on the right side, and command her to compress; and make her vomit with care.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Preparation for delivering the fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the membrane ruptures in this manner (probably referring to premature labor or ruptured membranes), consider it, and then incise the second layer with your nail until it is drained of liquid.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the person is suspended by the face and neck, then you should incise that area of the navel to ensure it is not retained and does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then you should gently push the person towards the incision inward until you feel the obstruction stop, and send a woman to hold her a certain number of menstrual cycles, and let him be forgotten easily with God's will.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Birth of twins or many children.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that twins are born after a certain number of menstrual cycles, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and difficult to understand; however, it is caused by nature, not by the living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count those who are twins, even if they are many, one of them is a premature birth and separated by caesarean section, distinguish between the ligaments in the navel of each of them. And some menstrual cycles are easily forgotten, like something that happens naturally easily, and others are forgotten for an unacceptable reason, as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, and you come to the situation we have discussed regarding unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is skillful and performs what facilitates and makes subtle and slow, and if she is ingenious according to all figures as she is prepared by the art leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection that it forms in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women give birth every one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten days, and it must be noted that one woman may give birth to six, another eight, which is caused by the measurement of the wise scholars.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this must be in the knowledge of midwifery, for it is a matter of life and death similar to that which we have discussed, and therefore caution should be taken regarding it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead child.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead child as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not extraneous, and you are determined to use force, then you must consider if the woman is of good virtue and not among those about whom there is fear of harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be laid on her back, with her head lowered and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The attendant should hold one of the two parts or tie them together in the back to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the child.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oil, aloe vera, fennel, and seeds of rue.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should anoint her hands with those oils and emollients, then insert them into the mother's vagina with ease, and circle around the area where the fingers are inserted in the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Choose the appropriate location: therefore you should consider if the fetus is positioned correctly on its head, and then insert your fingers into the heels, neck, mouth, palate, below the beard, at the junction of the spine, or near the ribs, or below the hips (hip bones).
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if it is positioned on its feet, then you should insert your fingers into the crotch or the small of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	It is necessary to hold the finger with the right hand, and bend it in the location between the fingers of the left hand, then insert the hand with ease and place the finger into one of the locations that we have mentioned, until you reach the desired outcome.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place another finger next to it, or the third if necessary, in order to attract it, but not extend it along its length.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	It should be done gently all around, in order that the process is alleviated as much as possible, like when removing a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	It is necessary that in this process the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate those parts that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the delivery is forgotten, then the umbilical cord should be tied within a place that is closer [to the baby]; and do this until everything is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the navel remains outside the mother and cannot be reduced by traction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and draw it out until everything is delivered, and cut the cord at the navel or the umbilical cord.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And in the same way, you must also do this to both hands and feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is difficulty in traction on it, or water accumulates around its head, then you must insert a spatula-like instrument called an alundat between the membranes and cut open the head and drain the water, or use an instrument with the name "alundat" to puncture it. The shape of this instrument will resemble those described in the chapter about other instruments.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: then you must use an instrument such as scissors to cut it, or seize it with the alundat as described earlier; and draw out the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is protruding and needs traction, you should break the waters until the moisture in the feet is drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there are no complications or difficulties, you should cut open the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdominal wall is protruding or swollen, you must puncture it until the moisture inside it is drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is in its pelvis, the traction of it is easy and the direction to the mother's mouth is easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is difficult or stuck in the abdomen and pelvis, you must draw it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and pelvis until the moisture inside them is drained.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members remain and the head returns, you must insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, you must insert your hand into her perineum, search for the head, draw it towards the mother's mouth, and insert one or two fingers to guide it, and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an accumulation of pus in the cervix, you must not press on it; instead, you must administer a liquid composed of soothing and moist ingredients.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and continue to immerse the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on one side, you should try to pierce it; and administer the liquid mentioned in the living fetus chapter.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If that is not possible, you should cut it into pieces and draw it out.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any foreign matter inside the second opening (vagina).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Once you have completed your operation, you should administer the medicine mentioned in the treatment of abscesses that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, you should provide a cold compress and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have once seen a woman in the womb whose child was dead, and over that fire another woman was observed to be burning, and that child was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Once upon a time, there was a man who had an abscess in his navel for a long time; it swelled up until it burst open and began to emit pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed strong plasters on him to draw out the pus, and an object like a bone was expelled from him, and after a few days, another object like a bone was expelled; and I was greatly amazed, because there should be no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead child.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I healed the wound and extracted many bones from it, but the woman continued to live in this manner for a long time; and then a small piece of arm broke off.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I was not surprised by this, because it is known and helpful in treating what doctors administer with their hands for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the child.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the spiral with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of the screw-like forceps in which the fetal limbs are held, with two prongs at each end of two rods.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this instrument should be thinner than a constrictor, and made of wood or bone.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the diameter of each rod should be two fingers at each end, and the length of each one should be a palm and a half; in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustable rods that have already been fastened, whose length is slightly more than a palm, and the diameter of each one is three fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are meant to be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it can be opened with those prescribed movements.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Make another similar mixture that is more subtle and lighter in texture:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it like a plaster of ebony or boxwood, similar to forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But on the ends of these two additions, there are to be small holes, and the length of these additions is what equals one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, first press the woman's belly down towards the hanging feet, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then place your hand on the instrument, like when using forceps, according to the depth you want to open the mother's mouth until it is wide enough for the child to pass through.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The kind of herb that the ancients called...
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The kind of stimulant that causes the fetus to move:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The kind of emetic that dissolves large heads (i.e., cysts)
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	It is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, as sometimes it can be made long like forceps according to this form, and sometimes short, like the teeth of a saw, with which it is cut and dissolved.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The kind of emetic in small amounts:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The kind of unguent with a sharp point:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The kind of unguent with two sharp points:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The kind of forceps with scissor teeth to crush the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The kind of spatula with two ends to separate the head:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The kind of two long spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are used, and when many of their species are multiplied and prepared, the craftsmen must make them as light as possible for their operation and as small as possible according to their size.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect the use of these instruments, because their necessity is not an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Extraction of the afterbirth (placenta).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the patient to strain, and make them vomit with hot water or some other means, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if this is outside, that's fine.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, you take a wave (seaweed) and pierce a hole in the membrane with a sharp tool, placing herbs such as calmant, ruda, anet, camomilla, scicados arabici, cassia lignea e santoreal inside.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are soaked in water and placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a tubing made of cane in the mother's mouth and keep it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then make them vomit as I said, and the afterbirth will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment remains and is not expelled, you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sizzling or micellage d'alti, then insert it into the uterus and search for the afterbirth, and when you find it, take it out little by little, making sure that the mother does not contract too strongly.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It must be bound tightly on both sides (right and left) with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then it should be adjusted in the amount of tension, because it will obey and escape from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the mother is narrowed (contracted), we have already recommended the cure with a purgative and oil medicine with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if all causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then you must be careful not to repeat the removal of it in the process of extraction (abstracio), but rather that what comes out of her mouth into the woman's cavity should be placed in a cushion and treated with ointment and four-medicine; for this will make it ripe within about 3 days, dissolve it, and it will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it ripens, the bad humour rises to the head and stomach, and the patient suffers from this; therefore, appropriate fumigation and suitable remedies should be administered.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But among the ancients, it has already been said that fumigation with cinnamon and dried figs is useful for this.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument by which the woman is fumigated must be designed to stop menstruation and second flow (postpartum bleeding).
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of metal or wood.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The thin end should be pointed towards the woman and the wide end towards the fire, and fumigation should be stopped over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	It should have a container within which the fumigation is consumed and another one is placed.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment for an unperforated child's bottom (Rectal treatment).
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	In children who are not circumcised and whose anus is not perforated, the feces should be softened and lubricated.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife should perforate this anus with her finger or, if not, perforate it with a sharp sponge and make sure she does not touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil over it, and treat it with anointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if there is concern that it may become blocked, place a tube (canula) in it for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	It also happens that the anus becomes blocked due to ulcers or abscesses, therefore, the consolidation should be incised, and it should be treated with what has been said about cure and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment for fistula that causes discharge (fistulous discharge).
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that cause pus-filled nodes (abscesses) near the anus or in the space of one parturition (childbirth wound).
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or a mass.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node is old and has turned into a moist, foul-smelling white or subtle pus, some of these fistulas can penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating ones are recognized by what comes out of them through the exit and by their foul odor; and sometimes the patient uses the evacuation, but it is very dangerous to come into contact with the worms that come out of them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas can penetrate into the bladder space, into the muscle of the vagina, and into the union of the cavity and neck of the bladder.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is recognized as a penetrating fistula in the anus and non-penetrating fistula, it is when you place your finger in the anus, and try to insert a thin probe of wood or iron into the fistula when there is no danger.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is danger in that, then you should insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all or do not obtain any cause of evacuation, worms, or foul odor as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and you should take care in the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or muscle of the vagina, the significance is clearly that it is urine from that place, and you should avoid using that area for any treatment.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the union of the cavity or into the bone and encounters pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe penetrates into it if there is no danger to the bone; and this causes pain during childbirth, which becomes purulent very quickly; and it is not valid for treatment nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure, and the cure of those is hard work and disappointment for foolish doctors on whom it depends.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is non-penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for as I have recommended to you, and what I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the patient should lie down between your legs and elevate his legs towards you, the thighs should be inclined towards his abdomen, and then insert a probe of lead or wood if there is no danger in the fistula into the place where the probe can be felt.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must enter your hand into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If the patient feels pain in your hand and there is a swelling or flesh there, you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and do not work on it, because it is not healing in that way, as has been said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it heals in some men after a while.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine for which healing is expected in that place, you must ignite a cauter with a size appropriate to the fistula, as has been described, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the surrounding flesh connected by the fistula has been cauterized and sealed off like a feather from a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then cure that [abscess] with bandages wrapped around it until all the surrounding flesh connected to it has healed, and then cure it with medications to regenerate and consolidate the flesh; if it is healed, that's good; otherwise, it will not heal within a certain time using other treatments.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the patient's intestines are inside and do not penetrate the anus, and there is a swelling or tumor of flesh between the intestine and the anus, and sometimes a fistula appears on the surface of the coccyx (tailbone), you should dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula, and watch as it dries along with the tumor; and if the drying reaches the location where the end of the tumor is, then the tumor will be freed and can be caught.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then clean those fistulated tissues that resemble feathers from the quill of a bird and do not remain for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if pus flows out between you and your operation while you are cauterizing the tissues, then use a millet (small seed) or a light instrument to cauterize with fire or an acid, because cauterization with fire is beneficial: it seals off the affected tissues, and drains the pus by coagulating the fluid.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then cure that [abscess] with bandages wrapped around it or with a wooden splint until the wound has healed, and then heal the sore with tough meat to promote healing and recovery.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And use medications that cause contraction and drying; when it is restored, it will be healed and there will be no recurrence (relapse).
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and is prolonged on the surface of the body, you must enter your hand into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you find that the tumor is swollen with flesh or tissue and seems close to penetration, then it should not be operated on but rather treated through faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause can be treated in one of three ways: either cauterize it as previously described; or cut it open until you achieve a concavity that allows you to enter the area and perform the necessary treatment; do not proceed with cutting unless you are certain that the rectum is empty, and take care not to harm the patient excessively by forcing your finger into the anus against their will; instead, treat it as previously mentioned, for it has a strong tendency to heal; or extend the swelling and clean the pus that has accumulated around the anus, as previously described, or with a sharp instrument of pointed tip, and then clean the infected tissue around the fistula during the incision, and then work on the restoration of the entire sore, and if the opening of the abscess does not heal properly and the fistula remains open at the edge of the anus, it will be more easily disseminated throughout the patient's body.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed by this method: when you insert your finger into the fistula, it will be on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the coccyx and at the edge of the anus, you should then grasp a pointed instrument like a needle for preparing the corpse in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	He enters into that faithful envelope of veins or around those; and tries to enter faithfully into the fistula until it achieves its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If you penetrate into the margin of the anus properly inside, then you extract the fistula from that tract thus, entering your finger into the anus; and draw out the end of the fistula and adjust its two ends together, tightening each one, and let it be for a day or two, and when the fistula penetrates more into the flesh, tighten it inside where those fleshes are indented which are between the two ends of the fistula.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make it penetrate using any means you have at your disposal, except that it should not be too deep, because it is not your task to cause harm; and heal it until it is cured.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the pointed spatula used to cut the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp on one side and concave on the other, so that it does not penetrate more than necessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing of hemorrhoids where bleeding occurs during their incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are like coal-like (protruding) or they are like fatty tumors (growing outwardly).
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some are small and large, and bleeding occurs from them all the time (continuously), and they are single, and some are multiple, and external to the anus, and at their ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are external to the anus, follow a period of little humidity, where clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow occurs, and their color is determined by the body's condition.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The treatment of those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and wait until the rectum dries out, and the hemorrhoids appear for you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take one or more sutures with the needle and thread you have at hand, and carefully make an incision in them.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the stitches are not available due to their humidity and softness, then take those with rough fabric or cotton or wool floss, and draw them out with your fingers, and make an incision in them and sprinkle some healing powders near the incision (to act as a substitute for cauterization), or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And heal those with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obstruct excretion, you cauterize the patient with a small clyster (enema) that is made of a liquid that eases excretion slightly when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, the cause of them should be addressed easily: either you take those with your finger, or you use stitches and make an incision in them; then heal them using the method described earlier until they are cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	For those who require incision, it is necessary to administer sutures in the following manner: take a pointed instrument and introduce it into the hemorrhoid using a needle; then extract the hemorrhoids at the top, and make the pointed instrument penetrate through the other side of the hemorrhoid with the needle, and wrap the two ends of the instrument around the point below the needle, holding them together (laterally); tighten the hemorrhoid using a strong stitch, and then tie the pointed instrument and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, and leave one of them open (without stitching), so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Approach and place a cushion soaked in red oil or wax on the backside; place it on the lower back and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Approach that which is inside the box; and when it is broken, heal it with medicine or some other cure until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas occur through excess seepage from a wound or due to natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are ancient and not worth the medicine, it is necessary that you cauterize those with a spatula or your fingernail into wet areas and hold them in place to prevent the seepage of pus on top, which prevents consolidation; and then heal those when they have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Remove those with very strong pus before the first day and let them dry out; then heal those when they have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Treatment of scrofula, it is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar is essential, and it is not if the body has a red spot like a nail head, and it occurs throughout the body and especially in the lower parts of the back and the sides, and it must be treated according to the pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Therefore, it is necessary to cut the area around the nail and hold it with forceps or oil, and then remove its root; heal that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish to, cauterize the following that are mentioned in your chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A wart is a small, rough, round fistula on the surface of the body, and many occur in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment is to extend and incise the wart, or to press it with a file or pumice stone into its cavity.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish to, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And warts, both inward and outward, are removed with the tools I will mention.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A flea is a small, furrowed or large fistula on the surface of the body that does not appear on the forehead, and when it is touched, it becomes like the bite of a flea, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment is to take a hollow reed or cane pen, and it should be strong, and place it over the flea so that it is contained by the circles of the cane on its sides; then rotate your hand with the cane around the area where the flea is, and press it into the skin so that you incise the area around the flea, and press it in the part of the skin, and remove the flea from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do it with an iron or steel cannula in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The end of the cannula is to be made thin, blunt (not piercing), covered so that its tip can be lubricated and rotated around it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the worm as mentioned in the cauterization of athlete's foot in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of instruments that are administered for incision.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes incisions are made with silver or lead or melted metal cannulas; and sometimes they are made with small and large instruments according to those who administer them, for the one that is administered in the treatment of infants should be small; and the ones with narrow or painful anuses, the cannulas of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and shallow incision:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a marking where the bag is tied in such a way as sometimes occurs.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The extremity below, which is inserted into the buttock, should be closed (meaning not open), carefully; and on one side there are two incisions, and on the other side one incision, and the width of the incision should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and the larger the rays, the smaller it should be.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	The bag in which the bladder medicine (animal or sheep's wool) is placed should be one handspan in size.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	It should be pierced with many small incisions in a rolling manner, and if the space between these incisions is wide, make it thicker (meaning larger).
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Place a suture (stitch) in these incisions firmly using strong thread, or around them; adjust the bag to this suture; and when the bag is placed there, it should be tight at the head of the bladder between two distinct points with strong tension, and suture each incision: But the quality of suturing is that you fill the bag with medicine (medication), heated according to the patient's tolerance; ensure it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then place the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a pillow; then anoint the incision area with oil or alum of horehound (an herb) or mustard plaster, or something similar; then gently insert it into the buttock with ease, and have the attendant take the bag and squeeze it twice and forcefully expel everything that is in the bladder out through the intestine; then remove the bladder and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine leaks out of the bag, it should be enough; and if it stays there for an entire night, it is more effective in helping.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you suture (stitch) it in patients with bowel resolution and the discharge from it fills up, then you repeat the cautery until it heals.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or ulcers in the buttocks, make a thick and blunt suture (stitch), which is called a simple stitch for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already explained in the division of the treatment of sores what is suitable for the free person, and now I will explain the treatment of those with more severe conditions and medications according to the needs.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that sores are diverse according to what causes the sores and according to the location where the sores occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of sores are often due to injuries such as falling on stones, or cuts from a sword, or a spear, or by beating with a club, or whip, or arrow, and similar causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But sores that occur on the parts of the body are such as a sore that occurs on the head, neck, feet, abdomen, back, and similar to those on other body parts.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple sores on the head, for a discussion of complex sores will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs on the head, but it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is caused by falling on stones or something similar and the wound has already been sewn up (stitched) and is large and there is concern about an abscess developing in the patient, then immediately lance (open) the cephalic vein (the largest vein in the head), and do not delay it; and let blood flow out according to the strength of the medicine, unless there is any cause prohibiting venous lancing, especially if the blood that comes out of the sore is scant.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the lancing should be on the opposite side of the affected area; and ensure the patient is kept away from food, drink, and heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause forbids the patient from eating, then reduce their food and do not give them meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Wait on the sore if an abscess forms, cover it with rose oil or wine that has been treated with astringents (a substance used to tighten tissue and reduce inflammation).
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are certain that an abscess has formed, then wait on the sore, if it is recent with fresh blood and the air has not changed the powder I will recommend using a small amount of.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed [i.e., passed], then wait over certain wounds until they are healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or caused by incision of space and not properly closed with lips, then close it with stitching according to what I will recommend regarding stitching them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has exposed the bone and flesh, and is not held in place except for a small support, then incise it and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its original location, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are rich in groats: oats and similar grains, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the flesh decays and does not adhere to the bone, then you incise everything there and clean it, and care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds it is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur and has not been separated by medicines, then you explore the artery, and if that unincised artery is decayed, you incise it with a lance or a probe; and if it is necessary for what I have said to not conform, then you cauterize until the blood is separated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, their cause is light; therefore, sprinkle this powder on them, as it solidifies before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: mix one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood oil, three parts not-extinct herbs; grind everything and sieve it, fill the wound with it, and tightly bind it with good constriction until it adheres to the bleeding, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a thick layer of pulverized material over it and let it dry, and do not loosen it until it is healed, as the medicine will not be absorbed into it before it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you perform cautery alone, when olive oil and dragon's blood are not present with you.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	Now perform this method of treatment on large wounds when it is necessary to wait over them and tighten them, and on recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has already altered them, especially during the summer months, do not apply this powder to that position, but instead care for those wounds with what I have said, allowing some wounds to heal on their own, or allowing those wounds coated with lime plaster to heal; and treat those with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it is a broken bone wound, which is small, you extract it with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I will explain the treatment of head fractures that are poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Treatments for the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment from the simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or artery in the neck have been incised, then if it is a nerve, do not apply remedies that cause violent stiffness, such as zinc and glass, which are harmful to the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not allow anything to freeze the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is the most vital part of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with light medicines such as being washed with sweet water, occasionally infused in rose oil or not, and also when being washed with sweet water and the other poisons are removed according to this method, and open wounds.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, you administer stitching or sew the lips of it, and treat it with powder until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or has occurred in the lower part of the foot and coated with plaster, you perforate it in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the artery has been incised in the wound and bleeding is obtained, then separate or dry it, lance it, or cauterize it if necessary to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the tendons of the hock or all of them have been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, you close the lips of the thigh with stitching on the shinbone and do not touch it; tie a knot there and return it to its natural shape, and tighten it with proper binding, and let it dry for several days; and treat it with poultices that cause stiffness and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has penetrated into the bone in danger, you strike it, and if there are fragments of bones, remove all that can be removed; leave what is not accessible to it until the wound festers, and separate it and the pain from the area should be relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, sprinkle powder on it as I have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the wound a fistula is made, then cure it with what will come to mind related to its treatment, as remembered in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From wounds on the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and it is made with a spear or sword or lance or something similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or sword and at times deep, then consider more if the wound has stench when the patient complains of it; then you should know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If it is not deep and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then you pause in that place for the first hour with powder, and do not press it to prevent the blood from being retained in the depth of it and returning to the heart and causing the patient pain, but rather pause on a soothing attractant, and dissolve it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the wound is not draining, then you pause on the orifices of the wound with old cotton to draw out the moisture from it; and have the patient sleep on the wound so that the water trapped in it runs out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and no spasm, tremor of the heart, palpitations, or other good conditions do not occur in the patient, then you should know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with warm compresses and other healing treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of the wound is delayed and it remains open for a long time, then you should know that a fistula has been made; so cure it according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is from a spear or sword and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what comes before stitching (if large) or powder (if small).
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there is a sign of bone involvement and the bones have been struck (fractured), then you twist the wound and draw out the fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if the fragments are not separated, you should make an incision to open the wound as it makes the removal of the fragments easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds occurring in other members, the remedy and healing is the same as that which has been said above.
De las plaguas del ventre.	On wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the abdomen may be large, small or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For large hernias, several days may be needed for the intestine or nerve of the intestine to come out, so the insertion of them and the stitching of them must be very strong and very delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to repair in another way, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not take care of their insertion back into their place quickly, as they swell and thicken making the insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best type of hernia is medium-sized, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, unlike the two types mentioned above (large and small).
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that stitching the abdomen is done according to four methods, but two of them are common and are used in stitching other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other methods are specific to other wounds, but they are more specifically used in abdominal stitching.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend that you expose and explain this matter (the treatment of hernias) to everyone.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus say that when the wound is small and there is a cause of the intestine due to it, and it is difficult to reduce the intestine, this is in one of two ways: either because of the small size of the hernia as we have said before, or because inflammation of the intestine has come from the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you warm the intestine by immersing a sponge or cloth in hot water only, or taking it in warm water, and cumin, pepper, and bind it with twine into the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it happens that this [affliction] is found in which there is stiffness, and it is better to use water alone for its resolution.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore you wet the intestine with water containing alum and mallow, since by this the inflammation is relieved little by little.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the inflammation is spreading and the intestine is protruding from its place during this treatment, then you should make a small incision with an instrument for this purpose using scissors.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial treatment is better when it is not cut, and it is not necessary to make an incision unless absolutely required due to lack of other remedies.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, take its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The sharp angle of the tool should be acute, while the other angle should not be blunt, and the tip should be fine but not too thin, with a slight obtuse angle.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, its reduction should be in a way that follows its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible on top of it, as this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the hernia is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs as far apart as their head; if it is in a higher part of the abdomen, you should lay the patient's head down and feet further apart.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And in the same way if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should direct your attention and consideration always to the side where the wound is located, so that the side on which the wound is located is further apart from the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should treat both large and minor wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, prepare what you need and ensure that the assistant is among your most trusted ones, who will hold the hernia with their hand and adjust the edges of it, and also cover one over the other to prevent any cause of separation during suturing.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suturing: Take an awl, or a needle according to the size of the wound; then hold it with the tip of the hernia, but do not insert the thread into both ends of the needle, instead take one end and leave the other free, so that you do not place the knot on the inside of the edges, until you pass it through the other side; once you have added two ends of the thread and the ends of the skin, it will be four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then strengthen the thread with a double knot around the needle, sometimes from both sides together, and bring the two edges and the wound together by appropriate tension; then let go of the thick part and insert another needle through it, and tie it in the same way as the first needle; do not stop until all the contraction of the wound has been completed with the needles.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And needles should be neither too thin nor too thick, as very thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to pass through the skin, so they must be of medium thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And the needle should not be inserted into both edges of the adjacent skin too much, so that the flesh is not easily penetrated and the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suturing to prevent the wound from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And insert the tips of the needles so as not to irritate the patient while they sleep; and place pulvils expanded on all sides over the suturing, which will hold the tips of the needles; leave them in until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture with needles in the method described is more suitable for small wounds, as it can handle the suturing of one or several needles around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second method of suturing is common: and it consists of applying four edges, two from the skin and two from the underlying tissue, at once, using a needle that has both ends tied in thickness and fineness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four edges, withdraw it slowly from that side of the wound where you started, to draw out the thread subcutaneously around the wound, so that the stitching is similar to sewing fabric, with the threads reinforced.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of thread required for the knot.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I closed a wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, who was injured by a sword, and the hernia was larger than a palm, and it was near two palms from the intestine of the same location and was located in the middle of the member; and after 24 hours, I reduced it after the intestine had been out of the wound.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or more, and it was cured and healed; and it lived for many years and was maintained in its condition, and it was preserved according to its dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	Other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle, for I did not heal it myself, since it was in a place where neither any remedy nor any medicine was found, but rather you placed a dressing on the wound twice daily and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell two types of suture according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and pierce the needle from outside to inside through the cut.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle penetrates the tendon and in this way it passes through the entire body, leaving the tip of the needle in the place where you have pierced it; and make the other end of the needle pass through the other extremity from inside to outside on the other side of the ligament.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so, when you have made it penetrate (the needle), you should make it pass through the other opening of the ligament from inside to outside on the same side where the tip of the needle is; and leave the end that is in this place, and pierce the needle again on the other side from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the piercing pass through with your piercing, which passes through the ligament at the point where it enters into the bone.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And so begin this incision on the side of the ligament and cut it with the point that is at the end of the ligament on the other side, and remove the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and return to the same tendon and close the end of the ligament on that side with this opening; and remove the needle from the tendon on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and do it again as soon as you sew everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The total of this method of suturing is that you sew with suture of skins, in the way that you sew the ligaments, but you sew the ligament once from the side of the tendon, and leave the other side uncovered until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second type of suture according to Galen, which is from him and is highly recommended, is that you sew as follows: all parts are placed side by side according to their nature; and the ends of one part are applied to the other end of the other part, and this is done as I have advised.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that the needle is placed in the end of the ligament towards the outside of the cut, and make it pass through to the inside only at that place, and leave two ends of the ligament; and turn the needle over and make it penetrate from outside to inside on the other two ends of the ligament.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Approach each abscess, and make each of them penetrate from the inner partition to the outer partition into two opposite extremities along the longitudinal axis.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than common light sutures and is the one which comes before remembrance (remembrance or memory stitch).
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Galen (a famous ancient Greek physician)
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	This is said to some, the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so you enter each of them with a faithful one and start with the insertion of the needle from which you are coming out, and make it penetrate into the other side following the suture of those who sew the heart together. (This seems to describe a method for correcting a hernia or abdominal wound using two needles.)
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	Know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of it is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment for wounds (plague) is judged like other wounds (plagues). (This suggests that the methods used to treat one type of wound are similar or comparable to treating other types of wounds.)
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you acquire the recent wound with its own blood before the air changes it, and reduce the swelling and close the wound appropriately, then you pause over the carnative powder (a medicinal powder). (This passage seems to describe a sequence of actions for treating fresh wounds.)
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then you pause over those ointments which are present nearby until they become solid and the needles enter and consolidate, and watch it; and take care of that in this way as is the care for other wounds until it is healed. (This passage seems to describe additional instructions for treating wounds, specifically when the air has already affected or altered the wound.)
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you are not present with the medications, then pause over that as soon as possible, because it begins to get worse, old flesh, and change it every two days, as you have taught me, until it is healed, for you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple. (This passage suggests that if a patient is unable to obtain the prescribed ointments, they should still apply a fresh dressing every two days as instructed by their physician.)
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound communicates injury to the main limbs, then you must submerge wool in boiled oil of quality or rose oil and apply it in the circle of the areas between the joints and leave it there. (This passage suggests a method for treating wounds that may have spread or affected the major limbs.)
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in his intestines, because it often turns out to be, then you must cauterize that with white vinegar (or another strong acid) and more so if the pus has reached the intestine and a discharge penetrates into its cavity. (This passage seems to describe a method for treating severe intestinal infections or abscesses.)
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the one from a large intestine has a lighter cure than the one in subtle intestines. (This passage suggests that larger intestinal problems may be easier or less severe to treat than smaller ones.)
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing by plague that enters it completely; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and the size of it which is in those areas, and the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves. (This passage suggests that the intestine known as "gegunu" may be difficult or even impossible to treat if an infection or disease enters completely.)
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if the tissue that comes from the wound is linen, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your judgment as you sew together the intestines. (This passage seems to describe a method for treating wounds involving linen or linen bandages.)
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed a long time and it has turned green or black, then you must tighten that with a needle over the area that is discolored by it, to bring out blood flow, because in linen there are veins and arteries. (This passage suggests that if an infection or wound has gone untreated for some time and turned dark or greenish, it may still be possible to treat it using surgical methods such as stitching.)
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then you approach that which is other than the linen, and pause two extremities of the needle hanging from the opposite side of the wound openness so that above it is relieved the attraction of it; for the removal of the tissue and emission of the blood from the wound you cut the linen and the flesh around the wound. (This passage seems to describe a method for relieving an infection or wound by cutting away the surrounding linen and flesh.)
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Rememberance of wounds when they happen in the intestine. (This phrase seems to indicate that the text is discussing methods for treating wounds or infections in various parts of the body, with a particular focus on intestinal issues.)
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it with certain men, because I have seen one who was plagued in his abdomen by puncturing with a lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had developed into a fistula (an abnormal passage between two organs), and pus and gas escaped from it. (This passage suggests that small intestinal ruptures may be treatable through surgical intervention, but it also describes a case where the injury has become chronic or complicated with the development of a fistula.)
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then continue the cure of him, since it was not yet confirmed in his healing, but continues to refine that within which fire heals and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when the place is consolidated, attend to the patient who has suffered from an accident in his stomach; and let no one suffer from this unfortunate accident due to improper eating and drinking, and let them rest in bed and exercise as advised by the doctor.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones say that when a hernia occurs in the intestine, and it is small, it is necessary to tie it in this way: take large breadcrumbs; place the two lips of the hernia together and place one of them on top of the lips of the hernia; then, when you grasp the breadcrumbs and tighten your mouth, remove the head from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another breadcrumb next to the first one and do not stop making more breadcrumbs according to the size of the entire hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And tie the breadcrumbs together and sew up the hernia; let the attached heads remain in the intestine until the hernia is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with a thin suture made from an animal's intestine, since it is thinner; and you should take the extremity of these fine sutures from the animal's intestine, and ensure it is well-cleaned, and tie the extremity of it with the suture, wrap it, and sew it into the intestine using needles, and reduce it in the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of sewing with breadcrumbs is not just by faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the hernia is large and wide, especially in one of the subtle intestines, then it is not enough to simply tie it or sew it up; it is necessary to make an incision and remove the excess tissue for proper healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatment for abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that every hernia and abscess, when it becomes old and hardened, turns into an ulcer, does not consolidate, and continues to grow without being drained, then in any member, universally, it is called a fistula and we refer to it as an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula, in truth, is a hardened nodule, white and painless with a cavity similar to the concavity of an ulcer; for this reason it is also called a hardened abscess, meaning ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men that the abscess becomes wet and grows larger; and the humidity is drained in certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is moving, rare, large, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, so when I speak of abscesses: every ulcer that does not heal or is not open to raw flesh is not one of them except for one of these causes: either because there is a lack of blood in the body; or because it is malicious; or because there is tough skin between it and the lips, preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is moving pus; or because the ulcer itself contains pus and the matter that is transmitted to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not suitable for its healing; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is a plague; or due to the properties of the region, such as in Saragossa, where digestion of illnesses is difficult, and the healing of abscesses by nature is delayed; or because there is a bone, tumor, or bone marrow in it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so you should know the cure for a fistula that is made by operation with a knife.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	A fistula occurs in all parts of the body, for those are fistulas that reach veins, arteries, nerves, or the ciphac, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints made so as by the hand and the foot; and those are the ones that give proximity to the main member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, the fistula of this type is one of those difficult diseases that does not receive treatment and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If one of the fistulas is deep and does not reach those places as mentioned before, and you hope for its healing and wish to learn about it, then take the probe or iron, and if the fistula follows the right direction, then follow it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, for lead has the lightness of its body and is easily bent to follow the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	But if the fistula is filled with moving worms, it is not possible for you to touch it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, cauterize the orifices with a cautery, for the moisture used to cauterize that one should go through the other orifices and run off from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then you must inquire carefully, according to your ability, whether here you have bones or nerves, and whether the depression of the fistula is long or close, or whether it is a fistula filled with moving worms and is entirely on top of the patient's body, and you should compress the pain at the site, and similar signs and causes of an abscess to the aposteme.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes with true certainty, then proceed to the healing with confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is an apparent one close to a saline, far from a joint, or near nerves, arteries, veins, or one of the places which I told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said about its nature before, and remove what is in that filtration and decayed flesh, and what is born in the openings of the skin or similar ones, and treat it inside until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is deep and follows the right direction, then you must incise it in the front as much as possible, and remove all its decayed flesh, and apply warm poultices covered with medicines, and introduce them into the depression of the fistula, which you have grasped with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that for some time until the acute medicine rots everything in the depression of the fistula due to decay.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with juices that produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and it must be certified that this is so, you investigate it and dry it according to what has been recommended, without prohibiting any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, you cut into it until the corruption has been stopped entirely; then heal it with that which causes it to regain flesh until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and it discharges pus like before, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, you dig further and examine it more carefully, reason about it and clean it with your last strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	Therefore, if it is healed, good; otherwise, you should know that the corruption in the deep part of the body has not been reached, and thus, your efforts were in vain to treat it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the rotten bone is small or can be shot out by you, then shoot it with subtle forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If it is worm-eaten bones, you must extract all of them carefully, without any cause using your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture opposes you and there is no fear or error in the incision, you shall incise them openings or flesh if they are here, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then wait on the wound until it heals, and leave it with the flesh and liquids around those bones, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and constrict the incision which you made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If afraid, pause on the spot submerged in warm oil or a spot submerged in Egyptian onions or any of the hot herbs, for when those liquids are heated, the limbs' bones will be separated and the swelling will be alleviated from it.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	However, if it is a large bone like the thighbone or hipbone or similar, and what is corrupted is only its surface, then remove that with resin only behind as long as the blackness and corruption are removed, and let it heal.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	However, if what is corrupt is a large part and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and make an incision into the place where the corruption was reached, and let it heal until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you take care of this in the patient's body, and assist and advise on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Examine a young man about 30 years old, who has pain in his groin area, and from the inner parts there is damage to the material inside the body up to where it reaches the groin, and this is a material of an abscess with a large abscess, but it was not caused externally.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then the time was prolonged with the error of doctors until the abscess had healed, and I added medicinal materials, and its healing was delayed until the thigh became fistulized, and they made small openings in the fistula that were all purulent and the body fluids.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the patient was treated by many doctors for about two years, but they were not wise but skilled in their craft, until I was summoned.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh and the materials that were flowing from those fistulae with great pain, and already the body of that man was completely healed and his complexion was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those fistulae and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I searched and examined all the fistulae, and found them coming from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised into one of those fistulae until I discovered a piece of bone, and found it rotten, dry and decayed; it was already rotten and corrupted to the point that it had penetrated into the femur.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I removed what I found, which was the discovered bone piece.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I said that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had abscessed and removed, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I dug again and discovered the bone for a second time after the first discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I performed the healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I examined again and did not stop cutting the bone little by little specifically and performing the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I cut around an inch, and that extracted with its marrow, and I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there was no need for examination or section of the operation on him except for the disposition of his frailty and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, since he often suffered from bad fainting due to excessive fluid evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it healed completely, and nothing remained in the bone tissue; and it was good to dispose of him in his body and restore its vitality; and it was conformed to his dispositions and did not harm him by walking or any harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in the body area already fractured, then it is necessary that you perform the following procedure: you take a thread and tie it at the end of the protruding bone, and ask someone to extend it; and stop the first thread with wool thicker than the first one; and apply it over the skin that covers the bone, and stretch the area by pulling the skin away from the sides, so you expose the skin over the place where you want to cut, and you cut the skin without hurting the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a bed or table beside the patient, for when you do this it is not forbidden to use the saw which does not cut corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The saw must be over the corrupt area gradually, for if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its sensory exposure, then perhaps the sawing of that other side will reveal it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupt and not visible, it continues with the division to the other side, and the corruption is in one or more parts of that area, then you uncover all the skin everywhere; and place a bed beside, and saw that from the first part where the corruption is contained until the cutting of the other side is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is at a joint, incise that corrupt joint and saw the bone where it continues to the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then this is not reasonable but rather cunning.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is difficult; however, you must find the source of the corruption and open it up, clean it, and treat it according to each case as possible, and with any remedy be corrected if not contrary to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what cutters and saws are needed to cut these bones, which depends on the position of the bones, their preparation, and thickness, and their fineness or coarseness, and hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of operation instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation signifies the type of instrument required from you; when you have extensive experience and knowledge of the various methods in this art, as well as witnessing the methods of diseases, then you will already have for your use whatever is appropriate for the instruments in all cases of illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should know at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones, which you will prohibit yourself from using on others based on your experience with them.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of a large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a ray (beam):
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this beam (or tool) should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and the points of it should be in the shape of pointed pegs.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not necessary unless the heads of the joints are broken when they are corrupt or there is a large opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of larger knives than others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller knives:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of long knives (razors):
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Another saw shape should be arched with the blade raised and its sharpness in iron, and the limbs of it made like a dagger handle.
Forma de lu:	Shape of that:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of knives with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of other fine-edged knives:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another knife with a curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Small rasp shape resembling a tent (or a pointed tool):
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of cutting tools for cutting bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of other smaller cutting tools:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting tool; this resembling a beam, and the end is shaped like a saw, and it is used in many places according to the reasoning of the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of red (painting or dye) suitable for the incision made in the bone.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The end of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and it should be noted that all the causes we mentioned about razors, incision tools, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	On the cutting edges and the fastening of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The edges become sharp either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if you have medicated the corruption for its treatment and the cure does not take effect, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb that is not caused by any injury, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the affected limb, so that the patient escapes through that channel either from death or from a greater malice that is more damaging to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one who occurs is that the limb turns black before it is burned, or the rot spreads close to the dark spot before it enters into the affected limb and burns all the body; therefore, be careful when making an incision on it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous strikes such as from a scorpion or viper or ratel and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or strike is at the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision on the wound of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption until it enters the wrist of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if the corruption spreads to the shoulder, you make an incision on the shoulder near the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes over the shoulder and sometimes surrounds it, then the death of the patient is imminent; administering another cause as treatment is a waste of effort.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when corruption spreads to the foot and affects the heel, you make an incision on one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold on the slope of the foot, you make an incision on the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates into the calf, you make an incision on the leg at the knee joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has reached the calf, there is nothing that can be done except for palliative care and letting the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tighten one ligament on the part you want to cut, and tighten another ligament at the location; then extend a ligament to the sides, and extend another ligament above it; separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make the incision or sawing.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is necessary that gauze be placed on all sides of the incision to keep it sterile and to bring the wound to the patient dressed and covered with a cauterized dressing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flow occurs during the operation, you cauterize the area immediately or apply some powder to stop the bleeding and return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And tie the affected limb with gauze at the appropriate place, and care for it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you the following remedy for a man in his foot, which I also recommend, which is that you apply this ointment to the dark spot on his foot similar to fire burn ointment.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption occurs primarily within the said intestine and tends to affect the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore, prepare that man for surgery as soon as possible, when the cure goes to the affected member with the intensity of its pain and swelling, and incise the foot at the joint, and heat it to heal.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time has passed since that surgical corruption occurred in the said hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Therefore, it comes to me, and I am performed to reduce the excess in the hand with what stops the swelling on the limb of the medicine, and not let the excess spread and begin in the other said intestine before it begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And I was called to incise the hand of him, but I did not want to do it, fearing the spread of that excess, and moreover, I feared the amputation of his hand would kill him, for the patient's condition was critical.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	After he lost hope in me, he returned to his land, and I was informed that the man was prepared and had his entire hand amputated, and he recovered.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added to this narrative except that it may be helpful in understanding this disease and what can be done about it, and also for the purpose of which it was written.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure for sinews and the quality of clysters with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged before it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is expelled from it, and the cavity remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the dressing placed over it is like fine linen, and no secondary corruption occurs, and it does not spread to bone or nerve or tendon, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	And if the space remains prolonged until corruption occurs in some member, it is then called a fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure for it is that the dressing is incised all around in the same way as it is rolled up, and especially when it is made fine like linen, and you make sure it does not stick to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the dressing adheres and that secondary corruption has not yet occurred, and there is a stench coming from the dressing, then you cure it with clysters.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the smell coming from it is fetid, then clysterize it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, wine, and ginger root in powdered form, ground together, and placed in a vessel, and poured over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches a specific temperature for healing.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey, then clysterize the sinus with that, and tighten the openings of it, and leave the medicine in for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And you remove that with caution, and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is gone.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ashes when the medicine is not present, and it is that you take the ashes of vinegar, place them in the water, and then let it cool down and clysterize it into the sinus until you feel that the sinus has stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then clysterize it with water and honey mixed with ginger powder, and clysterize it with wine and honey mixed, because by nature honey cleanses and purifies, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of stickiness and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this for several days and feel that the sinus has been cleansed, then clysterize it with what makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take deafenicon powder and dissolve it in olive oil and white vinegar, or that you clysterize it with certain medicines and other remedies that have properties which I have already mentioned in the treatise on enemas.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the canula of the clyster cannot be inserted into it, then you dilate it little by little with a small iron tool, and pause at each point where it has been wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon oil until it is dilated.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, you sew up the lips of it with suture and leave the amount that the clyster can pass through without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of it from which the pus flows out is elevated at the edges, then you dry that in the pus below where it flows so that the pus will flow downwards, because when the pus is blocked by sinus, the flesh grows there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus near the bone as you wish, then perform that you prepare the limb with the preparation by which the pus flows out lightly according to what you can arrange and so that there is no obstacle for the pus.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take medications that are suitable for packing into the appropriate sinus to extend it over the linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Let the cloth be of such size that it communicates with the entire sinus; then incise, with scissors, in the right direction of the sinus orifice a groove slightly larger than the orifice itself; and extend another cloth lining over the groove according to the size of the groove, and place it on top so that it is positioned far from the sinus orifice to relieve the swelling of the arm without letting the cloth be too large, but rather let it be changed daily.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	However, what is on the sinus orifice should be kept moist at all times so that pus does not form in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	In order to know if what flows from the arm is more or less, or digested, or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Consider the location of the sinus, whether it hurts the patient or not, and if there is an abscess in that area.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	Since your medication has been applied in this manner, and you see the material that flows over the sinus orifice already adhering, or gaining adhesion, then on the third day you should remove it. Once you remove the plaster, you change the cloth and renew the lining.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	However, if the sinus has an extensive area of subtle growth, do not despair of the adhesion of it, because healing in that area is approaching, since some men have slow skin regeneration in their wounds and others have a reversal of that process.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus is not healed in a few days and the arm is indigest, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; if adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is prolonged, you must adjust the medications to drying, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their effect, they dry up as diaphoretic agents do when there is an excess of additives added.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the later medicine that cures is to take diaphoretic agents and dissolve them in rose oil, have it saturated with an ancient anti-inflammatory agent in its substance, and apply it there, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And this is similar to that action when there is no pain in the arm, take diaphoretic agents and honey that is thick enough to be applied, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and grind them all into a powder over the honey that has been heated, and apply the powder over the cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and apply the powder over the honey that you have heated to thicken it, and grind it into a powder over a cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And occasionally it is administered with long-acting aristolochia and the root of celestial (and this is celestial) and ground erysipelas and centaury, and use those simple substances or compound them, grind them and sift them, then powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you should know that corruption is in the bone of it, and then you conduct an inquiry into the bones or hard organs or the ligaments; at that point you cure it with fistula surgery, as has been said before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment for paronychia and removal of nails, incision and amputation of the finger.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, and it is usually more common in other fingers, and if it becomes prolonged and its cure is expensive or it is an abscessed abscess or rotten, it pours pus into the arm and rots the root of the nail, and it ultimately corrupts the entire area, and its corruption spreads to the bone at a foul smell, and the extremity of the finger falls off, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have the above with what has been said in the division and do not achieve a cure, it is necessary that you incise with iron all the excess material removed from the nail and cauterize the wound near it, because cautery is helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and you want to apply the ointments on the underside of the nails, they begin to compress the flesh in the folds and puncture them, at that point it is necessary that you make a thin incision below the angle where the nail punctures the flesh, push it upward, and incise the flesh with ease, and apply over the remaining flesh corrosive medicaments until everything has been drained; and treat it with diaphoretic agents until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	However, if the corruption has already entered the bone, it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, because there is no cure for a time as long as the bone is rotten.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you see corruption and decay spreading in the said (affected) area, then you should make an incision in one of the nodes as prescribed for remembrance, and take care to cure the affected area to ensure healing.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you strike the nail with percussion or attrition and there is intense pain, then at the beginning you must anesthetize the patient and then cut the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, ensuring that the incision does not penetrate into the flesh below the nail, because you will cause the patient further intense pain and it may lead to the growth of excess tissue in the affected area; take care to cure the affected area to alleviate the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Mentioned is a wart that often occurs in the hands of many men, it has a hard consistency throughout, and it is either hard in the bone or hard in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Warts are born from the root of the joint or they originate in warts on the fingers of the said (affected) person.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	A wart that originates from the fingers is not harmful, but one born in a joint is unhealthy.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those that are born as flesh-colored growths, the incision should be easy, and when you make an incision, you must remove its root with a lancet.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But the healing of those born from the root of the joint is difficult, so take care to avoid an abscess forming there.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of those born in the said (affected) person's nails, you should first incise the flesh of the affected area with a round incision around the bone, and then use a suitable saw to remove it, taking care to cure the affected area to ensure healing.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation that occurs in the said (affected) person between their motes observed or by nature of the man who was born thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by fire or something similar, must be incised to return it to its natural form before it hardens too much.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Place a layer of red oil-soaked fabric between their wounds so that they do not consolidate easily, and separate the affected areas or place a thin layer of lead between them to prevent consolidation until it is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Consolidation in the said (affected) person's palm should be incised according to its preparation and the shape of the affected limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Incisions made on veins are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose veins that become large and filled with melancholic waste products, which can cause swelling in the limbs of the body, particularly in the legs, especially among travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer strong purges of black bile to the patient several times and draw blood from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of varicose veins can be done in two ways: one is to incise and extract the black blood, and the other is to elevate the vein and completely remove it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of the affected area is as follows: first, wrap the leg with warm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is a foul substance from the vein, then tighten the patient's leg at the upper part of the calf to the lower part of the thigh with a bandage, and make an incision in one or two or three places, but make the incision wide, and lift the black blood along with the surrounding tissue towards the top and bottom of the vein until the desired amount is released and you see it coming out, which will remove the patient's symptoms.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And tie it up and order the patient to avoid foods that produce black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment through bloodletting when the veins are full and the patient feels better.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the affected area can be done as follows: first, you should examine the patient's leg and if there are swellings, immerse it in warm water and wrap the leg with warm water until it becomes swollen and the veins become prominent; or exercise the limb with strong exercises if hot baths are not available, until the limb is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Cut the cord directly along the vein in a long or oblique direction, depending on whether you need to cut the lower end of the vein, or if it is the base of the vein that needs to be cut.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Open the cord with scissors and remove the vein entirely from all sides until it appears to be resolved, and you should recognize when it is necessary to stop cutting because you see that the wound is darkening.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, if you find the cord white, cut off the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And place the rod beneath it to lift and move it away from the cord, and suspend it with a hook for further treatment.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Place another incision near the first incision, and remove the cord above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Lift the affected area and make an incision in the lower part of the vein, remove it and lift it until it is released through the second incision, and then remove the excess tissue above the incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this before extracting the one from the section that is supreme or unique among all sections, before it is completely exposed; then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey and rise up, then insert an awl with a strong double-edged blade and tie it in place, or else insert a lancet and rotate your hand all around until it is punctured.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to lift that member and harm the patient by it.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the whole thing is pushed out, then stop at the place of the wound where wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil (and unrosed oil) has been applied; cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted and has a twist in which there is an enclosure at the parts, contrary to what was said, then you must make incisions on both sides of the twist and at the points of enclosure; raise it up with sutures until the whole thing is raised.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Be careful to not cut the vein and avoid wounding it, for it will be difficult to lift that part; let your prudence guide you in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made on the section where a severed vein is found:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of the suture (or stitch):
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be made like a suture or have a sharp tip so as not to wound the vein; it should be of thick flexibility, for if it is too thin, it will wound the vein due to its thinness; being excessively thick, as we said earlier.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the thighs in warm lands such as Egypt in Arabian lands and in the warm and dry lands of India where there is little vegetation, and it does not grow herbs or trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And the vein is born in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is due to rot which comes from the kidneys, such as the poisons that dwell inside the body, snakes, worms, and parasites breeding between the kidney and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the onset of this event is the swelling in the thigh, which becomes very inflamed; and the area is soaked; and the vein begins to appear from the site of that inflammation, as if it were a plant growing there.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Then, when the extremity appears (of the fetus), you should wrap it with a lead weight of approximately one-drachma weight (about 3.6 grams). Insert this and keep it suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And keep watch for any cause at the parts outside, wrap this in lead and leave it as such.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the part is prolonged, then you must make an incision on it and wrap the remaining part; do not incise that one too deep until it is completely exposed, for if you incise it deeply it becomes contracted, enters the flesh, causes abscesses and pustules in the area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it must be treated gently and removed little by little until it is completely expelled from the body without any remaining cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein has come forth in some men whose length is more than five feet and ten inches, and I have heard that one of twenty feet has issued forth.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, insert the lancet into the wound and pass it through the body with a long stroke until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putridity from the area for some days with medicines; and care for it as for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has many branches, and particularly when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, it produces many tumors, and it is issued forth from each tumor.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, treat it as was said before in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section under worms generated beneath the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called bovine disease in some lands because many cattle suffer from it and the worm is rare among humans, being born between the kidney and the flesh, and moving upwards and downwards throughout the body; it is revealed by the sensation of a member to another until the kidney bursts and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its formation is due to the rot of certain fluids such as worms, snakes, and roundworms, and parasites in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of the malice of it, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, and is brought to the nose, you must breathe deeply into it and enter it and destroy the brain, and this brings forth many evils.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you wish to heal that [person] and extract it (the affected part), you must not do so unless you have first examined its movement and appearance for your sense, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it firmly and tightly, and then press down on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is punctured in the flesh and not healed, then you pause a hot cautery with fire on the area until it dies, and the main cause to be feared is corruption of it that corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you find that person coming near the head with a cold wind, then strengthen above the forehead with strong pressure and press down on it, and extract it; it is necessary that the patient use purification of his body with medicines that evacuate corrupting humors, and keep away from foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From section [of the text] about the illness of the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called the nose in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen it according to what I advised you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I found her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it had been cut for an hour, I saw the inflammation flow like worms advancing as they would move quickly, but more gently, like living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that area grew and sank into the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And it corrected itself in the other arm, as it came to the other chest.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I advised him to rotate the entire body as I had seen, and it was very surprising to me at the exchange of that area and the speed with which the member moved from one to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that in the most severe cases according to that method, but I have seen some which stopped pain being transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see that with the most severe cases as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that it was that, but because the woman was old, her body and veins were dry, and in this case, the windiness transferred appeared to my senses.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retroactive cure not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies with softened veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to heal it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not expose it to cold as we have said, instead strengthen it gently and press down on it until the windiness contracted is expelled, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your severe cases, then cure it by excision of the body and what expels windiness, and make medicine for it with fumigated pills and pills of serapia and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of thorns.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Thorns are differentiated according to species, and according to the parts of the body in which they enter, since their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, mute, and solid; those that have three angles, and those to which tongues belong; and those which are called astelas.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the thorn which is according to the limbs and parts in which it enters, is according to two methods: since the limbs or main members include the brain, heart, liver, lung, ribs, hernia, bladder, and similar; therefore, when you catch one of these main members and a sign of death appears to you, I advise that you avoid extracting that thorn in those cases where death occurs in the member in the most favorable conditions, and when you do not see these bad signs, and the thorn is not hidden deep within the limb, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the servant is when it catches in it (the patient) a splinter, pierces the bone, and exits from the cavity which is above the brain, because this happens due to violent soda, scotomia, vertigo, heat in the veins, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and the word is forcefully separated and destroyed, and exits from the wound location a whitish pus-like fluid resembling powder, and eyes from it resemble the moisture of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and removal of the splinter unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of a splinter that has entered the heart, near the left breast, and is firmly embedded, are not in vain; and its movement is similar to the movement of the thumb, and there is bleeding from the wound, oozing black pus, and this heat of the limbs, sweating, and faintness; and therefore, know that death approaches quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the splinter has wounded the lung are that there is spumy blood from the wound, and vessels near the neck are congested, and the patient's color changes, and they expel a large spirit, and demand for cold air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the splinter catches in the membrane that is on the foot and causes pain near the small ribs, it will cause great pain with violent cries and moans, but not all the limbs of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the splinter catches in the stomach, there will be a lot of yellow eyes of the wound exuding some undigested matter.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the splinter catches in the abdomen and is deeply embedded, there will be a fissure or tear of the wound, or intestine or hernia that has been torn apart, and there is no hope for recovery in the removal of the splinter.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the splinter catches in the bladder and is discharged through urine, and causes some injury outside, there will be severe pain on the patient, know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other members, such as the head, neck, throat, back, shoulders, and adjutorium, spine, furcula, pelvis, hip, thighs, and their similar limbs are saved if the splinter does not touch a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that I have seen the nature of these splinters, so you may understand from this concerning your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that when a splinter enters the lacrimal duct of a person's eye through the nasal cavity, and it is extracted from the other side, taking care to remove the eyelash along with it, it heals, and no harm comes to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And extract another splinter from a Jew who it entered his eye in the tear duct, leaving the eyelid aside, and the splinter was already hidden, and could not be found except for a small tip that adhered to his cornea, and it was a sharp Turkish splinter with a lion head in which there were no eyelashes.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And send the Jew away, and no harm comes to his eye due to this accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another splinter from a Christian man who it had entered his throat, and it was an Arabic splinter, with eyelashes; and then I inserted a fine needle between the two eyelids, and it was already submerged in the throat of the patient; and then I carefully extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another splinter from a man who it had entered his stomach, thinking he would die due to that; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any of his dispositions, I inserted a fine needle into the splinter and drew it out, and he recovered, and no harm came to him from the accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom a splinter had entered his back, and the wound had healed over, and after six years, it exited from the opening of the pelvis.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman in whom a splinter had entered her abdomen, and the wound healed internally and did not change in any of her dispositions; and the woman did not suffer harm from any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man in whom a splinter had entered his face and the wound healed, and the splinter was broken, causing no severe pain, but pains similar to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the splinter of the man who was the son of the king, which had entered his nose at its midpoint and had begun to decline towards the right side, and the entire splinter was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called upon for treatment within three days of the insertion of the splinter.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the splinter to see if it was tight; and when I inquired about it with a fine probe, I did not feel it; but I felt a prick under the right eyelid, and so I hoped that the prick was from the tip of the splinter.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Expand the wound with a plaster in the area where there is an attractive and digestive virtue, so that the location may be exposed to me, so that I can cut it open on that spot.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Do not allow the accident happening at the location of the abscess to be mistaken for the abscess having moved; continue applying the plaster over it for several days and do not allow any accident; when the wound heals, remove the patient from the site for several days until they feel the abscess near their nose and recognize this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then apply an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until pus emerges, and with the probe I will detect it, and cut off the subtle tip of the abscess that is attached to the stalk.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then align the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the tip of the abscess becomes visible to me, and wait for several weeks or up to four months before coming back to me.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound has been expanded and it becomes possible for forceps to enter the area, remove the pus without causing excessive damage, and then do not stop using subtle and ingenious methods on that area until a day comes when you can use forceps to grasp it properly. Follow the form described at the end of this chapter to extract it; then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, and I will restore it and the wound heals, and the patient recovers fully, without any complications.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend that you follow the quality of extracting certain abscesses according to the rule and significance I have not mentioned, because these sections and definitions are not understandable through narrative or reading alone.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise craftsman compares much with little; and what is present with what is absent; and in new operations and the use of new instruments, you must recognize unusual causes arising from the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that abscesses are not neglected in the members where they are located except in two ways: either due to attraction of the location where it is found; or due to the opposite side of the affected area.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And an abscess that is neglected due to the location where it enters or is found in a fleshy area and is drawn out and neglected.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not pay attention to the time when it catches, then you must wait several days until the surrounding tissue can be softened and the abscess's attraction and outflow are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if an abscess is located in bone and you do not pay attention to it, then wait several days and repeat the process of attracting and moving it every day, and eventually it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not pay attention for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate the abscess in all directions around the bone with a fine instrument until the area is expanded by the abscess, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the abscess is located in the bone of the skull and has already progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and the patient shows any of the signs I have mentioned, then avoid extracting the abscess and let it remain until the patient's condition stabilizes for several days; for if the abscess reaches the cerebellum, then the death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the abscess is not located in the skull bone but only in the bone of the body and does not reach the cerebellum, and the patient remains for several days without any complications from those symptoms, then use your ingenuity to attract the abscess and attract the surrounding area.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is not to be extracted but dressed, then administer tourniquets around the affected area as we have recommended, and care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is embedded within the body and causes no pain, then try to locate it by touching, and if you feel it, draw it out with suitable instruments appropriate for extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach the wound due to the swelling and length of the spearhead, and it is not a bone, nerve, or vein, then make an incision over the wound so that it may be enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If the wound is covered by scabs that must be removed, then cut the surrounding flesh in all directions with whatever tools you can use; and apply force to it, if you cannot remove the scabs through the escape of the flesh by breaking the scabs and twisting them until they oblige.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When extracting the arrow from any location, use twisting motion with your hand or forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be gentle but persistent so that the arrow is not broken and extracted as easily as possible for you, requiring minimal effort and force.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you are unable to proceed at that time, leave it for some days until the surrounding parts have healed, and then revisit it when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If blood flow is against you, administer the cure as mentioned in its section.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Be careful of incisions in veins or nerves, or arteries, and provide all possible means for the extraction of the arrow; do it with ease, tranquility, patience, and firmness as we and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, apply counter-pressure to the arrow so that the patient is in a position according to the figure in which you should remove the arrow from him, as this will be more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If that is not possible for you, administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Arrows that protrude from the opposite side or have caused damage to surrounding parts, or gnaw away at the shaft due to the feeling of pain above the shoulder blade and sometimes prominently; then proceed with caution on it; make the incision according to the size for which forceps can grasp; and draw it out easily.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If the arrow is lodged in the bone, twist the blade against it until the arrow enters the bone, and expand the incision, then extract the arrow.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If it is not lodged, leave it for some days, and revisit it when it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is in the wound, push it back with something.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft is broken and you wish to administer pressure, introduce your finger into it (if it is deep), use a concave instrument to enter the concavity of the wound near the end of the arrow and then push it back with something.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, push it back with a strong instrument entering it, as the arrow will be relieved by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is embedded, make sure you flatten all the flesh around it if possible, and care for it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow is in the foot, abdomen, bladder, ribcage or back and can be touched with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then proceed to cut around it carefully and avoid incisions of veins or nerves; extract the arrow, suture the wound if necessary, and care for it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps used to remove arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The tips of them are shaped like bird beaks which are made with saws when they grab the arrow to prevent it from slipping.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made various types, large, few and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the wound and its swelling.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the concave plunger on this convex end is like the beak of a bird, so that it relieves the entrance of the arrow into the wound, and pushes out the blunt one.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the blunt plunger:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a ray to relieve the entrance of the concave arrow and push out with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of venesection (bloodletting).
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins used for bloodletting, which usually require 30. from the head, These are two pulsating veins near the armpits, which you call cubital veins; two herbs that are in the temples apparent; and two veins that are in the tear ducts of the two eyes called lacrimal veins; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two jugular veins at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are called the cervical veins -; and the two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Veins that are lanced in the arms are .v; If one of the veins lanced in the arms is a cephalic, it must be allowed to let the wild blood flow out; and the people call this "the vein of the head", which is deaf and is a median vein, and is composed of a branch from the basilica and another branch from the cephalic; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and the basilic is the vein that is punctured in the domestic artery, and is named "citillar", and the common people call it "vein of the abdomen"; and the median cubital, which is punctured above the wrist, and is the one in which blood is drawn, and is the one that appears above the wound with a clear appearance; and the cephalic vein, which is between the mentioned auricular and the lesser auricular, and is found in two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins: one of these is below the curvature of the wild artery; and the second is saphenous, and its location is below the groin of the domestic artery; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the groin of the wild artery; and in the leg there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The assistance of the veins that are near the auricles is beneficial for ancient catarrhs, migraines, and head sores, as well as old ulcers in the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of bleeding these veins depends on the advice I recommend to you: it should be scraped on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the back in the location of both veins with a large and clean cloth; then strongly hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that the locations of their ears are pressed against the head in two places near the top of the head; and use this technique, and if you feel the pulse of these veins with your fingers, try it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical lancet and the one that is sharp-edged, and insert it below the vein into the cavity so that blood comes out of the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift your hand with the vein and cavity to the incision points above, and make an incision in the vein with the sharp-edged instrument.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And make the length of the incision about two finger widths or around that; and let out the blood as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen the pulse and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now, at the beginning of the book, I have explained the incision and cauterization of these veins.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, the assistance of the arterial veins in the temples is beneficial for migraines and headaches, as well as chronic eye disease and acute swelling of the ears.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of puncturing these veins depends on the advice I recommend to you: strengthen the patient's neck so that both veins become noticeable with a clear perception and demonstrate their pulse with your fingers; then try it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then lift the cavity over the vein at the incision points as indicated by me, and insert the lancet sharp-edged below it, and raise the vein above; and make an incision in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let out the blood according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then release the patient's neck constriction, place your fingers on the vein for an hour, and hold pressure on that area while strengthening it with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now the reminder for these veins and their incision and attraction has been given at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore, the assistance of puncturing the forehead vein is similar to that of the cephalic vein for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and infected ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of puncturing it depends on the advice I recommend to you: the patient should strengthen his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and take the instrument that is called a scoop, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the puncture point at the tip of the scoop on that vein, and strike it with force or another cause in the manner of using it, and let out the blood according to the amount you desire; then release the patient's perforation and strengthen it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes the puncture is made with bloodletting, but it is not necessary that the bloodletting be of sharp extremity like other bloodlettings; instead, it should be of blunt extremity, and make the incision horizontally because the bone is close and strong, so it can easily break during the bloodletting when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The relief of the two veins that are at the eyelids of two eyes due to scales on the eyelids from inflammation and pus in the eyelids, and for the illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and you press the veins (phlebotomize them), and you stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	The phlebotomy should be made obliquely across long and short slightly, because in that place there is no flesh; if the phlebotomy is subtle, however, the extremity of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood run out as much as is necessary, stop on that spot, and tie it with a new bandage, then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is for acute fever and vehement sodium, and for diseases of the face and migraines and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of phlebotomy in that case is that the patient tightens his neck and holds his nose with your left hand, and take a subtle long phlebotomy needle and place it in the middle of the bridge of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein is not felt here, and because the blood begins to flow quickly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is necessary that you hold the phlebotomy needle slowly with your hand and make it draw blood according to your need; tie it up with a new bandage, because it heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the relief of phlebotomy on the two sides helps with contraction of the eyes, and at the beginning of leprosy, and with various diseases, inflammations, and itchy and painful ulcers like herpetoma (herpes).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of phlebotomy in that case is that the patient tightens both with his neck, and the practitioner stands over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a couch.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a wide and shallow needle, gradually; draw out blood in measured quantity or according to what is necessary at that time; make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then loosen the patient's neck and tighten both veins with moderate pressure to prevent the patient from fainting, and leave them for a few days because the wound is healing.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The relief of phlebotomy on the small veins confers to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums, painful ulcers and fissures, and painful ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of phlebotomy on those is that you should sit the patient facing you, tighten their neck with a bandage, and turn their lips so you can see the two veins, one from the right lip and the other from the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of both, and this is because in the circuit of those veins there are small dark veins; then make an incision in each one with an incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are uncertain which one it is, then make an incision into the larger of those, and the one with the most pus.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Make it similar to the two veins in the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to incise more often the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But the relief of the two veins that are under the tongue is for fainting that occurs in the throat, disease of the uvula (soft palate), and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of phlebotomizing those is that you have the patient sit between your hands and lift their tongue, look below their tongue, from one side of it to the other vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to hold your hand too long in phlebotomizing those, because they are arteries below.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those that customarily occur in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done in two ways, either with the use of a mirtilat or olive oil diluted; or searing it with a phlebotomizing knife (lancet), and applying alum (alum), and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This sentence translates to: "And this incision is appropriate for section and of those (who are) slender and subtle according to the size of the veins, and according to the narrowness of those (veins)."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The guessed translation for the given line is: "Form of lithotomy (removal of bladder stones):"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "Cut the veins as they appear, and it is appropriate to open the convex, swollen veins that contain thick, tortuous blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And this is the form of lithotomy (removal of bladder stones) using oil."
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And this lithotomy (removal of bladder stones) is smaller and of narrower and more subtle extremity, and it is appropriate for performing a lithotomy on subtle veins containing thin citrus blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, it is more helpful in performing lithotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: as it drains the blood from patients who are suffering from gout and colic, as well as from the feet and abdomen."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "It is necessary for the lithotomist (one who performs lithotomy), when performing lithotomy on that vein, to be careful and cautious because there is an artery nearby, and if it is accidentally pierced or misaligned during the lithotomy puncture, the artery will be severed, causing bleeding. Therefore, it is not recommended to perform lithotomy with a pointed instrument, but rather incision with a scalpel."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if the basilica vein does not appear in a manifest manner, it is necessary that you locate it and move to another or seek one of its branches; or perform lithotomy in the area where the end of the arm is, as this is more apparent; and incise it with a scalpel, as we have said."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, if you want to perform lithotomy in the arm, it is necessary before the narrowing of the arm that you touch the area between where you know the location of the wrist, and place a cushion over it; and bring the arm and incise the vein with a concave incision using a scalpel, making sure to avoid hitting the percussion site for the location of the artery."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And when you feel, as if stretching it (the arm), inflate in the location that you have indicated with a cushion, then that inflation is of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if you see blood flow during lithotomy, like that of a child, and the blood is thin, you should know that it is from the artery; and you should keep your hand still for a long time over it; and remove your hand, and if the blood is severed, as it may be severed repeatedly, you should stretch the arm and let it go."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And be careful with the patient regarding their moistness (wounds), and avoid moving or disturbing them for several days until they are healed."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, if the blood is not severed and you find that you do not have the necessary medicine for it, you should incise the artery if it appears to you; as its extremity will be constricted and the blood will be stopped. Or take a tourniquet, inflate it and tighten it around the location of the vein with narrowing between the arm and wrist, and hold it there for another day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if the blood is severed, that is good; otherwise, take care of it with what was mentioned earlier regarding the location of the powder that stops the flow of blood."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "The stopping of the blood flow in it (the wound) is difficult due to its small size and the flexibility of the arm."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, lithotomy of the dark vein is more helpful in draining the blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; because it consists of branches of the basilica and cephalica veins, as we have said."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And it is necessary for the lithotomist to be cautious during lithotomy of that (vein), as there is a nerve nearby; and if it is accidentally hit in the puncture of lithotomy, it will cause paralysis, and healing may be difficult, and partial paralysis may not heal completely. This nerve may sometimes be felt; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not visible, it is necessary that you pause lithotomy with the one that you are performing lithotomy with, using a scalpel incision, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And if the vein is between two nerves, you should make an incision along its length."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "The advantage of lithotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and helps with headaches."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "And it is necessary in this case, if you want to perform lithotomy with oil or with citrus, as all veins are safe, because there is neither an artery nor a nerve nearby."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	The guessed translation for the given line is: "However, it is necessary that you be careful during lithotomy not to touch the tip of the liver with the instrument, but rather seek a lighter location, and do not notice if it is not hit, as long as it does not occur in several watchful observations during the lithotomy."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is often observed in some men that an abscess does not appear if not probed during the first strike, but it will not be noticed until later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of that incision and its complications should be considered when correcting it.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing that must be known is that incision should not be administered except for the preservation of health and with the hope of it and caution for the occurrence of diseases, and that incision should be made in one of the veins that are on the arm, namely: cephalic, subclavian and basilic; and that incision should be made at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And incision should be made on the third day or at least three hours after the evening meal has passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, incision should be administered only when it is necessary or convenient, either at night or during the day, at any time and in every hour.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It is necessary that an infant should not be incised before the age of 14, and a woman who is pregnant should not be incised until the fourth month at the earliest, and old women should not be incised who have passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be incised by any means, it is necessary to clean the intestines before the incision with leon cloth, if there is a fissure retained in them, so that the veins do not push excess fluids into the incisions of the intestines, which are pure, and that they do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Incisions should not be made on those suffering from nausea or vomiting, nor should they have any illness or drunkenness before this has passed, nor a watery disease, and incision should be feared near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal swelling, and multiplication of the genitals and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and all causes that dissolve virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the examination of bodily fluids before this whether the blood is thickened by foods and drinks, and medications if this is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Enter the bath if there is no prohibition, or exercise by some exercise to thin the blood.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Pause the incision of that in the feet during the day, for example around the third hour, as mentioned before.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it should be ensured that the foot of that is protected from all animal and physical accidents during that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all accidents similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in the case of the wound, make present the causes in the use of the medicine that humans commonly use with aromatics and fragrances, balms, and similar things according to the possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the one who is incising on a cushion that is higher than that of the person who must be incised.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then pull out the arm and wipe it with your hand, the one who is incising, two or three times; and tighten the strap around it and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The constriction should be moderate, for if the constriction is too tight or the constriction is with excess fluid, then you prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with softening, then you prohibit the heart's blood flow.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then the constriction should be done with the hands of the one who is to be incised between them until the veins are inflated and declared by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the one who is incising should anoint his incision with a little antiseptic oil specifically; and the left hand of the other should be placed on that vein, away from the location where the incision is to be made, so that the vein drains a little, and the pressure should be steady for if the veins are those that contract like cords when they are pierced, then the incision must be made, and it is discovered that the one who is incising; and the incision does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is too tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, the one who is incising should be firm and attentive in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then pause the incision, but if the vein is pierced in one attempt, that is good; and if not, you should try again a little away from that location or quickly, if there are no signs of infection.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is infected or the patient shows signs of discomfort, you should leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the strap, because excessive force will cause an abscess to appear, nor enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And try again if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and the blood flow is thin and you fear that there will not be enough blood flow as desired, then you should try again in the same place and adjust the opening slightly, and do it quickly before the location becomes infected, because when the location becomes infected in many men you should make few incisions.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that (the wound) has already been opened, do not reopen it, for you have no excuse in any case; and place a cloth over some part of the oil wound, for it relieves the body of pus.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better at that place to use olive oil rather than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And administer the oil wound in all phlebotomy where you must prohibit the body from bleeding, and do this tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is stopped from one of them on the area, for the blood becomes subtle and turns into pus when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the phlebotomy site a large abscess is generated, which often happens, and more so in one that has not been kept bleeding since that wound, or at the opening of a small vein, then you should cauterize, and place a cloth soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, on it and keep it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It is necessary to make this to the scab of the blood of that vein with the completion of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the area for several days with a black or green color, do not notice it; and if you want, place some reason of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some reason of mint juice or camphor or something similar to it on it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often abscesses and elevations require phlebotomy in the basilica (the main artery).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on that (the wound), and if you notice softness, you must apply compression to it, since the elevation is bad and harmful; and so take care that you place something on it as I have said, for a large amount of blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply plaster with what has stiffness to the area so that it is hardened, and take care of it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to draw blood from every person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that comes out as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, you must let it dry until it turns red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, you must let it dry until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, keep its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for a person who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one occasion that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the phlebotomies be large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in a weak person, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to draw too much blood from him in several occasions, and let the cuts be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing that can be administered in vein phlebotomy is a cross section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is easier and safer than phlebotomy according to the longitude and latitude (coordinates).
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in the one who is accustomed to fainting, you should perform phlebotomy, and it is necessary that you take care of him before phlebotomy with a piece of bread infused in milk of magnesia or simple camphor scalded; and draw blood from him in three occasions or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is inflammation of the joints, you should take before phlebotomy a draught of myrrh syrup or scented honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or a scented aromatic syrup and a strong odorant (perfume).
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy, it is caused by too much blood, and therefore you must take before drinking water of meat and a subtle perfumed syrup; and use aromatics with something, and let his legs be bound with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that I have mentioned in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to weaken his arm and dissolve his blood gradually in one occasion, it is necessary for the person from whom phlebotomy is performed for great evacuation, and let the virtue of him be weak, which gradually lets out a little blood according to the amount of his virtue on consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to weaken his arm and expel the blood little by little, and his body is strong, do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to draw blood from the body towards the opposite direction of the wound where it tends, it is necessary that it be weakened on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in a body with too much warm blood and acute and causes fever, it is necessary to expel that blood from the body in one occasion and a large amount and enlarge the opening until fainting occurs, since you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulses of him so that the body does not die from fainting, for too many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary that when you want to loosen the arm and expel blood gradually in one occasion, if the openings of the veins are closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, that you press hard on it and straighten it slightly, for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The patients should wait until the second flebotomy can be performed; or remain with the acuity of the flebotomy that is coagulated by blood in the vein's opening; or pause on the place of bleeding from a lancet, or leech, and compress it lightly until the blood exits.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is punctured, then leave it as it is and do not touch it until the puncture site is soothed.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If you need to draw blood a second time, and it is not an excuse, then you should perform venesection on the same spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "the brachial nerve" is punctured where the cephalic or basilic veins are not constricted or hidden, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that the patient inserts their hand into warm water until the vessel becomes noticeable.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then tighten it with a strap and apply gentle constriction; perform the venesection along the small transverse vein, not longitudinally or along the length of the vein.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Make the opening wide and your venesection on that joint with a small incision.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is forbidden, then place your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from putting your hand in warm water, and in winter, the body is cooled by warm water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	This vein is more convenient to puncture than all other veins, as it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The venesection of the saphenous vein on the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that you tighten the hand with a strap or your own, then immerse it in warm water until the vein swells and is clearly visible; perform the venesection transversely; if you incise it completely, it will not be noticeable.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Be careful not to cut off your hand with the venesection, as nerves are exposed there without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then put your hand in warm water and let the blood flow out of it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate at the vein opening, and bleeding is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	Draw the blood according to your need, and then pause over the olive oil and salt vein so that it is not hardened; similarly, you must do this for all branches.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the advantage of venesection from the left-hand vein is that it is beneficial for gallbladder diseases.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Perform similarly in the venesection of this as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the saphenous vein venesection is for diseases in the lower part of the body such as abscesses, retention of menstruation, and lung diseases, ulcers, and old sores, and their similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that the patient inserts their foot into warm water and performs friction on it until the veins appear; then on the ankle with a strap, and the site of the vein should be pointed out, and from there, it branches out on the sole of the foot multiple ways.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, make a wide incision at the base or on the side of the ankle, as it is more convenient and cleaner.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you perform venesection on the sole of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the sole, and pause your bloodletting where you puncture transversely, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let the venesections be small.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if bleeding is forbidden, then immerse the foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of it until it is drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the bloodletter is inexperienced on their first visit, then immerse them with a small amount of venesection at that location, as it is clean; do not fear deception but be careful of the nerves as previously mentioned.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Similarly, do this for the saphenous vein on the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the site as previously mentioned should be pointed out below the wild-side hip.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The advantage of bloodletting at that location is for lower back pain when it is due to bleeding.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the bloodletting at that location is such that the patient immerses themselves in water, and strengthens and tightens the lower back muscles from below the waist to above the feet with a long thin bandage, which can only be seen through it.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it becomes visible, then perform venesection on it according to your abilities and transversely, which is better; or incise or cut it, as the location is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	The first sentence translates to: "She is in labor with weak men; if you find that, and it does not appear to sensation as a whole, then touch any branch of it, and that which appears on the heel near the ankle and the ear is called phlebotomia."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"Be careful with the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"Then unravel the constriction and place your hand over the site of phlebotomy, holding it firmly, because it heals easily."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"Of ventosection and the qualities of using those [instruments]."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Ventoses are made of horns, or animal intestines, or glass."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"Ventosection is performed in two ways: one using incision and bloodletting, and the other using ventosection without incision."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this ventosection that is done with incision has two methods: one with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the locations where ventoses with incision and bloodletting are administered are twelve parts of the body, among which is the site where ventosection is performed, which is the last part of the head; and the middle part of the neck from both sides; and ventosection of the jaw below the mouth; and ventosection using two spatulas; and ventosection using an alohoster [large syringe], on the end of the backbone; and ventosection using two bellows, which are from the elbows; and ventosection using two cups; and ventosection using two cuppers."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"Ventosection does not draw blood from the veins, but from small veins scattered in the flesh, thus it does not obtain its virtue as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should ventosection be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion before the entire body has been evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"However, if there is necessity for ventosection due to disease or continuation, administer it at the beginning and end of each month, and in the middle and at any time."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"The cause is that in some men blood is multiplied within them before it needs to be extracted by ventosection and causes severe headache, swelling in the face and head, and neck; and in those who have pain in the face and forehead and darkness and dullness in the eyes; and in those who lose the site of their ventosection; and in those whose nose is running; and in those who have a taste for blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is swollen and spits blood; and in those whose sleep is prolonged, and in those who see blood in their sleep, fever, old age, and other similar causes."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"Therefore, when there are some causes of those [symptoms], and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command that ventosection be performed after passing two or three hours past sunrise."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And as an aid for ventosection of the neck is that when it causes heaviness in the head and if it causes sinking into the eyes, but evacuation of the entire body should be performed."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this ventosection is at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein]."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"And it is not allowed to use it in one who has a complete cold or one with catarr, because that causes great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And for this reason, the elderly and those with cold diseases should not use it."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"However, for one who is persistent on it, forgetfulness occurs; and for this reason you should command the ventosector to press lightly on the ventosection at the sites of the incisions, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"However, ventosection at the site of phlebotomy of the vein alveolar and basilic: and for this reason causes asthma, constriction of the alveoli, and scissuring of the trachea, cough, and repletion."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And the alveolar ventosection should be gently pressed down a little, because if it is left alone, it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	"And the ventosection at the alhagdahan [vein] causes accidental pain in the head and optic neuralgia, and migraines, and presbyopia, and toothache; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"And you should command the ventosector not to press too hard with the incision, so as not to cut the artery and cause blood flow."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	"And ventosection below the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to oral diseases; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the alihieric [vein], which is on both lips."
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	"However, the ventosection that is performed between the two spatulas causes cephalalgia [headache], which is caused by repletion of heat."
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"And the ventosection between the two incisions of the bellows [diaphragm] also helps with phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, alveolar, and cephalic; as it attracts blood from all those superficial veins, and those small veins of other large veins until it reaches the attraction of the three veins."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the lancer not to proceed too deeply in the incision, for the location is stripped of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries left.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a lancing instrument with which one lances the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	It is necessary to command the lancer to have a large lancing instrument and one made of iron, because the location requires a deep incision; and sharp, fine lancets should be used for the incision and lancing should be done with incising.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	However, the lancets on the limbs should be very small and delicate because they will draw blood from every part of the body, and they will relieve old pains in the lungs and womb, and the bladder; and they will provoke menstruation, and they will bring forth lochia and afterpains; and they are used instead of venepuncture for veins, and they are used in the neck, and at the navel.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	On the other hand, it is not good to weaken the entire body, because it can cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	But the lancets at the navel are very similar to the lancets of the veins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the lancets is that one leaves the lancet in place at first and sucks gently for a short time, and does not prolong the position of the lancet, but rather removes it slightly and leaves it in place intermittently, and that the humors come to the location by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating this and continue until you see the location redden and swell, and the redness of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you incise and suck gently, and pay attention to the positioning of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man is of delicate flesh with few pores, it is necessary that you incise once and do not suck because the location will not be ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the lancer to widen the incision and make a deep puncture, and suck gently.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary that you incise twice because in the first incision, the passageway for sublimation of the blood and fluid is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second one, seek the hard pursuit of the removal of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very mucilaginous, it must be made a third incision to achieve the goal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract little blood or very small amounts, this is sufficient for us with one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract much blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary that we incise deeply.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "incision" refers only to the depth of the wound.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the wound is thick, hard, dark and its pores are tight, it is necessary that the locations of the lancets be greased more smoothly and resolved more widely; if it is in summer, for example with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of marigolds twice, or oil of mustard seed; and if it is in winter, use oil of nutmeg, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood oil, and similar things.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If there is excessive fluid, fry it with oil of amaranth, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the lancer has wide pores of delicate flesh, it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and instead the locations of the lancets should be washed with warm water or hot water from Solidum, or camomile water, or water of borage, and similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	If the blood is very wet, wash the lancets with vinegar, or camomile water and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	If the fluid is thick, wash the lancets with old vinegar, or water of fennel that has been steeped, or camomile infusion, or similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	It is necessary that the lancing be kept away from washing; it must be administered immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the lancet.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary is that the person who performs lancing should be bled before performing lancing.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who performs lancing or the one who will perform venepuncture has colic and acute bleeding with inflammation, it is necessary to take cooling measures, such as milgranate, acidic vinegar and laytuga juice, dandelion and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as peeled vegetables and poultry dishes with bitter flavors, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	If the person's complexion is dry, take a drink of almond milkshake or a milkshake made from asafetida seeds and sumac, and a slightly odorous herb between thyme and nutmeg; and it should be commanded to use little in drinking and eating, and pause peeled vegetables, beans, peas, mushrooms and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of venetization (ventozacio) and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is necessary to give certain men a drink containing tiger balm, or medicines such as musk, mustard, or camphor, before ventozacio (venetization) or phlebotomy, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is made thin; and they should not take this coldness.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the ventozas (ventosities) that are not incisions are those that are stopped in the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, at the joints, and the pits of the anus, because these members cannot endure incision upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for that purpose except the attraction of blood from a member, as stopping a ventosa (ventosity) on a nipple in a patient with bleeding from the nose or ear; and they use this to dissolve cold, viscous ventosity in a member, as stopping on the stomach and umbilicus; because it thins the member, chills it, and reduces pain, resolving the ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And a ventosa (ventosity) has been stopped on the throat when it occurs in their obstruction or purulence, because by its strong attraction it draws out the obstruction and eradicates the purulence from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when a ventosa (ventosity) is stopped on the liver and spleen, it resolves ventosity that is trapped in those places.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These ventosities are administered with juice alone; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some are administered full of hot water in cases of spleen disease.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is to fill the ventosa (ventosity) and make it larger, with hot water alone or water in which certain herbs are steeped that are appropriate for this purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventosa (ventosity) administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the depth should be the width of a palm; and in its length, at the site where it is located in the circuit, it should be the same size, the trauc (?) should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make it made of lamb's wool or lemon peel, thick edges, lion's wool, and clean and dry to avoid irritating the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be placed in front of it (the ventosa) a crossbar of wool or iron, where the candle is stopped with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventosa (ventosity) should be much larger than the one we recommended; and a small one, as little as possible, according to the disease and the state of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventosities (ventosities) of children and women in labor are other than those of young men and thick-set women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of stopping this ventosa (ventosity) with fire on the member is that it heats the meat with a good amount of wood in front of a small amount of wax candle, and places it on the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the ventosa, so that the fire is lit around the sides so as not to burn the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And let it be placed on the patient's member, and the said candle is placed over the trauc (trough) that we have mentioned, until when we have the ventosities (ventosities) and do not need to hold the candle and let the vapor rise from that trauch, then the ventosity will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And burn the meat according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in a ventosa (ventosity) that is administered for plague disease with water, without a crossbar or trauch, it is not administered but filled with water and placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger the ventosa (ventosity), the better it is, because it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capital LXVII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissugus (leeches) are not administered in many members, but only in those members in which it is impossible to position ventosities (ventosities), because of their small size, such as the nose and its surroundings; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the genitals and around them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you may find in muddy waters is that they are clean.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them lie in muddy water for the day and night until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in their stomach; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and ventosities (ventosities); and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it reddens; and let them be placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and closed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the juice from the location with the ventosity (ventosity) is possible, it is more helpful in aid.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, wash the location with warm water and add hot water to it; and rub and squeeze.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the duration of the blood in the bladder of the leeches is prolonged and it becomes thickened, let you immerse a cloth in cold water and place it on top until the thickening has subsided.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the blood multiplies, then sprinkle powdered vitriol over it, or similar substances from stiptic causes, until the blood is drained; or if blisters are made at the spot with cooked favas, and they are laid down until the favas stick to the spot, and the blood is drained.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, the repeated application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the use of leeches is prohibited, then it should be washed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the spots until blood comes out; and they should be covered to prevent them from being felt immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to shrink, sprinkle a little of crushed aloeswood, salt, or ashes over them, and then wait for it.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So begins the process of the third part, namely restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is mainly observed in the art of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, understand that this chapter is scorned by the foolish doctors and the common people and those who do not read or study the works of the ancients for any length of time.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this method of the scholars in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten this at any time but have only followed it after prolonged reading of the books of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I have extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the long course of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that constitutes the main science and upon which my experience has been passed; here I abbreviate it for you others and relieve you of the burden of lengthy explanation; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate it at the end of demonstration; and form many shapes of the instruments that are administered in it, as has been done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections on the subject of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to begin the reminder of fractured members and those of various types of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I must first say in the preamble of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artist is halted and stands still on the truth of these things; it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing, it is necessary at the beginning to apply leeches or alum, or whatever may not be prohibited by any cause, such as weakness of virtue, or if it has happened in a weak person, or an old person, or in hot weather, or in cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be content with food consisting of greens and meat of birds and fish; and prohibit coarse meats and fill with other foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his original regimen as he is accustomed to it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency in which there is viscosity, such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, peas, beans, veal, fresh fish, coarse wine, and similar foods; and with this regimen is made coagulation of the fracture more easily and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones fractured in young men and the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying of these members, and those that are in infancy and childhood are consolidated and continued, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nevertheless, nature corrects and adapts itself in some way to the fractured bone of every part by a certain cause similar to glue, which causes swelling that adheres and strengthens it until it is consolidated and set, until the time of hardness and firmness comes, such as fire at the beginning, unless you prohibit this cause from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to pause the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick, as has been said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Variety of fractures according to the variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the variety of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will go on with the reminder of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter apart from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Move diverse types of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The various species of fracture occur within the bones; for example, the arched fracture occurs in the star-shaped bone, and some are fractures according to the length of the bone: and those from the thigh and shin, both occurring and non-occurring, such as when the bone is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in all cases, it is painful or tormenting for the patient when recovery comes according to how well they remember their own specific conditions in their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Move the sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this is recognized the fracture of the bone: it is a twisting, and from that prominence and sensation of it, and only when you press on it does it produce discomfort.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no twisted appearance in the place or it does not produce pain when touched with movement of the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Since it is possible that there may be a twisting or small fissure, therefore you must press on it with your hand and with compression in all places; pause over the medicine of which you have remembered its appropriate application at this moment; and apply it tightly by subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the place that is arched and not divided in two or any other thing that does not occur in the thigh, such as a large part of its comparison, then it is necessary to start from your time in the rectification of it; because it has developed an abscess cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess cauterization has occurred, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess stops; and apply to it according to each method that can be done with skill and care.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that recovery of the place and piercing of it is lighter than the bone in which this situation occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And apply strength to it according to the memory that comes up.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there is a fracture, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with ropes or with one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And you should position yourself with the member in which you apply the pressure according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the fractured member; then proceed to make the additions return according to skill and in their respective locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to cause pain or injury on the patient due to your operation, and proceed according to your strength by applying one bone to another in the best possible ways.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	It is necessary that at this time you touch it with your hand and if any other cause is found, correct it and apply the required amount of force to it.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And proceed with strong extension and compression, like the foolish doctors who often cause abscess cauterization to occur through their operation or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen through the operation of their foolish treatments.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And apply attachment, correction, proper operation and restriction of this limb, rest and tranquility; advise the patient on these matters and make sure that he does not aggravate it during his vigils or sleep, observe its rotation and movement, take care of his diet, and take care of all his movements with full force; and wait to see if the position of the limb is a position in which pain occurs, because when there is pain in the position of this limb or injury; then it is necessary to change that position to another one where no pain occurs; and make sure that the position of it is straight and tightened, so that the limb does not twist when it is being healed.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the restriction of the limb in a straight position is what I recommend; because you should know that fractured limbs are diverse according to their size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand and foot, it is necessary that the wrap be made of very thin fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a broad and strong wrap; because linen is broad and connects the large limb with strength in all parts with tight binding, so that nothing can enter inside of it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin by applying your correct position and pause appropriately on the location of this fracture with three or four wraps or as much as the limb needs, and hold it slightly with strength and linen.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Approach that person to the area above the location of the fracture and speak firmly so that your instructions are not misconstrued regarding the immobilization of the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Approach the fracture area slightly and release the bandage around it gently, loosening it bit by bit until you can grasp a large portion of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Approach the broken area and take another bandage, wrap it around the observed area over the fracture, and approach the other bandages at a distance below the fracture; your operation should be in tightening the bandage and softening it as you did with the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Approach the bandages of wool or fabric that are wrapped around the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature, and pause at that point; otherwise do not stop for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Approach the other bandage, and approach the other bandages of well-made steel needles as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or cauterized abscess at that location; then pause over the abscess site and what is causing the inflammation; leave it for several days; and then apply pressure to the needles.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The needles should be made of cane or hardwood, well-formed; or of reeds; or palm fronds; and their width should be as follows in this form and shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the needle that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and narrower than the other needles, and the length of the needle should correspond to the size and smallness of the member; apply pressure on the needles with another bandage according to your initial immobilization; place it above the needle with faithfulness as I have said about immobilization, and this should be your immobilization according to the location of the fracture more, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less the immobilization.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and made of silk; if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operation of some foolish people using thick ropes to tie them, this is a great error, because when tying the fracture, equality is important.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle threads are not suitable because you will not achieve immobilization with them as desired, and it is not necessary to have a space of one finger width between the needles.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient is injured by the tips of the needles near the immobilization area at those points, then pause with woolen or felted bandages until that does not cause him injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are with abscesses, and it occurs with rupture in the ligament, and I will remember that in a later chapter about specific cases.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	Know that all fractured members should not be tightened with needles on the first day; this is because the member, when it is large, does not require immobilization by needles immediately but after about three to seven or more days, depending on your certainty of the development of a cauterized abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plasters that the ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The common method of plastering for the restoration of fractures is suitable for complicated cases and more so for women and children because it does not require heat or moisture; take powder from milled grain, and this is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the millstones in the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Prepare it as such, unless you sieve it with egg white, and pause the preparation of that until it is neither too thick nor too thin; then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe for aloeswood (agarwood), lapacho (lignum vitae), acacia, eucalyptus, myrrh, and ambergris (ambergris salvage) in equal amounts of one drachma each; add 5 parts of frankincense and 4 parts of aloes (aloe vera); strain and mix with warm water or egg white if the patient is sweating excessively. Use this poultice as it has a good composition and gently restores broken bones, conferring strength to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for treating fractures and twists is a poultice made of ambergris (ambergris salvage) and white althea in equal amounts of one drachma each, with myrrh and aloeswood in amounts of five drachmas each, and Armenian balsam in an amount of twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in a mortar with crushed herbs and sieved, then mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and separated bones in their places, as well as accidental pain at those places and fissures and fractures: take wool sutures, immerse them in sour wine vinegar and olive oil, and pause it over the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, of cauterized abscess or expelling pain specifically.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores fractured bones: take fig leaf pulp and wild poppy leaf pulp, combine them all to make a plaster from it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Another shortened method for the treatment of a fracture or solution of the abscess: prepare a remedy from alum, camomile, violet flowers, ground eraser, and everything finely divided. If the member is not scalded, apply ointment and bandage it up.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if it is scalded, do the following with either colander water or colander water and its use:
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another strong plaster for abscess resolution when a fracture occurs: prepare a remedy from alum and its seeds, balm of Gilead, clover, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, everything finely ground and mixed with honey; bandage it all up with water of sage or sweet water or oil, according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that a pause should be made over the fractured member for its restoration, but rather a mixture of wax and oil and no other cause; he recommends it to be moderately between thick and thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, in Galen's opinion, pausing over the fractured member for its restoration and cases in which there is excessive dryness with little heat, such as myrrh, cinnamon and similar to those cases that have been recommended, should be done.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: prepare a mixture of vinegar, pepper, human shaved skin or rooster pen feathers, alum, salt; grind and sift it, bandage it up, and make a plaster from it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the quantity that is needed to keep the wound from spreading and should be spread out, consider whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is not broken from its place, then you do not need to undo it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is pain, swelling or inflammation at the site, undo or remove the plaster from it immediately.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Then take linen and sea sponge with leonard water moistened, submerge it in boiling water, and use it to wash the affected area until the swelling and pain stop; allow the member to rest for an hour; then place a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil over it for one night to ensure that the abscess is cauterized, reduce the inflammation of the member, and alleviate the pain from it.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Approach that subtle constriction with a thin plaster and do not tighten it with your initial compression, let it heal with subtlety.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If the abscess and the swelling and pain and inflammation and all those symptoms have been cured completely, and you need ointment and bandages, then you should treat it as you did at the beginning of the healing process.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If no cause affecting that member occurs as mentioned beforehand, leave it alone for three or four or six or seven days. If after twenty days the situation is not resolved due to the loosening of the member, as mentioned before, and the fracture does not heal and the flesh does not attach to it,
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the constriction more than your initial compression in that area, and help the swelling of the patient's intestine, as previously described.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture is drying out and expanding more than necessary, know that nutrition must be prevented from reaching it; therefore, wrap it with boiling water for all observation periods and keep it like this for three days; then loosen the compression a little, and through this operation, allow the limb to receive nutrients, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Those who restore the fracture of the limb at a later time when it was not restored initially, as is appropriate, and restore it incorrectly due to their operation, this is an error according to the operation of the ancient physicians, and there is great fear, and if they had been correct in what they did, the ancients would have added to their books with what has been done.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone do that, so it is reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capital II: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are multiple, and their shapes are diverse, with distinct causes, for some fractures occur due to blunt force trauma that penetrates the entire bone, which is then destroyed, as in the case of a club, and this type of fracture is called ascal; or the blunt force cuts into part of the bone and also pierces the skin but does not pass through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether it contracts or expands; and its cause is due to blows with a hammer or axe on rocks, and similar instruments.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this type of fracture is penetrating, approaching the muscle layer that is below the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this type of fracture is when it is narrowed within the bone in its subtlety (tiny cavities), and for this reason, this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	The fracture that is caused by striking with a hammer or blunt force on rocks, which causes some layer of the bone to split at its joints, and occurs in concave areas such as those found in millstones when they are struck and split at their joints from within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Furthermore, this type of fracture occurs in bones with a spongy texture, such as those found in infant skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are treated as problems similar to separated stars (stars that have moved out of their proper position and require treatment).
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find a remedy for all of it in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We will recognize all types of fracture by examination on it, and through testing, we will find the substances corrupting them, which are on it.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A hair-like substance is recognized by this that is discovered on the bone, and it is scraped off, and it turns black due to the test, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture, it is first necessary to consider the condition of the patient, and then if you see by the signs that it indicates clearly by manifestation of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, swelling and redness of the affected areas, and similar signs in greater dispositions, there is doubt that it will not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If there are no unusual signs, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has been brought to you at the beginning as it was brought in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the removal of the bone on the twelfth day after all preparation.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, then it is necessary that you take out the bone on the seventh day, knowing that if the bone is left, it may be corrupt from putrefaction and the signs that I have mentioned will occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has reached the panniculus covering the brain and is small pieces and stuck together, then it is necessary to cut open the divided piece and separate it, as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	It is that you reason with the head of the affected patient and discover on the bone according to custom and your ability according to the appearance of the wound, and it should be gentle on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you find that there is bleeding or an abscess on the bone, then you must apply what is necessary, and it is that you put compresses of dampened wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is calm, and be sure of the blood flow; and then begin with the circle around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you make an incision in the bone with a narrow incision tool, and this is the form of it: Place another cutting tool next to it, slightly deeper than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And place the cutting tool slightly deeper than the previous one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have a number of different incision tools, some of which are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the end of sharpness of their tips, and they may be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them easily for striking on the incision tool so that you do not hit the head and cut it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to drill a hole around it before administering the incision tools with taravels, which are called non-penetrating taravels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called this only because they do not penetrate the end of the bone to the test, but rather on the taravel is rounded or curved edge around that which is left of the head of it, sharp like a margin or small circle, which prohibits submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is necessary that you take a great number of these splinters, each one suitable for the specific bone, until it is present in all parts of the brain whose extremity is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the amount of splinter needed for this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of splinters: The quality of perforating in the circle of the broken bone is that you place the splinter on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone is penetrated; and then allow the splinter to move to another location, and place what is between all around the ray or surround the surrounding area with it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then insert the splinters with the tweezers between each crack of the bone and make the splinter as thin as possible so that it penetrates to the end of the cavity, as mentioned before, until you pierce the bone, or do this with your hand, or by any other means using various instruments such as tongs and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	It is necessary that you keep caution so that the tweezers do not touch any nerve.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the nerve if it is separated from it, and you have extracted it, it is necessary that you shave and file it on the roughness of it where it is in the bone with another tool similar to a tweezers, but nevertheless it is necessary that it be thinner and more delicate than the other tweezers.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If any small and stubborn pieces of the bones remain, then take them easily with whatever tool you have at hand; and care for the wound with linseed oil and bandages as I have said earlier.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of treatment is easy and far from fear, which is called Guillaume and is highly praised; and this is the explanation of it: it is necessary for you at first to start by discovering the fracture of the bone in the location where it is most violent and manifest, until when you have discovered that part of the bone and have placed a cushion under it, the end of the cautery should be slow and gentle. Here is the shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The concave fracture is round and does not penetrate anything, while the acute fracture is from one side to two sides in length, as sometimes happens; that the concave fracture should be adjusted to the nerve with the face of the penetrating acute part of the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then pierce one part of the fracture with a small hammer until you have pierced the entire bone easily as it is rotated, and you should be certain that no panic occurs in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish and ignorant of all men and the most asleep. Certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if any nerve is still attached to the bone of the panic in some places of the bone, pierce it with the end of the cautery that is concave and release it easily, because it is released from it without harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the nerve, and what has been cut off or remains of the bone is its face, and it remains rough and stubborn in places, then it is necessary that you shave that roughness and remove those stubborn areas with fine razors that you have prepared in different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places according to the most convenient places and the proper ones of them according to where you lose your operation of the broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	It is necessary that you administer with the razor that you use to shave the bone at first, and place it close to the most delicate part of it, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach the point where you can administer the thinnest and most delicate of them all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have learned for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because not all those who have studied that art are capable of doing this.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the nerve is rectangular when you pierce the bone, then take linen according to the size of the wound, immerse it in rose oil and place it over the opening of the wound; and take another linen folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first linen gently but not too hard on the nerve; and administer a mild lint ointment over it and do not press it except to the extent that the wound requires.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that in this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess forming; and then remove it and administer medications that are excessive dryness, such as linen rind and barley flour, and powdered alum and arsenic, and similar to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make powders of these medications that are powdered over the wound, such as dry ones; and in general, administer all the medicine of properties that absorb and do not cause pain.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Keep in mind that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and it should not be contaminated with linseed oil or any other substance; nor should you leave it to become infected; because when it is pressed against the nerve of the brain, it corrodes it and poisons it, and causes evil on the patient with malicious intent.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And when a tumor occurs at the skull's base, when the bone is modified and especially when its treatment begins, and it turns black on its surface; then consider whether the patient experiences the symptoms we mentioned, know that this is dangerous in all respects.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness does not occur due to the medicine that is paused, but it is due to the nature of the medicine that causes the blackness, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of oil. and apply those lines on a cloth and place it over the skull; and apply care with the appropriate medicinal herbs until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken in the nose, but rather two fractures together, or one of them is visible, because there are two bones in it, and the fracture is cartilaginous, so it is not broken and does not occur there, but rather an attrition, a curvature, and a narrowing.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert the small finger into the nose and grasp that fracture with your finger, and push it inward, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Do this for your convenience, but be careful not to harm the patient in the process.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the superior part of the nose, and it protrudes there, then you must align it with the end of the bone where there is a slight swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, you must perform the same procedure.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Try to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, apply caution for the seventh or tenth day after the abscess has healed.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Place a pad of cloth at the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or place two cotton swabs if the fracture is in two parts, and fill the cavity of the nose with enough cotton to block it.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some of the old restorers say that cotton should be wrapped in linen and kept tied for all days, but I do not see this; rather, the cotton must be wrapped in alum-water with ground powder; and keep it there until the bone is healed and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, insert a piece of soft lambskin into the nose instead of cotton, as it may be difficult to place cotton because it is wrapped in cloth; and this is if the fracture of the nose is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing through it.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This method is not necessary for you; and if you wish to do so, perform the procedure, and if you wish to use cotton, use it.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs, fill the nose with cherry or almond oil infused in vinegar and olive oil, or with egg yolk.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no abscess, you must fill it with soda flour and ground cinnamon mixed with alum water, and place a piece of soft lambskin over it, and do not let the nose come into contact with anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted fracture, then you must saw through them, extract those pieces with the appropriate instruments; and sew up the wound, and care for it with what strengthens and consolidates it, and apply the appropriate ointments.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound occurs inside the nose, you must care for it with cotton and administer lead cannula until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	If the lower jaw is broken but the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, then consider whether the fracture is only on the outside and is not broken in two and curved towards the inside, its treatment is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is in the right part, you must insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left mandible, then insert the right index finger; and push gently with that finger toward the inner side of the fracture to facilitate the separation of the broken parts from within, and with your other hand outside of the bone, you should also separate the broken pieces evenly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of both parts according to right angle until possible alignment is achieved.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is a loosening or disruption of teeth, you should strengthen the ones that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or suture thread; and place cotton on the broken jaw, and double cotton, and a large sterile gauze piece properly made, or a single piece of sola equal to the length of the jaw; and bind it as appropriate according to your ability to apply the binding, until it is no longer destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and eat sweet lemons.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then examine and remove it on the third day; and correct what has already been altered and apply it with powder of milled pearl, egg white or rice flour, as you will have removed the cotton from it, and place over the applied linen a piece of lion wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when the plaster is attached and adjusted on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, as it should not be removed until healed and strengthened; for most often this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another swelling appears as an abscess, administer what was mentioned earlier in its treatment until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is with a wound, consider if it is a separated bone or a splinter; then carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing them from the wound using instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the orifices of the wound are narrow, you should enlarge them with a flebotome according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed the splinters and there is no pus remaining, you should close the large orifices of the wound; and if it is small, place one of the dressings that is appropriate for it and apply a dressing to it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capital V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Most often, the clavicle is broken at the midsection through the muscle, and that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, separated or split into two parts without splinters, it is easier to restore; or it is such that there are splinters present and difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two assistants present; one should support and hold the broken clavicle while the other extends the neck on that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And align the fracture with your thumbs until its form is restored according to what is necessary, and neither protrude nor concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If additional extension is needed, then you must support the patient's head with a cloth or wool and its size according to your need; extend and raise the clavicle and hold it in place with your hand until you align the fracture as necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the clavicle to the outside parts, because it is blocked by a protrusion, then the patient should be reclined on his neck; and place one hand in the middle-sized size on the muscle there.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle on that side towards the outside until the end of the clavicle is raised above the protrusion and then you correct the fracture and align it with your thumbs.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters in the clavicle and they are harmful, then it is necessary to break and remove those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is held in the bone, then you must make an incision in it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, as you have placed the chisel under the clavicle; and this tool has a wooden or iron handle, which takes the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And is similar to the shape of a cauldron's concavity; and its width should be according to what you need for it, depending on the size of the bone or the depth of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; as it often has two ends, one end should be large and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide and you are sure of an abscess, then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the rupture is small, or you fear an abscess, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's cut.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If an abscess is feared, then you pour boiling vinegar and rose oil onto it and leave it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	For a bone fracture with an open and gaping wound, place a plaster made of milled flour and egg white over it and leave it to stop the bleeding. Then wrap a long, thin splint of soft wood around the wound and the fractured area. Wrap the splint in cloth and tie it in place with string, if necessary, and apply warm humidity as needed to the splint and the patient's hand and the patient's affected area. Gradually lower and release the patient's hand and their hand's movement, and ensure that the fracture does not close again and remains exposed.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And be careful that the splint does not harm the fractured bone; and for this reason, you must check the patient daily to see if their pain is lessening or if the splint needs to be removed. When the wound has healed, then you should reset the fracture and strengthen the cast.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The author advises placing the patient's head on their chest and keeping them awake for a short while to elevate the affected area and help raise the shoulders, which in turn raises the fracture of the collarbone to a higher position. Alternatively, the arms can be tied to the patient's neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the dressing unless there is pus or pressure buildup within the first twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	The author advises renewing the plaster if you see any signs of infection or poor healing and making any necessary adjustments to ensure proper alignment and healing of the collarbone fracture. Leave it in place until the fracture has healed completely and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	The fracture should be strengthened and supported for a period of 28 days, with some men requiring additional time to heal during this period.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the repair of shoulder fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is fractured at its wide end and not at the narrow tip.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And since the location of the fracture is not visible, it must be diagnosed by touch. Therefore, prepare for the type of fracture and reduce it according to its natural shape in any way that is possible using your ingenuity.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a cushion of fine powder made from milled alum and hull, stop the wound with lion's wool; then place a double-layered powder cushion; then place a cushion on the steel rod of a fine table according to the amount of the whole spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the rod is concave at any of the places on the spatula, then you fill up that concavity with lion's wool, and adjust the rod to be level.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then apply strong and warm liniment along with a suitable constriction and secure the rod firmly into its place so that it is not protruding from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the liniment daily; and whenever it is softened, apply another layer and adjust the rod if it is protruding from its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And be careful not to press down on the patient's wound.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is healed in 20 days or 35 days (depending on the individual's condition).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this period is completed, you dissolve the liniment, and be certain that the bones from which it began will not be feared or their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If the bone protrudes from the location and you remove the bandage, then you break it, take it out, and proceed as described in the treatment for a broken furculum or an abscess cauterized with care.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of broken bones (in the foot). This text appears to be continuing or starting anew, as the previous treatise seems to have ended abruptly. It discusses the healing of a broken bone in the foot, but without further context it is difficult to determine the specific method or treatment being described.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but the ends move and become twisted or crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the middle of the foot is broken, it often descends into compartments and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, headache, and vomiting; and it becomes visible within the fracture cavity and cannot be hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the foot is to place the patient on their back, placing a cushion between their shoulders; then pressing the muscles and adjusting the costal arches with the hands so that they are level with each other, being careful in the operation and alignment according to all possible means and what is appropriate, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place an adhesive and stopper, and place a thin steel rod of willow or poplar on top of the fractured bone, making sure it is level; then wrap that with fabric; be careful not to injure the surrounding tissues as you apply the adhesive; make regular checks on the alignment, tightening it appropriately; consider the alignment at all times, and when it becomes softened, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, you may need to perform an incision or drainage of the affected area if pain, abscess, or inflammation occurs there, then cauterize and remove that tissue and correct any problems caused by it using methods of healing; be sure to remove the adhesive, if needed, and tighten it appropriately until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of fractured ribs. This text appears to discuss a treatment for fractures in the ribcage area, but without further context it is difficult to determine the specific method or technique being described.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that rib fractures do not occur in thin locations, but rather at the junctions of the two ribs; and from the ends of the junction near the front, there is no contraction but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And do not hide this knowledge from sensation; make an examination of it using the senses (touch, sight, etc.).
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration is to fill the fracture using the senses as possible, until it is healed; then apply adhesive and tighten the broken bone with a steel rod if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture descends into compartments, this causes severe pain for the patient and requires puncturing, as with puncturing for pleurisy; then cover the bone with a dressing; and this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The Ancients were very clever in treating this condition with many ingenious methods. This statement suggests that there have been advanced techniques for treating medical conditions, specifically the one just described (fractured ribs), throughout history. It also implies that modern medicine has continued to build upon these ancient methods to develop more effective treatments and solutions.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And as they said: it is necessary to restrict the food intake of the patient to prevent inflammation and bloating, so that the abdomen is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed out towards the compartments. This statement suggests that dietary restrictions can help alleviate certain medical conditions by reducing inflammation and allowing for better treatment access, such as in the case of a fractured rib.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should avoid causing abscesses through cauterization if possible, unless it is necessary; and if it does occur, address it immediately. This statement suggests a cautious approach to the use of cauterization as a medical treatment, acknowledging that it can potentially cause complications such as abscesses but emphasizing the importance of addressing these complications quickly when they do arise.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Some of them said to avoid wind and sucking, and it is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will draw excess fluids to the affected area due to weakness. This statement suggests a concern for the potential negative effects of certain actions or practices on medical conditions, such as drawing excess fluid to an injured or diseased area, which could exacerbate symptoms and delay healing. It also implies the importance of considering the underlying causes of a medical condition when developing a treatment plan.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And one of them said: Cover the place with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, let the linen be rolled as round as possible; and treat the patient with a treatment of pleurisy from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient feels intense constriction and cannot bear it, pierce the skin with a sharp instrument at that location, be careful around the patient, then we must cut open the place, reveal the broken rib, and cover that instrument which contains the splinter (a term used previously), remember its recall, and make incisions in the bone to facilitate extraction.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then we adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large, stitch them with suture, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If an abscess occurs inside (the body), then you should press and apply warm poultices on the area until the patient is healed from the inside abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be placed supine (on the back) on the bed until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck or the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	If something happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, consider this: if their hands feel softened, numb, and dead, and you cannot make them move or strengthen them by pulling on them or pricking them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that they are not healing, and in most cases it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If they feel contraction and pain in those areas when pulled or pricked, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see vertebrae in the neck similar to that and want to know if they will heal or not, consider their weight (size).
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If they are already softened and you see something that happened in the muscles (surrounding tissues), and when you press on their back it produces wind or stool involuntarily, and sometimes is placed supine on their back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and do not waste time with the treatment of such cases.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no such cause occurs, the prognosis is better and easier.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment is to perform the evacuation of the abscess by applying a hot oil cautery or poultices with mustard seeds on the swollen vertebrae, and apply it for several days until the abscess is drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Afterwards, apply a comforting and soothing poultice and strengthen it with linen; and tell the patient to rest, have peace of mind, not sleep on the affected side until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to perform the removal of the affected bone or any known cause that has been separated from it, we must saw the bone and remove it; then adjust the two lips of the wound, using suture if it is large; and treat it with a soothing salve made from ointments until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the posterior part of the bone is fractured and it is at the end of the coccyx, we must insert our left hand into the anus and move the fractured bone with the right hand as possible by equalizing; then apply a poultice and splint to it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel fractured vertebrae in the spine, we must perform an opening on that area, remove them, and treat the wound with the prescribed treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus sometimes get broken, and if they break, their fracture is nothing more than a rupture in the extremities and are inserted into the length and slope toward the internal parts; and the patient feels pain at that location and the anus becomes numb when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of it (the patient) is that you extend your hand over the entrance which is above the fracture, its figure (shape).
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is in the extremity (limb) of it alone, then you press that [part] according to what appears suitable to you by means of splinting inside, which resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or that descends toward the joints below, then you make the patient lie on their stomach to prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have splinted that [part], place plaster over it and apply pressure to the wooden or metal splint, and tighten by compression on the area where you do not fear perforation of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Splint the concave area with something that fills it so that the splint takes the same shape, and tell the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess cauterization occurs, you cease extending and restoring it until the abscess cauterization subsides, and place something over it as directed; then return to restoring it, and tighten it as appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If this happens in the bones that are set or shattered, you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the dislocated joint fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The dislocated joint is that which is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the restoration of it (the dislocated joint) is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a long flat wooden splint of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And they are attached at both ends with ligaments, and it should be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And the patient follows over a seat; and the broken arm is thrown out over the splint to reach the end of it in the middle of the location where the curve of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it for some serious reason or let the minister extend it towards the lower parts; and the doctor and his assistants hold the fracture with their hands until the fracture returns as appropriate.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the patient lies on their back with their neck extended and holds their arm above the fracture with a band; and you command two assistants, one of whom holds something over the fracture with their hands; and the other holds the swelling below it; and each extends to their respective sides.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten over the fracture with a band and over it with another band, and each of the two assistants extends to their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, you must stop halfway along the band over the joint and the other part of the band below the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is near the collarbone, you must stop halfway along the band at that location and at the collarbone.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Splint the dislocated joint with ease and without trouble, and once it is splinted according to what is appropriate and applied well, tighten it if there is no abscess cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess cauterization occurs, you should loosen the splint for up to seven days and place linen soaked in warm vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then tighten it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of tightening the splint is to place plaster over the fracture and then cover it with a linen wrap; and adjust the arm above the dislocated joint, and place a cushion under the patient's muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Place the linen and tighten over the dislocated joint the arm to keep it in place without any obstacles due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Use splints (wooden or metal).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	You should place the splint over the fracture that is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place a gap between each splint equal to the width of the finger, and the length of the splints according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Approach strongly upon the stars with the constriction that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your constriction on the location of the fracture be made stronger.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as much as the fracture has healed, the constriction should be reduced.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, when the patient's condition of the stars and the constriction are as we said at the time you restore the member to its proper position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, leave the constriction and stars until the seventh day as we said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the salve on all parts for three days, so that it does not happen in the affected area pain or inflammation; or food is forbidden to reach the member due to excess of constriction; and thus correct everything as we said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that no cause of this arises, do not unbind the ligature before three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Place a cushion full of wool soaked in vinegar over the broken limb, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not to be unbound or dissolved; or the ligament is softened, thus correct everything with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Restrict the patient's food according to the order we gave earlier, so that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and thus coarse up their food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Since it is customary for the cushion and the mat of him to be strengthened for forty days; and thus they must be unbound and bathed, and treated with poultices that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is very deep, you do not unbind that ligament and the stars for up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones that are called the ulna and radius; one is small, which is referred to as the lower bone, and the other is large and is called the lower ulna, located below the lower bone.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger bone is broken or if both are broken.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the lower bone is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the upper bone is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Worse yet if both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the lower bone is broken above, it is appropriate for the doctor to wait a small extension with ease before binding it.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is broken, you must wait a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both bones are broken, you must wait for a less forceful reduction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	You must bind the hand of the arm, restore it and extend it on a cushion, and place the thumb above, as we have said earlier, and the auricular is lower than the others, and the patient lies down on a chair with a backrest.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Place a cushion in front of him at his height or incline, so that the patient does not suffer labor.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And extend the arm from below with your hand or ligament, and another servant extends it above in the same way.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And bind the bone until it reduces as well as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the fracture of the bone there are shards, you must remove everything from its location with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If a shard appears separated that penetrates the skin and is not in your hope for its restoration, you must perform surgery on it and remove it as we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with a wound, we have already dealt with that in a separate chapter, so take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, you line up a cloth with a lining made of rose oil and white wax, medium thickness and strength, and apply strong wrapping over it with subtle constriction until the abscess subsides; then remove the lining and place a paste prepared from powdered crushed walnut shells and clay of huou, and cover the stars; and let the star that is placed above the fracture be larger and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Know that the number of stars in the arm is usually in the major positions, or the fracture in one bone or in two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And apply your constriction on the location of the fracture forcefully and vigorously, and when more extension is required above or below the fracture, reduce the constriction slightly as remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or harsh, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between subtle and coarse as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as a swelling occurring in a member, and then it becomes necessary to immerse the member in warm water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Leave the member unrestrained until it returns to its normal state, and then restore the affected area.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the swelling has become soft and the bone has been restored to its natural state, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive swelling, then it becomes necessary to soften it slightly and allow it to rest for several days until the nutrition reaches it again, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not experience any of those mentioned causes, there is no need to keep him bedridden for more than approximately twenty days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Suspend the hand of the patient using your skill to prevent it from moving too much, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or sixty days, or less in twenty-eight days, depending on the complications and the doctor's expertise.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a finger or thumb fracture.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that when the joint of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers break, it is not immediately apparent, but rather slow movement indicates it.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand or finger is fractured or sprained, it becomes necessary that the patient remain in a horizontal position and raise his arm so that it hangs evenly, and place a cushion under it to support it.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them well with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply plaster and padding, unless there is an abscess caution required; place a probe over it according to the size of the wound, and you have already covered it with linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is inside the palm, make a bandage-like covering, and command the patient to tighten it with his injured hand; secure it with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the probe of wool with fabric in which there is a handle to apply it to the palm; tighten it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is outside the palm, then place a probe and another probe from the back of the hand on the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; then bind it with bandages as usual by wrapping the hand between the fingers with linen cloth.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of the fingers, if it is a swollen joint, align it as necessary and secure it to the palm; if you wish, place a small straight probe under it to raise the fracture and prevent it from becoming worse.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as at the base or the index finger, or the ear (auricular) or annular bone, it should be aligned and laid with the appropriate digit; or if all are injured, they should all be treated together, which is better; or place a small probe over it, as mentioned earlier in the swelling.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider, in your restoration, the position of abscess caution and opposing it with the appropriate procedure, as well as what is necessary when any of those mentioned causes occur, according to the repetition of the narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a femur bone fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thighbone, when swollen and felt through the skin, is broken and detected by touch where there is pain and swelling above it.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is done by tightening the bandages over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister extends all the bandages to the side where the fracture is located in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is suspected that the thighbone has been broken, the bandages should be placed close to the groin on the side of the injury, so that the extension stretches upward, and another bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is suspected to be at the hip, make the bandage close to the groin and extend it towards the sides.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor aligns the bone with both hands until it returns to its normal position and the bones are joined well; then bind it with plaster and bandages, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If an abscess occurs, leave it alone for several days until the abscess cauterization is complete, and then return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging of it should be done as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it over two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap it around the knee to reach the ankle and the groin area.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long file between the thigh and the knee on the side of the injury, allowing its ends to protrude from the swollen area on both sides; then rotate it around the knee and thigh so that any excess bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Approximately place a cushion on the thigh at the location of that fracture, and place one stick over the bones of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Approximately apply cloths heavily to the area between the thigh and the leg, in order that the extrusion may be coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	E aprop commencez avec une compression forte du ligament sur l'emplacement de la fracture avec trois à quatre enveloppes ; et plus vous vous éloignez de l'endroit de la fracture, votre compression sera moins dure, plus légère et plus mouillée.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	E aprop étirez les deux extrémités du filet à partir des articulations inférieures jusqu'à la cheville, et resserrez toutes les extrémités des éclats de l'autre côté pour que le ligament ne soit pas déplacé de son emplacement.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	E aprop laissez la compression sur lui, de manière qu'il n'atteigne pas le membre corrosionné, ni l'éboulement, ni l'empaquetage chirurgical, et semblable à cela ; et si quelque chose de ce genre survient, alors coupe-le promptement, rectifiez ce qui se produit tout près de lui, suivant ce que vous avez dit précédemment.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Mais si la blessure pénètre dans l'os, alors il est nécessaire de vous y refermer selon ce qui est possible ; sinon, fendez-le et retirez-le, puis soignez-le avec ce dont la remémoration suit précédemment jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Et certaines fois cette fracture de la cuisse est plus grave que celles qui sont adaptées aux jambes, comme vous l'avez dit précédemment dans le supplément et le bras.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Mais sauf à éviter une paralysie du malade dans cette méthode de guérison, si seule la restauration est réalisée sans application de l'autre jambe, il sera nécessaire que celui qui a été restauré ait un claudication constante.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the wound will heal in 40 days or a little more than a month or a little over a month, and this is all according to the complexity and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	Here is the continuation of the translation:
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Here is the continuation of the translation:
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a break in the radius of the thumb often heals slowly, but it frequently occurs more in elderly people.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the break occurs, it should not be left untreated, but rather sutured or splinted, and that is a wound or multiple wounds, and over that it must be treated with care.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The healing process consists of immobilizing that which is broken in the limb, and bringing it into proper alignment as much as possible by traction, ease, and materials.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And apply plaster and press down on that round stone if necessary; and strengthen it with a bandage as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions that have been recommended in other fractures, such as applying a poultice and similar substances opposite to all accidents as appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the healing of the fracture of the thigh bone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh bone there are two bones of which one is large and is called the femur; and the other is slender, and is called the shaft.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And the types of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm are treated similarly to the healing of the arm and the surgical treatment is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the thigh bone is shattered into pieces.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the slender bone is broken, the thigh bone is shattered in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, it breaks backwards and is one of those causes that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension, traction, and ligature of the tendons as appropriate.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh bone is a fresh one with few complications, the extension should be less and more gentle, and relax it with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the thigh bone there is one cause for surgical treatment of the arm, and that is when you transect the tendons and complete the entire operation, then you will take pieces of pine wood which are placed on the soles, and they are made similarly to branches of palm; place them on those with minor swelling, and not too large, and the length of these according to the length of the thigh bone from the thumb to the toes.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And cover each piece with a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one over the fracture of the thigh bone on one side and the other over the fracture of the other side, and they should be from the thumb to the toes at the lower end of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two tendons in three places at both ends and in the middle, because with this fixation the thigh bone is prevented from closing on the right and left sides, and it is a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And apply a splint of wood according to the length of the thigh bone; it should be placed where the thigh bone is allowed to move.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Moreover, it is necessary that you do this in a fracture and when the wound is properly infected.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the thigh bone every day and study it further, and protect it from inflammation or swelling or other similar causes; and when any of these occur, oppose yourself to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A fracture does not occur in the whole ankle, but certain fractures happen in the foot bones, and only rarely does a fracture occur in the toes of the foot, and this is not common in their setting.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and these bones are sometimes raised up between them, then the patient should rest his foot on the ground prepared in this way as he walks.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on what is raised from those bones and press, and step, and hold it until it returns to its place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and below the foot of the patient place a small table with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen it with the foot in a downward direction, since you have wrapped it up with cloth and other means that are needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, you should undo the binding, because you will find that the bones are bound, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on these is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are broken, you should restore these, and bind them as I show you and recommend to you in the repair of hand toes.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken digit on a ruler according to the length of the digit, and the other end of it should be slightly inclined; and below the foot, place this table that has been recommended to you, and strengthen it with a downward structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken among the bones are two or three or more, you should place each digit on a ruler covered with leather according to its size, and strengthen the table at the lower end of the foot, and stand it upright over one of the table's surfaces away from the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that I have said, and prepare yourself for any accident with what is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the hip in women and the pelvis bone and the penis bone in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip of a woman is broken, you should cause it to lie down with the leg in an extended position, and incline it slightly towards the side, and keep it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife should fill the broken hip with cotton, and do it in such a way as she can; and the woman should be shaken, and raise her pelvis slightly from one side to the other until it is in front of the fracture, and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powder on the side of it, and when she wants to urinate, let her lower the crotch with ease and urinate, and reduce and return it according to the method by which you set it initially, and then return the pelvis to its original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or until it is healed, because it will heal.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and strengthen it with a cane tube over the fracture; and insert the entire bladder into the hip and inflate the tube with air until the bladder is inflated inside the hip, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with cotton and remain for as many days as I have recommended until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the penis bone in a man or woman is broken, you should administer to its repair and guidance what has been recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	What is correct should not be hidden in these near fractures and what little happens, especially to the one who has some study, experience, and understands this my book; because that fracture means a lot to you in greater dispositions regarding the repair and guidance of it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the penis of a man when it is broken, take alum, and put it on it; and place it over cloth covering, wrap it, and leave it for three days or until it heals, and it will be cured.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the repair of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for the one who has a fracture with an infection and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or forearm, or similar to it, that you cauterize and drain it immediately if the conditions for cauterization are present as I have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the pus flows blood, you should cover it in order to retain it until you powder it with lime and salt if there is no other reason.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And you should begin to repair the fracture on the first day itself, and do not delay it if there is no abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess forms cautiously, you should leave the repair of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is released, and do not approach it in the third or fourth days altogether, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes from the skin, you should forcefully reduce it and bind it with your hands with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared and the position of the patient is not with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take one of these three or four, depending on the quantity required in the treatment of any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Let it be round and let there be little swelling to avoid it being doubled over during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Let it be of sharp pointed end with a margin at its extremities; and let the top of it be thicker towards the sides and from there down to the joints.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means it is a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, the end of it should be cushioned and raised above the bone prominence to avoid any injury.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Push that into a position where the bone is returned and aligned with some position or another.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	So you must align the fracture's extremities with each other, and if the broken end is delicate, do not use the instrument for good reason; instead, you must incise the bone's extremity where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone with what we have recommended, then incise it using what we have mentioned as cutting instruments; or use one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Bring that which remains rough and small in the bone to light and smooth it.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced and the patient experiences severe pain gradually, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and therefore do what you can to give great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your treatment of the bone is complete and you are finished with the procedure, immerse a black stiff cloth in vinegar, and in summer especially, do not let the wound be touched by any oil or other cause that could lead to pus formation and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	You administer stitches at the time of your completion of the bone treatment, and leave the wound exposed so that you can incise it with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to injure the wound with the fracture, because many times foolish doctors have done such things, causing their patients' death or chronic illness, which is sinful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If her stricture is slight, soft and different from the stricture of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or bad, and you fear those evil accidents that we have mentioned, and experience pain in the area, then it is not necessary to use stitches, but instead apply a hard bandage where stitches were supposed to be and strengthen it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the wound starts to heal after one or two days, which is caused by a bruise, you should remove the cloth that you placed over it with vinegar, and provide warm compresses, according to our custom, we treat wounds using compresses like tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is necessary for you to remove the dressing and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and the limb should be prepared in such a way that pus flows from it towards the joints with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes many days without being consolidated or draining pus from it, then you should know that this is a sign of the infection and you must examine the wound carefully.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs that are separated and extracted, those that are not separated and make the limb swell and cause pain, force you to incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If pus or an infection occurs in the wound, it is a sign of corruption or putrefaction; then you should pause for a while until one of those signs that are mentioned earlier and whose treatment is described in its own chapter appears.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	Regarding that which requires the most attention and you should present your case: when a large bone is broken, place it above the limb like the bones of the hip and thigh, and do not attempt to attract or extract it because many times such attempts result in death; leave it until pus can be drained, since a weak person may die within 20-30 days. And you should take care of the wound if it is visible, and leave it alone if not.
Capitol .xx.	Title .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodules that occur in the traces of some fractures.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These nodules are often found in the traces of fracture healing, particularly at joints, and they are caused by the figure (shape) of the limb; and it strongly hinders the natural operation of the member.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the nodule is recent and administer medications that have astringent properties such as alum, wax, and mastic resin; or if necessary, compress them with one or more of these, and bind them with wax, oil, or vinegar and apply this to the nodule in a poultice, and firmly bind it so as to achieve good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Remove the poultice that does not loosen it for several days; then remove it and apply another one, until the nodule is removed; or strongly press on a lead plate firmly placed over the nodule, because lead has the property of causing everything that is inflated in the limbs to remain.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	However, if the nodule has already become hardened and requires frequent removal, then cut it along its most superior part, excise the excess and eminence, or remove it with sharp scissors until it is removed; and heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Title .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it has healed and bind the limb gently, not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has healed, bind the limb gently, but do not do so except for several reasons: one of which is the excessive loosening of the ligation and the ligature not being tightened according to its need; or because of excess tightness of the bandages before the nutriment is prohibited from flowing into the member; or because of excessive swelling in the bandages; or because of superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or due to a lack of blood flow in the patient's core and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Treatment for this is to feed the patient and make his heart tender before the blood is multiplied in him; administer baths, and give plenty of encouragement and comfort over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply a tight bandage to the limb so that it attracts less nourishment, or continue swelling of the limb with cold water, until the nourishment flows back to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Title .xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	In treatment of broken bones when restored incorrectly, prohibit the operation on them as much as possible.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the restored limb is delayed in healing due to irregularity or misalignment of the broken bone and nodules, and its shape is distorted, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it is not necessary for you to receive the word that the limb was newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Yet there are some mad doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly to be condemned as causing great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If recent swelling and nodules are present, then they must be sewn with boiling water in which softening herbs such as althea leaves and ragwort, marshmallow, and similar plants are placed; and it should be made into a plaster with plaster of meadow or olive oil, or a decoction of althea root and honey of galangal or camphor oil is prepared and applied; or figs with the flesh of pigeon eggs and similar medicines that are called "amermorce consolidation" are used.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent light rubbing that is with the wettest substances, and movement of the limb in all directions at all times is given.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the deformity has already gone ahead and is strong and has turned into a stone and necessitates treatment with iron, then it must be drained of pus and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved, and whatever surplus nodules from that member are superfluous must be removed from the bone with fine cutters, and ease should be administered to it by applying solicitude and diligence.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	On discourse in dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is essentially one of the joints in its place, which is prohibited from movement, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it must be treated as soon as possible by reduction, and the reduction should not be delayed because if it is delayed, the location becomes necrotic and the reduction of dislocation becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore it is not good or comfortable during the time of necrosis because many times brings spasms and prolonged pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, you must be prepared for the patient's flap surgery, and allow enough time to stop the necrosis; and place the limb in warm water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And let all members be cured by whatever remedy will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as they were mentioned in the chapter on fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On treatment of dislocation of the jawbone below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both mandibles are dislocated and not reduced immediately, the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are returned to their places with little movement, and are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and displaced, until they are softened at the joint junction, until saliva flows from the patient's mouth, which cannot be swallowed and cannot close its mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in its cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation is slight, then it can be reduced with the greatest care taken to avoid further damage.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and prolonged, reduction must be administered gently and not delayed for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The minister holds the head of the patient and enters his hand into the root of the dislocated jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or he enters both hands together, if the dislocation is of both parts, and the other hand remains outside to help guide it; and the minister orders the patient to stop moving its mandibles and allow them not to move from either side; and the minister guides the jawbone and covers it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jawbones are dislocated, administer evaporation with warm water and oil until the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both, as has been said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they return and are covered, the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, place them on a pillow of cotton with wax, made of wax and oil rubbed smooth; and cover it gently but firmly.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his side, and his head should be kept between two pillows to prevent it from moving either to the right or left; do not force him to masturbate for any reason; have food brought to him that is forbidden by lion, until the pain subsides and the jawbones are no longer swollen; then let him eat whatever he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered gently, and not force the opening of the mouth; it (the food) should be consumed and liquids drunk and sleep, until the jaw is immobilized and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they do not return to their places, then watchful waiting often leads to fevers and constant sweating, and the abdomen of the patient becomes bloated, and strong vomiting of pure bile occurs.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you should know that it is a disaster; and watchful waiting often causes the death of him who suffers from this in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capital .25 (in Roman numerals)
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the back by its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer joint, and this can be determined by examination.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of it (the clavicle) involves the patient lying on his back and extending his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And press the area with your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place a cushion over that wound and apply pressure and strength to it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of that bone which is continuous with the shoulder is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and fixed as I have said, and according to what you are equipped for.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place a cushion over that wound, apply pressure and compression, and instruct the patient to rest in tranquility until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capital .26 (in Roman numerals)
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the joint of the elbow to the wrist.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way is that it is dislocated at the joint above the muscle, and this is very serious; and it is not dislocated at the joints behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the joints in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	In addition, it is dislocated and protruded at the wrist joints in front, and this is serious; moreover, in those with little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it occurs in some men due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of him is removed with cauterization of an abscess, and it is healed where it has been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should find out what this is and only proceed if you are well equipped for it, and then you can proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The dislocation of it (the elbow) at the wrist joints is known; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there are clear differences among them; and you should locate the head of the muscle by feeling a concavity below the elbow, and on top of the head of the muscle, you should touch it like the end of a thumb, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to its auricle, nor can he move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated at the knee or above, you should find a clear touch, and it should not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation there is an easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of it (the elbow) is that the healer raises the hand above the joint and presses his thumbs below the elbow, and lifts the joint with force to its place, and the healer raises the hand, and extends it above; and presses it below so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return with the method described above, and the dislocation has just occurred, many days later, the patient should be bathed in hot water and a poultice made of comfrey, marshmallow root, and honey in water should be administered, like a poultice made from crushed althea leaves, fenugreek, and honey in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient should lie on his back and rest below the elbow, waiting for a bandage that is neither too loose nor too tight to be placed; and the healer should place his hand over the shoulder, lift the head of the muscle with force, and pull the patient's hand toward the wrist so that it does not move outward, and another healer should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved outward, for it will soon return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want to reduce it in this way: and this is that you have a man present who is taller than the patient, and stands on his side, and enters his muscle below the elbow of the patient and lifts the elbow of him up to the joint above until the patient is suspended in the air, and another healer pulls the patient's hand from the joints of the abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, it is necessary to suspend something else as a counterweight, in order to make it heavier, for the dislocation will soon return.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in the same way: and this is to place a long pole on the ground with its head rounded like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and have the patient rest below; then place a lion's skin cloth over the top of the pole, and the patient should stand according to the length of the pole, and extend his hand from the other side with force, for the joint will quickly return to its place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction [of the intestine or hernia] is difficult due to all the causes mentioned earlier, then use this remedy: take a rod whose length is two fists and its width four fingers, and reduce its thickness at the knob-like end in this manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then wrap a lion's skin cloth around the rounded head [of the rod] to protect the patient from being hurt.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Place the knob-like end at the patient's side and extend your hand or arm around the rod between the fingers, and bind the rod with ropes and hands and the end of the arm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place one arm over a step ladder according to its width, extend the other arm to the sides, and fasten it to the opposite side to join them quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the interior [of the intestine or hernia] is completely filled in any way possible for you, then place a woolen sponge soaked in a mixture of ground alum and hulled oats over the entire muscle, turning it around as needed; strengthen the knob-like end with a suitable tightening, wrap the ligament over the paste, and bind the hand to the patient's neck, leave it there, and do not injure the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It is necessary to limit the diet of the patient little by little until the member [intestine or hernia] is comfortable, as it promotes healing quickly.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And give the patient more food little by little and exercise movement; if it is stopped and does not become softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint [intestine or hernia] is dislocated multiple times due to moisture that happens to it or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three strokes, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and the ligament and joint are not tied for seven days, and the paste and tightening have been reduced several times without success and cannot lift the arm to the sides above, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or stretched or softened, and you know that the joint will never be properly set in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that [intestine or hernia], you must press on the feet and the breast or the sides behind it, and the reduction is done with impulse and extension until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another tightening is administered to it, and cure that [intestine or hernia] until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is serious illness or delay in the movement of the member [intestine or hernia], then have the patient use baths several times until the illness subsides and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and it returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by covering or touching it according to any figure, and when you adjust the displaced shoulder, it is declared clearly that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch the muscle with it.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms, because if an abscess forms, reducing it is difficult, and the healing is slow; especially when it is at the back, because all other types of dislocations are worse and more painful, and many days can lead to death from that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration [of the shoulder] when it is possible to reduce it, is that your hand should be extended over two more, and the arm of it should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the shoulder and under it, and he pushes the joint with his knuckles or the back of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns by bending the hand towards your palm and striking the shoulder with the back of your hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Two servants should extend the arm, and another two should hold it so that it is not stretched too much during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then turn the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped with doubled cloth or rope around the hand of it.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, oil it to facilitate lubrication and movement, then push the joint with strong force until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And for the reduction of it, it is necessary to place it on a paste made with alum and hulled oats, strengthening it with tightening and wrapping it tightly; then lift the arm from the neck and leave it for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if the joint has formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see that the joint is not stronger, then you apply the plaster and ointment, and leave it for some days until it is strengthened; and release it (the bandage) afterwards.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If there is a need for the reduction of the joint, and its condition is moving, then administer humectation in baths and subtle friction, and compression (bandage), until it is relieved; or apply ointment to the inflamed joint, so that it may rest on the bones for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove that (bandage), and immerse it in water; when it has softened, then you scour the joint with tempered friction, and apply ointment over the inflamed area, which is a cough, once, twice, and thrice,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred within the intestine after bathing, until it becomes limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a damp and warm pad over the wound and bind it tightly around it; do this several times, as the wound is wet and will return to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder (joint between arm and hand)
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder joint of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, while the contrary is true for other joints; however, speed in the reduction of it at the time of the dislocation is necessary, before it is dislocated or a dislocation caution is applied.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's hand on a table and extend their arm, then place your hand or palm over the joint, and push it back into its position until it returns to its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been placed on the stomach of the hand; in that case, the patient should place their two hands on a table for both extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceded by the hand, then the position of the hand of the patient should be intrinsically placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand may come over the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, you should strengthen it with plaster and allow it to rest; do not apply any more ointment or heat, as it may cause pain or prevent the reduction of the dislocation for several days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may remain crooked; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but make their hand soft and not strong enough to exert any force; then know that the nerves are cut or crushed, and do not be hasty in healing it, but rather strengthen it with a pointed cautery for its recovery and confer no cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the shoulder is returned, you should place it on the plaster which has been recommended, and allow it to rest and strengthen for seven days; then release it, let it rest again, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the motion is impeded and there are any complications, then alleviate it with warm water and gentle friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Fingers are sometimes dislocated at various places.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When one finger is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the middle, then hold it and push the dislocation back into its position until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the finger's head, and suspend the affected area, allowing it to rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Suspend the finger and stretch it until it is straightened on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night comes, follow that order, and do not cease to release it during the day and exercise it with motion, and lay it down at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist of the hand, and lay it down at that side and perform the first operation on it, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do as when it is dislocated in other places.
Capitol .xxx.	Here starts capital thirty.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spine bones in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the spine or neck bones are completely dislocated and more than two vertebrae are moved from their places, there is no cure for that, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's bowel movement is outside their control and they cannot retain it; and many times some limbs or both legs or one arm, or even one vertebra is moved from its place, because many times it is moved and many times it is made to move to four different directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has already been dislocated in the back and is called scoliosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of it is whether it occurs in childhood, because in that case there is neither cure nor healing of everything.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which occurs by accident or by impact or similar to those, the ancients have already spoken at length about the methods of treatment; but I will abbreviate it from that which has a little excuse for its excessive length, because I want to present and form it with different instruments than the one which I will explain and expand upon.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in scoliosis which occurs in the front of the legs, it is not remedy nor healing for it; and similarly in one that occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only that one which occurs in the back itself with what I will recommend is cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should be extended flat on their back, facing a wall, and should be supported below to prevent pressure on their legs.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end near their head, and another stick in front of them to support their feet at the other end.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The attendant should hold the stick, not being anchored in a hole; and another attendant should hold the other in the same way.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient with a cloth and tighten it firmly with a bandage; extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is near their head, and tie it there; and strongly apply another bandage around their waist and hips, under their chest, and adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Approach the minister and extend the linen to the division of the trunk, but do not allow the two trunks and the linens in their places where they are inserted, but rather loosen them slightly.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places his hands on the spine with strength until it returns, or places a board on top of it and adjusts his feet on the board until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this manner, then take a board whose length or width is three feet, and dig a hole in the wall next to the patient, into which you insert the end of the board.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the edge of the board on the spine and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and exert pressure until the spine is bent and returns to its location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, turn the patient's head to your hand; and you should place his heels at the end of two trunks, whose length is one forearm each, and his head similarly at the end of two other trunks, with a space between them that is a palm for each trunk. Then make a hole in each trunk and secure it firmly to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Make one trunk round and place it on top of the two trunks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole through which the trunk is formed, with a length of one palm and a circle around it. And the other two trunks are similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the linens that you have stretched on the feet of the patient in the hole where the head is to be placed, and the linens that you have stretched on the thighs of the patient in the ring where the legs are to be placed.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then each turn should have a servant who turns the ring with his hand, and the doctor should insert the spine as stated.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the ring:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Once the spine is returned and the location is covered, it is necessary to place compresses made of thick plaster with albumen from eggs and stopper, and to place a board over the plaster, whose width is three fingers or more around that area, and the length is the same as the size of the swelling, and on top of the spine's location.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And use the linens that were mentioned earlier for nourishment until the patient is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there remains any danger in the location at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe it for a long time with the administration of the board, which we have recommended; and already a layer of lead has been applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes there is danger in the lower end of the spinal column due to dislocation; and it is cautioned for that reason that this medicine should not be applied quickly to it because it can lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not dislocate but only displace, and this does not happen to those joints that dislocate slightly and are concave.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the pelvis is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated internally or externally, anteriorly or posteriorly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And moreover, it is dislocated internally and rarely anteriorly or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When the dislocation of the joint at the hip is suspected, since you adjust the patient's healthy leg next to the affected one, it becomes longer and the affected leg is more prominent than the healthy one, and the affected leg cannot bend; therefore, it should be straightened, and it is the place where you should apply a cauterized cautery incision, so that the head of the dislocation has been reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation which occurs at the hip is that the symptoms opposite to this accident occur there.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation at the front of the hip is when the leg becomes extended according to its nature, but does not bend due to pain that is on the inside, and if it is forced to be moved and cannot move inwardly; and the urine is retained and the incision is cauterized, and you should walk with it on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation at the back of the hip is that the inside does not expand, nor can it bend outward which bends the incision, and the leg becomes shorter than the other, and the incision becomes soft, and the head of the dislocation should be there.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of these types of dislocations depends on your consideration, if the dislocation is old and longstanding, which has already been treated with approximation, then it is not in its cure; and therefore, there should be no expectation for improvement.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of a recent dislocation and one of the four types of dislocations, then you should aim to bring the joint together and extend it outwardly on both sides, with the right and left, for a strong pull returns and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare and apply strong treatment and extend the leg from the lower part or with the aid of a lever that is tied above the dislocation; and another assistant should extend the hand above it so that his fingers reach the end of it; and apply pressure firmly on the ligament above the incision, and have another assistant hold the end of the ligament tightly.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension should be either from the inside of the leg to the incision at the groin, or from the back of the leg to the end of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension of all these should be performed in one move while the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; and if not, it is necessary for all types to follow what I will say about its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is at the inside parts, it is necessary that the patient lies down on their back; and place the ligaments on the incision in the location between the head of the dislocation and the lower part where the incision is to be straightened; and extend the ligament above the area of the groin to the most advanced part of the spine.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And have another assistant hold the arms of the patient tightly, and grip the large head of the dislocated joint firmly and extend it outwardly by forceful extension, for it will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is easier cure than the other types with which this member is reduced.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused and you do not obey this type of treatment for all, then it is necessary to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong, light ligament around both ankles and both soles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be four fingers, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And have the patient suspended over the post, with their head upward; and let the length of them from the ground be two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to press down on the head of the dislocation, and have another young man support the patient, and the other young man should press firmly on the joint with strong force, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of its own, when it is a dislocation on the outside parts, it is necessary for the patient to walk with crutches as recommended earlier; and tighten the ligament firmly on the affected leg and on the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And pause two posts, one on the feet and the other on the head; and pause ropes attached to the middle of each post, which damp cloths should be wrapped around, so that the patient is not hurt because the post is between their legs, and so that the extension outwardly is not restricted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each assistant should extend to their respective part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey this in reverse, it will be very good; and if not, pause over it carefully and do as I said earlier for guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	It is necessary that the patient walks with crutches.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when dislocation occurs at the hips, it is necessary that the leg be gently extended, and according to this account on hip; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected hip, and with the other hand he presses that one, and with that pressure he holds the dislocated hip back towards the opposite hip.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if dislocation occurs at the hips behind, it is not necessary that the patient be extended towards the back and raised above the ground; rather, it must be held in place on a hard surface, just as it should be held if the groin is dislocated to the outside of the hips, as we have said earlier about the treatment of such cases. And it must be on its face and the limbs extended, according to what we have said, there is no improvement.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	It is necessary to apply a compression with a board to the joint area.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, as the reduction is complex, as the sign for reduction of that joint is not hidden from you (you spread the patient's legs) and when you see the groins contracted and the patient extends their leg and expands it without excuse, then you know which member needs to be returned - and then you adjust two cushions and pack it with bandages so that the groin is not damaged in any part; and you keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the bandages and the packing, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see that the groins are aligned properly, then you know that the dislocation is now closed, and at that point you can let the patient move about.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any sign of swelling, then return and pack it, and extend it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then unbind that one, and make him walk slowly on crutches for several days until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of hip dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The hip can be dislocated in three ways: to the outside, to the inside, more towards the back than the front; but it is not dislocated to the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign for hip dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply pressure to their thigh, and then you know that the hip is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the treatment for all types of dislocation is to position the patient correctly, so that they extend their leg if possible, place your hands on the side of it, and hold the foot between your feet; and bring the hip towards you with both hands and hold it in place firmly, and another person extend the foot until the hip returns to its proper position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign for reduction of dislocation is that the leg adheres to the thigh without laborious effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then pack that one and make the leg adhere to the thigh with bandages for three or four days, and then unbind it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction is difficult for you, then administer strong traction with the bandages as described in the treatment of the groin that was mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to complications, and the dislocation of it is made either towards the inside or outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign for dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen in the direction towards which it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for reduction is gentle, and it should be extended easily with both hands and held in place until it returns to its proper position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of ankle dislocation due to complications, it is necessary that the patient be positioned correctly, and have a strong and capable person from behind the foot on the same side of the dislocation.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place your right hand on the upper part of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the area of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and pull it again with your left hand for two steps, and extend it with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand towards the leg without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as they have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then you push the feet of the patient to the bed on the third observation, and you are at the foot-end.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If it returns in one observation or two according to this method, and if the foot appears swollen, that is good; but if not, you continue with the operation, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction of it is forbidden as they have recommended, then you place the patient on his back on the ground, spread a cloth on the ground and let him lie between his legs, and you are already wrapped around him with a cloth so that you do not hurt the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the one in charge of him should hold his legs, and another minister should stretch the foot with his hands or as he lies on the neck of the foot; and each minister should extend their arms opposite to the extension of the patient's leg, and the cloth should be placed between the patient's legs to keep the body from being pulled apart at the sides, so that its extension is not torn.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor grasps the dislocation with both hands, and another minister holds the healthy limb apart, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and the reduction of it is declared to you as good, then you stop plastering and tightly bind the foot on the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful or protect yourself from the nerves that are behind the heel, because the binding should not be violent and hurt it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two days or three; and if the binding is softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then unbind it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he must go before that space, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and this will not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If an abscess is formed by cautery, then you must administer the prescribed treatment for it as in the place of care and binding mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the cure of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the one who is dislocated be reduced with a little extension without strain; and this is not difficult, it is easy to move.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, it is necessary that you place the patient on a stool or table at the site for reduction and be standing as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And you stand on one foot, and place your other foot on the site of the joints, and press it with the other foot with force until it returns, and observe that it has been reduced and does not appear in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place the foot of it on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two legs; and tighten it with a suitable and firm structure for three days; and then unbind it and let it rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the kinds of dislocation that are caused by a wound, or a fracture, or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When some cause of that kind occurs and you devote yourself to the treatment of it and the restoration of the limb, many observations may occur before death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore, in the treatment of it, do not be presumptuous or hasty, but rather patient, humble, and compassionate; use remedies that allow abscesses to heal slowly; leave the patient to divine judgment, but treat him who you hope will recover from danger, with alleviation of the disease, and in which you see some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, as soon as possible, make the reduction at the beginning of the cause before an abscess forms.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as desired, then administer treatment that allows an abscess to form and cures the wound with appropriate drying remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is caused by a fracture and it occurs in separated bones, then you perform a setting of them, and do what has been said earlier about simple diseases at their sites.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid, according to your ability, the intestine in fearful paths as my preaching has guided you; for that is better for you, and it preserves your creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy to your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albuscasim, may God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
