Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge of medicine, by completing it, its purpose will be accomplished in it, and by exposing it, and by declaring it, I see that I should complete this treatise for you, which deals with surgery, as part of my art.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery has been abandoned in our region and in these times entirely, except by a few who greatly risk the science of it, and its tools are lost; not remaining from it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were changed and led to those errors and distress until their meanings were closed up and their force was weakened and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I shall vivify this treatise in the manner of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of work, as by adding a description, and by preparing them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Yet the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his art in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes Gaul until he knows the joints of the members and their forms; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, ligaments, and their number, and the origin of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And by this it is said that "a word is a small thing", but more in the work of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not equipped that he does not fall into error by which many men are killed, as I have seen often, for some are trained in this science and withdraw from it and its experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck, causing much blood to flow until the woman fell dead among them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who thought he would extract a stone from a man who was in his state, and the stone was large, and came to him and cut out that stone with a piece of the bladder, by which the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already called to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient he knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a blacksmith who was owing him for a fracture in his leg; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with tendons and nails with strong construction, and did not let air into the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	He dressed it according to his desires, and sewed it up, and let it heal for some days and commanded us to remove the bandages; and so it was until the leg became abscessed and ended in disaster.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandages, and achieved tranquility and relief of his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be stopped, and did not cease to spread corruption in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess cancerous, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it was magnified in its master.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is because the cancerous growth is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not have to come upon it with all force, but be in a member that suffers from everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that surgery should be divided into two divisions: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is work associated with danger in greater conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already examined this in every part of this book where there is operation that contains error and fear; so it is necessary for you to guard this and let go of that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and to deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with goodwill and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to achieve health and laudable success, and abandon the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and leave aside your weapons that make you afraid, so that testing in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for more remains to your glory, and thus you will remain in the world and in eternity at your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaul said in some of his lessons:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad sickness, for that way bad doctors do not become famous."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The text begins the division of the book, and it starts with the first part of the first division.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter arranged concerning the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the treatments of cauterizations, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on abscesses and perforations, on boils, and on sores, and on the extraction of bladders and similar things for those conditions, all arranged and ordered concerning the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoring and dislocating, and treating twisting and similar conditions; the chapter arranged concerning the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine, and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At the beginning of the treatise on all this.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to say the quality of the aids for that cauterization and the harm caused by it, and in what circumstances cauterization should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Thus I say that the speech about the quality of the aid for cauterization and its harm is long and detailed, subtle by knowledge, hidden, and many wise men have spoken about it, and there is disagreement among them, and only a little of their speeches concerns me, fearing length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus I say that cauterization universally applies to all matter or with matter, except for two circumstances, which are circumstances without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the circumstance without matter and dry with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable in disease of a certain quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inconvenient to treat dry and cold diseases with something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And the one who says otherwise says that cauterization is useful in all dry and cold diseases that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the body of a man is moist.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of this person, that I have already experimented this in some cases.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Nevertheless, it is not necessary for me to come again over what has already been proven and exercised in the chapter on cauterization by previous experience, and to know the diversity of human conditions and the disposition of diseases in their manifestations, and the causes of those diseases, and the accidents of them, and the space of time for those diseases.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Nevertheless, in other circumstances, there is no need for you to fear, and especially in cold and moist diseases, because all doctors are agreed on those, and they are not disagreed upon the aid with cauterization in those cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it is for cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not spread beyond the member that is cauterized but causes only minor harm to adjacent members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine spreads to adjacent members, and strong heat causes disease in a member that is hard to cure and quickly wastes it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this (i.e., spread disease to adjacent members); and this is known by experiment and by long service in the study of art concerning the truth of the causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of speech, and if it were not forbidden in my book in this place, I would reveal secret hidden about fire and the operation of it in the body and its expulsion of diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would serve to sharpen your thoughts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Understand, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is appropriate to do cautery and they pause the best time of early spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	However, it is said that cauterization can be done at any time, because the harm due to an accidental time is submerged in the advantage of doing cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, which do not tolerate delay, since it is feared that malice, which is greater than minor harm, will come about through delay.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	However, do not trust in your feet, or sons, for they do not esteem it except for the common people and foolish doctors, since the remedy for that illness which is cured by cauterization is not available at all times, and they delay that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think for that, because cauterization is not simply in a location of medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are the causes for pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Nevertheless, cauterization is used excessively due to the desire for the virtue and greatness of its operation and the power of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may return at some time during the course of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in its body due to the aggregation of superfluities within it, and what is obtained for it through its acquisition in food and similar things of those causes; however, the illness in which cauterization is administered should be a subtle illness in a part with few superfluities and humidity, such as cauterization of teeth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather something small occurs.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	However, the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and this is correct, not according to what I understand in it, because I believe that it is not healing that improves with medicine nor with any other reason for cautionery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and my intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is not when we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses, but rather when those medicines do not work, and at the end of the illness, a person administers cauterization, and it improves on that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here is the corrected translation:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterization does not harm, because this is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than iron as they said; however, when you perform cauterization with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, since it depends on the quantity that you want for the rugosity of the gold, and since it prepares to receive frost; and if you adjust it over the fire, gold melts due to the heat of the fire, and in the fire, some layers form so that the craftsman can catch it with the tool.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, when performing cauterization with iron, we must do it gently and then apply it correctly to the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have organized those of the head into the feet, therefore I relieve you from asking anything else about it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization for pain in the head due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization affects the humidity and coldness in relation to the accompanying accident of which there are two causes, namely scalding and much flux rhinitis, called corrisa, from the head to the partings of the eyebrows and flowing ears, and much sleep, and toothache and guliar, and generally all illness that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, scalds and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with medicinal laxatives for three or four nights, according to the power of the illness and the age and habit of the person.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And you command him to shave his head with a razor, and then put the hair that falls out between your hands on a chair and place your hands over his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And you pause your palm in the position of pressing down on the rash on the nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, since the location you mentioned has been reached, mark that spot with a test, and then ignite the olive-oil cauterization, which is its form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And you pause that over the spot marked with the test, in such a way that it descends, and your hand should be kept contracted slightly, and you turn it around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And you lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see that any amount of bone is exposed from the skull, such as the grain of an error, then raise your hand, and if your hand does not return to that iron, with another one, if it becomes cold, until you see the bone that I told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve it on the area, let it stay there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place a plaster made of clay or dough over the burned area and let it stay there until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the painful area with a four-drug remedy until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the wound remains open, let it be treated with honey, as it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They say that the hump should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should remain until some part of the hump's tissue is burnt away.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then shave that which is attached to the bone, and let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They also say that with the cautery reaching the bone, it should cause strong pain until the bone is broken, and this is the method of amputation in small bones.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	It is believed that from that place, steam from the head will escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Keep the wound open for a long time, and let it heal until it is solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauterization in all cases, but rather in certain men as a matter of fear; and you should abandon that, for it is better for health, when it is; because the head is more vulnerable due to the continuity of the situation, as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cauterization is safer and better for you; and from that surgery, you should benefit in health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient and uses drugs such as gears, cochias, capipurges, emplaustres, guatz, cadels, gualinas, and similar substances, and if it has already been cauterized with one cautery without any improvement in that condition, consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in nature; and if it is not frail or weak, cauterize it again with another cautery a little later.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize it on the crown of the patient's head with a cautery until the hump is separated.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Make an incision in the hump and remove the amount that has been calculated and cauterize it with a cautery on the back of the head at the location called "was" - and this is the location where the vent hole is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And loosen your hand in this, and do not expose the bone because the patient will experience a great deal of pain different from the pain caused by all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And they will say that this cauterization is in its place because the cautery used for the corners of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one used for the middle part of the head; and this is the method.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Modern Migration (title)
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When sharp pain occurs in the head or the neck swells and pain enters the throat, it should be treated with medications to alleviate the problem, followed by other treatments that I have previously described; however, none of this helps, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either cauterization using a burning medicine or iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Moreover, when using a burning medicine, you will take an alum block, scrape it and remove its edges from both ends of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then, make an incision in the temple where the pain is located with a thin lance, making sure that the skin is not visible from the outside until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then press it down with a thin cloth and hold it in place for three hours; then remove the alum, leave the wound to heal for two or three days, and place a piece of oilcloth over the submerged area until the wound is dry.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with a gargle until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do the same with some burning medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Furthermore, iron cauterization using this method involves heating the iron over fire for cauterizing as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a cross clavicle because the shape of its head resembles that of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a slight prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Place your hand over the painful area and hold it there to prevent the archery from being compressed; then turn the small iron gently but quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is pressed by the pressure of the codena becomes as hard as stone and raises, lift your hand to prevent the artery from being pressed, so that blood does not flow out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then immerse the affected area in salt water and place it there for three days, and then bandage it with linen cloth, and apply cure with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the ingrown toenail with a cautery as usual, but be careful not to cut the artery during this modern procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On ancient cauterization of ingrown toenails.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure ingrown toenails with the method described in the previous treatment, and the method mentioned in the division of diseases does not help, and when the method of the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery does not work, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery knife until it is glowing hot, since this means that it is applied to the area of pain with a line as thick as the tip of the finger, or whatever that may be; and after waiting for one day and strengthening it, press it into the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to watch out for the continuation of the jaw, which can be harmful for chewing, and that the tendon is not pressed and the nerves that support it, and that it does not cause spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that has been cut open, since in the cutting of it there is fear, especially to those who do not know what they are doing or lack knowledge and experience; leave the operation to them at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with the reminder of the regulation for blood flow accidents from the artery according to its method, in its appropriate place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if this disease does not respond to the cautery and the patient is able to tolerate it, cauterize it in the appropriate location on the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on compression of the artery with two knives, as this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On cauterization of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain occurs in the ear due to pressing and is cured with medicinal treatments and other methods mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then burn it with cauterization, which is called puncta, whose form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the cauterization and guide it in the entire ear, like a wheel is rolled, or in the area around each sample if the pain is in one specific area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Hold the cauterization of the ear lobe gently, little by little, since you must try to locate the spot where it hurts.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if many small points of cauterization are applied throughout the ear, and you locate them, then cure the areas until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On cauterization of turturr.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turturr that is cured with cauterization is not due to the spices that come from flux, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the affected area when it comes from drying or from spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When treating that part that is affected by ulceration or inflammation and swelling, and you find no relief from your treatment, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one should be made at the aurelha's location, and the second one a small one on its temple, and the third one should join two labias.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the affected area, because softening does not occur except in the unaffected part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is to cauterize it on the side of the affected area opposite the ear-lobe, placing a small one above its tip, and another on the temple whose length should be in proportion to the length of the finger applied, and pause your hand with the cautery until the amount of the tissue of the wound is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is called "cutellary", whose shape is like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is also very subtle, so it needs to be sharpened occasionally to remove excess grooves.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And apply the dressing to the wound until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the ancient method of cauterization for apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and treatment with what has been mentioned does not provide relief, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all corners of its head; secondly at the middle of its head, as previously stated; thirdly at the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method for cauterization is performed as previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized at the mouth of the stomach; and this is later; let it heal with what you are processing (applying).
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the ancient method of cauterization for forgetfulness caused by feebleness (dementia).
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient large and round pills, which help with softening at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the head of the entire patient, and pause over its neck with a poultice made as described in the treatise on poultices.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Pause it for some days because this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do as that remedy ordered, which has already been mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it cures well in this way, then do not perform cauterization; but if not, make three cauteries on the opposite side of its head, which should decrease from the highest part of its head to the lowest part of its neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Pause between each cautery with the thickness of the finger and treat the cauterized area as previously described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you want to increase the dose and the patient is tolerable, perform cauterization in the middle area; but if you want more of a dose, then cauterize it over both ears.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Treat the cauterized area until it heals; and let the olive-shaped cauteries be in the form given before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the ancient method of cauterization for parazoli (fractures) and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary to process softening for the head with poultices and what has been mentioned; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it at the middle of its head, on all corners of its head, on the back part of its neck, and three cauteries on the spinal column.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if the disease of softening of the body is widespread and the patient is tolerable and the condition is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the spine, and afterwards cauterize it deeper until the tissue is burned off moderately, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Treat the cauterized area until it heals; and let the olive-shaped cauteries be in the form given before.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Treatment of epilepsy by cauterization.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epilepsy is not to be cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by wind.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore it is necessary to treat the brain of him at the beginning with warm applications and the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is strong and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, administer emetics and masticators that will clean the stomach, for several days, with good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient and cauterize that place with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery on the back of the head, and over each ear you should cauterize it.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that place with cauterizations which have been said, in having paralyzing and softening effect on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, pause the subtle cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Treatment of melancholy by cauterization.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and corrupted moistures and gross wind, then cauterize that place with the cauterizations which we have said to have a paralyzing effect.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is superfluity descending into melancholy and the body of the patient is wet, then give him to drink that which cleans the brain of him according to what has been said before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a warm tortoise shell made in a suitable way over the forehead, and leave it there in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be sixty years old, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment, it is more suitable for the ancient remedy of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that place over a fire with moderate heat, so that it does not suffer from excessive heat when it is placed there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then apply it to the middle of the forehead in a circle, and let him rest until it becomes moist.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Do this to the patient every week once, with the other treatment for his good health until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to him, but always have a suitable cautery ready: this is a kind of cauterization that humidifies the brain in equal amounts.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply it to that place covered with bindweed or nettles.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	From cauterization of water descending in the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have been informed of the onset of water in the vein by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink a medicine that clears their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him bathe in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And order him to urinate, and cauterize the area with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of jaundice in two veins, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of jaundice in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are covered by the bandage, and make the cauteries in that length near the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of bleeding when you are cauterizing, and if you see blood flowing from it, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with knowledge concerning the extraction of arteries and the opening of those arteries, as well as precautions for bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes it is cauterized in the neck between two bones with two deep-seated cauterizations.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	When dealing with old tears (cauterization of old tears).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears in the veins and arteries that are evident on the head's surface have become chronic, and it is verified that this is excessive fluidity, then cauterize it with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter "Beginning of jaundice in veins," at the middle of the head and two cauteries near the temples, and two cauteries near the bones of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it requires addition, then cauterize it along the entire length of the vein on the underside of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	When dealing with the smell of the nose (cauterization of nose smell).
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When the medicine given does not work according to what I have said in the division, then you prepare yourself and give the patient three nights of cochias (a liquid or paste made from certain herbs) to drink; and shave their head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And cauterize it with a clove cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows, just under the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to cut the artery while you do this.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The shape of the clove cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xv.	Title. XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On cauterization for softening of the eyelids of the blind.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the blind is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar-type cautery, and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that on both eyebrows a small one or two cauterizations all around the edges, and they should extend from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Title. XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterization of the eyelid of the blind when the hairs are turned into the inner parts and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the blind are turned into the inner parts so that they poke the eye, cauterize in those areas using two methods: cauterization can be done with fire or with medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cauterization is done with fire, tell the patient to look away such that they pull their eyelashes out like those who clean them, until they are long enough and plucked; if it hurts, you must soothe the eyes with a bandage until the eyelashes grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once they are long enough and plucked, place the head of the patient on your lap, hold their eyelid open with your hand using a thumb sign as shown in the figure of a clover leaf, and begin the sign at the base of the eyelashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place a hot cloth in alum powder or chicken mucus on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And bring the heated cautery of that shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And bring the cauterization slowly over the shape that was outlined, in small strokes, until the surface of the skin, similar to clover leaf, is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the healing work is that you see the eyelid of the blind contracted and the eyelashes raised due to the poking of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore lift that area and hold it for three days, and apply a hot cloth to it until the scar is raised.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that with warm water until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns because of the eyelashes some cause and the eyelid becomes soft again, then do another time the cauterization on that same area as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the eyelashes are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it returns to its natural position, shrinks and the eyelashes no longer poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if the cauterization with medicine is used, tell the patient to pull their eyelashes out until they are long enough and plucked, and make a paper patch in the shape of a clover leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known salt and fresh wine vinegar in equal parts. In other words, Or if it is that, mix those ingredients quickly and apply it with haste so that it is not dampened; expand it onto the paper that was made in the shape of a clover leaf, and place it over one or both eyes; hold down the eye with hot alum cloth, and let the patient's head be on your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And pause the patient on the medicine and press it gently, and do not force it in until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is as in this manner like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient feels the bite, then release the medicine and move it with your finger; therefore when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and consider if the eyelid has been raised as when it is washed, so that the contraction is done with fire or incision, for in this case it is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the spot where the medicine was not pressed, and do not damage it until the wound is closed and your operation is complete.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And pause at the spot where you are to sew until the abscess of the inflammation has been eliminated, and apply care to it with healing ointment or another treatment until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to perform your operation with diligent vigilance that the wound does not become infected by any residue of the medicine; and if the eyelid becomes softened and some hair falls into the wound, then repeat your medication on that spot where the eyelid was softened, and perform this in the same way as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the method of extracting mastic.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that wounds in men are various according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this is performed your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not conceal the path of rectitude for him who has studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Eye Socket (Lacrimal Sac).
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula as mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not provide treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to lower his head into your hand, and have another servant hold the patient's head in such a way that it is neither harmed nor shaken by the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Approach the spot with alum of hog or hen's glands on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And approach the fire, which has this shape for the cautery:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is concave, like the shape of a reed or feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should be penetrating to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it protrude in this way as it tries to.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the concave one is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Approach the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then you should open it and remove the purulent material from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Approach the cautery that is properly lit, and place your hand on it with a small amount, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed; then pause the cautery in the corner of the wound and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it reaches the bone, that is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and leave it in this condition for three days, and then approach the spot with stitching and cover it with a dry ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if it has passed more than ten days and is not healed, then pause on the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and shaved as necessary in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of cauterizing a fistula that some people used in the past: put your hand into the fistula and open it, then pause at the small fissure-like opening that is its shape; it should be the amount of an inch of lead melted down; hold your hand with a good grasp, and do not harm the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the wound of the patient. And it is necessary to pause over the wound of the patient with alum of hog or water, because lead adheres to the site of the fistula and cures it miraculously through healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed through the method of cauterization and treatment that we have described, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity in its appropriate location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterization of the Cracks in the Feet (Cracked Heels).
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times, cracks occur on the lips, and especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those wounds as we have told you in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Then make the hollow of it according to the fineness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place that pointed instrument carefully into those wounds up until the cautery reaches the edge of the wounds.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with wax up to where it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess appears on the uvula or in the palate or on the gums and a boil is formed, it should be broken, drained, and cauterized, but if the treatment does not improve, then you must ignite the cautery according to the size of the fistula, and apply the heated iron into the hole of the fistula. Put your hand inside until the heated iron reaches its end, and at the other end, perform this action once or twice; then heal it with what we have told you about treatment up to where it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the abscess heals and is cured, that's good; but if it does not, then it is necessary to expose the location and drill the rotten bone according to what will come up in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the abscesses.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When abscesses are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicine but do not improve, then place the patient's head on your lap, approach the affected tooth with the cautery tool in the form that will be needed, so that you can place a cloth over the tooth and insert the heated cautery tool quickly into it. Hold your hand a little ways inside until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And lift your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And have the patient rinse his mouth with salty water and keep it for an hour, as the damaged tooth is sealed and the inflamed gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by inflammation or worms, and does not improve with medicine, then cauterize it in two ways: either cauterize it with a cow's hoof (cauterizer) or cauterize it with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with a cow's hoof involves taking a hoof from a cow, heating it in iron, and wrapping it in cotton and covering the end of the hoove with the bulbous part. Then apply it quickly to the painful tooth until it becomes inflamed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat the process several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the hoove mentioned above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place the heated iron on top of it until the iron reaches the bottom of the hollow of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire is that you should attend to the candelabra or iron, and there should be some grossness inside it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then arrange the form of the hot iron and place it on the tooth, keep your hand inside until the iron cools down; do this a few times because the pain may last that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to press the patient's mouth tightly with a good gag and hold it for an hour, then release it. This is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize with whatever tool you have available to you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	Here is the shape of the candelabra:
Capitol .xxii.	Capital. xxii. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterizing hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by sharp objects and cold humors that do not respond to medications, and you wish to treat them gently, then use fire as follows: the shape of the cautery should be as shown below, with two handles at each end to hold it securely, and heat it at one end while the other end is cool; place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or repeat as necessary until it reaches the base of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days before applying it again to the same spot until whatever the fire has burned away has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Cover it with oil, lint, and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the candelabra or cautery should be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Capital. xxiii. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterizing wounds on the vocal cords and constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes over the windpipe, and especially when this is accompanied by congestion, it is necessary that the patient should be evacuated at first with laxatives, and then you must cauterize the affected area using a red-hot iron.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Be careful not to burn the tongue with the iron or burn its skin excessively.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize the joint at the neck using another hot iron on the lower spine area.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The form of the candelabra should be as follows:
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Cover it with what was previously used until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capital. xxiv. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterizing lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture and the patient does not have a fever or chills, and the disease is chronic, you should cauterize it with two hot irons on the collarbone areas where the veins bulge, and with another iron in the middle of the chest between the nipples; both irons should be heated as described previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your cauterization can be performed using the "puncta" iron, which is described in the treatment for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Make points at those places, and cover it with whatever was previously used until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	The iron should have three prongs because cauterization involves performing three cauterizations as follows:
Capitol .xxv.	Capital. xxv. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterizing ticks that are at the top of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	If the top of the helper (the bone) is displaced due to slippery moisture and does not return to its original position when it should, you should reduce the displacement as soon as possible using a small movement so that it can be repositioned, as we have witnessed, at which point you must first carefully push the displaced area back into place; then turn the patient over onto their back or side, and lift the skin on the affected area from the inside to the outside using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated on the inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approach the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Approach the cautery such that it penetrates one head into another, and the figure of the cauterization will come afterwards from four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and that subtle one according to the amount of tension; this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some observations are adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries (meaning the positions for the cautery are determined based on the count of eight, as there are eight cauteries).
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then pause over the cautery with salt, and then prepare to adhere the patient to tranquility, and let the limb not be harmed for any length of time until it is comforted (meaning apply salt on the cautery, prepare to secure the patient in a calm position, and allow the affected body part to recover before moving it again).
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation occurs above or below and it is treated in this way, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or a multi-pointed cautery because the joint is confirmed and moisture is expelled and the patient is healed (meaning if the dislocation happens either above or below, cauterization using a pointed or multiple-pointed cautery is used to confirm the affected area, expel excess moisture, and promote healing).
Capitol .xxvi.	Capital 26 (meaning Chapter 26). Here's a simplified translation:
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On stomach cauterization.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	If inflammation and humidity gather in the stomach, causing it to swell excessively and multiply its size, and if you continue with the treatment without success, then the patient should be laid on their back, extend their arms and legs, and prepare for cauterization using three cauteries: one cautery under the feet for the thickness of a finger, a second cautery below the costal cartilage, until the triangular figure of cauterization appears; and elongate the cauteries that are not positioned to avoid causing burns.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the abdomen (meaning the cautery should be positioned halfway through the abdomen).
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the appropriate location in the stomach according to this form. This cautery should be shaped like a circle according to this form (meaning the cautery should be positioned in a circular shape according to the provided instructions).
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized in points where it is frightened by this cautery: you shall make punctures on the stomach according to your will with tension, and then cauterize those points using a cautery; care for that area with the prescribed treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27 (meaning Capital 27). Here's a simplified translation:
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterization of the inguinal hernia.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When inflammation in the abdomen occurs due to heat, humidity or excessive wind entering beyond its normal complexity, which is expelled by superfluous excretion and is treated as described earlier without any further action, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, and a woman tries three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity, placing them on the abdomen below the hypochondriac region, which will prevent the bed sores in males.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	The space between each cauterization should be according to the size of it, and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press the cautery too much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of the medicine is equal to the quantity of the amount of the patient's urine, and it is not too much or too little; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then sit them down, which has already opened their legs and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is possible for you to apply these cauterizations with a cautery knife, if you have the skill and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and make sure that the amount of medicine is sufficient for the entire body and enters the intestines, since the urine here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of the abscess in the abdomen with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess or boil appears in the abdomen and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the abdomen or in the serous membrane of it, then if it is in the flesh of the abdomen, the patient will feel heavy and painful without any increase.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the serous membrane of the abdomen, and the pain is greatly increased and often tires out the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned onto their back; and a woman should try to find the location of the abscess; and ignite the cautery, which resembles thread, whose shape is described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Cauterize it with that cautery until the entire abscess is burned up, until it reaches the skin, until the pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this cautery method if it is prolonged in the study of medicine and has been tried with many diseases; but rather experiment with this operation several times, but you should still be careful and follow what has been said, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients applied cauterization to ulcers in the same way as they applied it to surgery, and this is what you should take from the long, dry burns of surgery, a long, sharp cautery that can be found, and of the appropriate size.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse that in oil and heat it up, and then cauterize the area between the neck and the collar with one large cautery, and two small cauterizations on each side of it, one slightly declining towards the part below the beard, and two on that which is declining between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, declining a little towards the back; and another in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three on the back; and one in the area between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the foot, after the cautery that is between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not press your hand with the cautery, but rather in the work of the body in plain sight.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they used to say among the ancients that some men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that one in the location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that spot near the abscess and drains pus, just as has been said in the abscess of the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation with cautery, there is no fear, for death often occurs in the location where there is a fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the disease of the spleen, as has been said in the treatment by division and you do not follow that treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are valid, of which one is that you make three or four rows according to the length of the spleen as in the figure of cauteries for the thigh, the figure of which has been preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization there should be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as that which has been said in the cautery for the thigh.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand with the cauterization; and let the patient be on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two prongs, which has been said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the spleen, causing it to move to the left side of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your lifting should be such as to lift the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And bring the two prongs together, ignite it immediately, in the place where they penetrate the cord of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And withdraw the cautery; and therefore four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And return the cautery after it has rested for several days, because it is more fitting that the previous causes in the treatment come first.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of edema.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in edema, but in a blister specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating edema with the methods of treatment that have been mentioned in the division and you do not follow your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the thigh, and another on the spleen, and two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right leg, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And leave the cautery open to allow it to rest for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is necessary to join them together, and it should be hastened by aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be as shown previously, and it is that one with which the back is cauterized, according to its shape as previously described.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and on other matters.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are abscessed with edema and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near the ankle, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and lift your hand, and do not turn it entirely, because the stagnant water drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is as follows: Two cauteries should be made on the two sides of the thighs, and in each thigh a cautery should be made with the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be according to the length of the thigh: one on the inside and the other in a lower position along the thigh; and over each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water drains from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat with those causes as has been said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of belly-wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When a belly-wound is caused by cold and humidity until the joints become relaxed, it is the virtue of digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured with the methods of treatment mentioned earlier, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization exhibiting virtues, then cauterize it with a large cautery over the stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries in the narrow navel circle, with a fine cautery; and with a cautery on the bladder over a large area, or with two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area on the penis and hernias, and apply strong heat to the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for which there should be no mistake.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	If hemorrhoids in nature are caused by thick humors or corrupted moistures, and have been treated as mentioned earlier without success, then three cauterizations should be made over the left buttock, just below the two small hips and a small triangle, and with a cautery on top of the navel pierced through twice.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and their food is not rotten, and if the face has been purulent, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the spleen with a sharp point, and leave the cauteries in place for some time until he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of an abscess near the ear: It is said that when an abscess appears near the ear, it should be incised with a sharp and pointed instrument, and then drained, as this will help the pus to escape. Then, a cautery should be applied over the area to burn the remaining tissue and prevent the abscess from returning.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	When you apply heat to the incised abscess, keep your hand over it until the cautery reaches the vein from which blood is flowing.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do this once or twice, for if there are many abscesses, cauterize each of them as previously mentioned, and treat them with the remedies that help their healing until they are cured.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you use a large cautery when cauterizing, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the groin area: It is said that when fistulas occur in the groin, they should be cauterized with a sharp and pointed instrument, as this will help to stop the flow of pus and prevent the infection from spreading.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not obey the remedies recommended for it in its place, and if the patient is afraid of them, let him be cured with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	If there is an old fistula in nature that contains corrupt blood and moisture, and it is suitable to try to heal it with cauterization, then first clean the area with a thin probe and approximate the quantity of the depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Place the heated cautery on this fistula and according to the quantity it penetrates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat this process several times until the corrupt tissues are burned quickly one or two or three times, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, be careful with all those areas, and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it does not penetrate deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Treat the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the area is sealed and the matter within it has been removed and remains in that state for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matter is not removed, then you should know that it has penetrated or is in the bone and is corrupt, or it will bring about reminiscence of those causes in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in abscesses pain occurs due to inflammation or excessive swelling, and the patient's body is weakened, then it is necessary to cauterize that on each abscess with a hot iron over every abscess, using a cautery with a specific tip for each case.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And in a second step, apply cauterization gently, so that three lines of cauterization will be formed, and thus they will be more effective in treatment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to inflammation and moisture, causing the patient to not be able to retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower area beneath the bladder, starting from the pubic bone, and cauterize with a hot iron on the right side, and on the left side as well.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the wound; cauterize that in the lower area below the pubic bone, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Make sure the cautery tip is appropriate for each case.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the womb is affected by inflammation and moisture, abstinence is prohibited, menstruation becomes corrupted, provocation is delayed, and pain occurs. In such a case, it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauteries in the circumference of the navel, as described in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a hot iron on the area below the pubic bone, or with two cauteries, and ensure the cautery tip is appropriate.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On reduction of dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When inflammation and swelling occur at the ankle joint, causing displacement of the joint, a sign of this is that the affected limb appears longer than the other when compared to it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found by pressing around it.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the ankle joint of him with a circular cautery, so that you will have guidance in the circle as it rotates, and thus the joint falls into the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery used in this procedure should have a similar shape to the one used for stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available, then cauterize that with three cauteries using an olive-shaped large cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Make the cautery according to the size of the injury on the entire coccyx, and care for that which heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint due to inflammation and swelling, the patient is treated with the remedy mentioned earlier and nothing more, which is an old one. Therefore it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors using foul-smelling or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medicine or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two learned methods, one of which is that you cauterize that on the ankle bone of him with three triangular cauteries arranged as follows: ensure good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	The spaces between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the finger, and whether the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	In some cases, cauterize on the middle of the ankle bone where there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If desired, you may use the circular cautery whose shape is described in the reduction of dislocated ankle, which circles and burns the entire injury on the coccyx.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and does not extend into the leg.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends into the leg, then you cauterize that on the leg at the site where the pain is located; and one cautery on the hip for about a palm's distance along the fleshless area.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is a knife, then let its depth be according to the severity of the wound.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient's pain extends to the location of the said feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery having three or four points, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient's pain is on one side of the body, then cauterize that area with a knife cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Be careful during all cauterization that you do not burn nerves or large arteries, and that by doing so, you are not causing harm to the patient or contractions.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hammock (cavilha) and burned through in the cauterization, and the leg swelled up into a tumor before the skin was affected, and it was burnt, perforated, and corrupted throughout the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Apply great care in treating the abdomen, for it is close to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two separate parts, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise old men in the cauterization of many cauteries say this method: make a circle with iron, whose circumference should be the size of a palm; and let its holes be according to the thickness of an almond or a pea.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Inside that circle should be another third, and the space between them should be the size of a knuckle; and those circles should be opened in two parts; and the length of those keys should be one or two knuckles, and make the edges of iron decoratively adorned on the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approach the fire to ignite it before it glows and emits sparks, and approach it to be placed on the incision of the ankle, let the patient lie down on the bed.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that with three cauteries at one time.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And allow it to rest for three days; apply ointment to it with stitches and leave the wound open for several days; and cure it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Son of Al-Zahrawi," he says: "We have rarely used this type of cauterization due to the fear of its appearance and because we have found few who observe it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of the soft cauteries should be applied to those who can tolerate them, and find the location for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauteries with medicinal substances are those that you should make in two circles, each pierced by a hole where the iron rod of the door hinge is placed; the depth of the wall on both sides should be two fingers or as many as necessary.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space that is between each finger's width is open both above and below, and contains within it as follows:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place it on the incision of the ankle, let the patient lie down on the bed, and press your hand over the incision of the ankle; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be with a small fire gradually, and hold it for the quantity of one hour, and make the patient bear the biting and tension of it – since that bite is like fire – until the pain stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand with the instrument and rinse the hot water from the entire ankle with mild water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let it rest for three days and place it on the stitches until the blackness of the tension is gone, and let it rest for several days, and run the pus out of it; this is the best remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And cure it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the chest, place it in a position that contains water as was done for the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and crushed charcoal from both ankle parts, mix them and apply them to a new wave where the incision on the top is perforated with a small hole, as much as needed to enter it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Place it below the next wave and pour over it alkali and living charcoal with mild water that takes them up by about a finger, and then press them well with your hand for good compression, and let the hole through which the sharp water from the incision on top is passed into the next wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all the water, and pour over it more living charcoal and fresh alkali, for that will now have strong acute power, which is administered in many medical operations and cauterizations of other members, as this operation acts like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among the medications some of which are cauterized wide, such as tizizic and honey with camphor and charcoal mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And it is related from an ancient man about the operation and cure for pain in the ankle and sciatica, and it is truly great to be of that, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, and it is healed by one day as recommended, for it is easy for him with bathing and syrup from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be pressed down firmly on a mustard plaster if no greenness is found; otherwise fig leaves should be taken and crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is located, or in the thigh or chest, and left to act.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for three hours or as long as the patient tolerates the tension.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And immerse it in water and when the body of the patient is relaxed, let it dry on the sun, as the pain stops and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medications, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, it is said by Hippocrates that when a vein in the lamb is cut, it is better to cauterize it; and the cautery should be done as follows: wool should be taken and steeped in old oil, and placed between the toes and the hollows of the foot.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take dried lamb skin and inflame it with fire until it is charred; then place it on the wool and let it be absorbed.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization for pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains occur in two places due to various causes, such as by falling or hitting or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, by the influx of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization should not be done except in this specific case which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, evacuation of the patient should be performed with soft pills and similar ones, which are applied on both sides where the pain is located three finger widths apart according to its latitude, provided that cauterization or more is attempted in each line if there is a sign of improvement.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	The cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medium-sized nail in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	In many cases this disease strikes small children; and the sign of its beginning in infants is that their structure bends back and their head rises and moves.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And the vertebra at the lower end of the spine and the back of the neck begin to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, cauterize that area with a circular cautery as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery should be applied all around the spine completely.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery of two or three fingers.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The points should be evenly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And take care of the area until it is healed as I have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Moreover, be careful that cauterization should not be administered in jaundice caused by a nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And since gout caused by coldness is treated with the method of treatment and the pain is not completely cured, then cauterize again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize around the ankle joint with many cauteries in the following manner:
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The olive-shaped cautery should be as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens often, then cauterize it over each toe with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you find that more cauteries are necessary, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, only place the tip of the cone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain moves into the toe and the big toe, then administer the cautery as I have said in its own chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the toes and it is called sciatica, then pierce around the nail holes as follows, pierce on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in those places, then pierce around the nail holes on each toe and at the base of the thumb.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain moves towards other days towards the hips or the muscles, then cauterize them all around using the appropriate tools.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient with good diet and medicine reception, because if good diet and treatment are followed and this cauterization is performed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization for fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the inguinal area and hernias appear before the scrotum at the genitalia, then it is necessary to make the patient fast on his own day and use soft foods so that the opening of his stomach closes.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient with your hands on his sides, and order him to keep his legs inside until he is discharged or the hernia or intestine appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And return it to its place with your hands on the sides and try to locate the rupture on the bones of the pelvis using as a sign the extreme end which is similar in shape to the diameter of the circles at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approach the cautery, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Bring the roasted hot iron glowing and glistening.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that spot with your hand, and when you have found the bone of the pentenilh within the patient's body, move the cautery along that bone towards the middle of the thigh; if you have not reached the bone in the first observation, do so again in another observation.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the position of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine, causing death or other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you do not have the bone with the cautery, do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The cautery for children must be delicate in proportion to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Care for the cauterized area for three days with sutures until the scar of the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Care for it also with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain lying on their back for forty days, until the area and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	Food should be withheld from the patient according to the length of their treatment time, and the intestine must not come out under the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for the patient to be raised after forty days, administer proper nourishment and care them for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let the patient rest and have a diet of less work, food, and drink, and avoid any violent movements, for when they follow this treatment completely, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here is the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, do not stop the treatment, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let it heal as the third part of the body does; care for it as we have said before, but be careful not to press too hard.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Some people originally stated that a triangular cautery should be used for the rupture in this manner as follows:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	The line is drawn across the width and above the rupture, and another line is made above it; then place your hand with a sharp pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterizing twisting (torsion).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a person experiences pain in some limbs due to an injury or impact and the pain persists for a long time without responding to medication, it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery should be of the right size and shape according to the size, nature, and location of the affected limb or organ, as well as its twisting and pain level.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first cauterization heals, that is good; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization on it; for it is customary for such pains to be located near the affected limb or organ, so it is necessary to find and cauterize those areas until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterizing leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leprosy of certain types can sometimes be treated with cautionery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by decay from fevers and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common or curable according to what has been said in the division, and do not proceed if it is not present, or if there is a risk that corruption will spread throughout the patient's entire body and all their organs; then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one at the midpoint of the head, and the second below it, with the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly, apply your hand to the cautery a little inside it before it grasps a small impression on the bone, and thus the sores shall be displaced, allowing the expulsion of thick vapors to be alleviated from there; and cauterize over the swelling as required.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has spread over the patient and is manifest, then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries that were mentioned earlier; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, on both cheeks, on two shoulders, on two spine joints of the neck, on six spine joints of the back, on a large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, on both ankles, one on each ankle, on both elbows, one on each elbow, on both wrists, and one on each wrist, on both knees, and one on each knee, on both hips, on both thigh muscles, and on both calves; and cauterize over all the joints of the hands and feet, and on every toe of their feet, and on the fingernails of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful with the nerves that are over the foot, not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some swellings are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and another on the stomach opening, and others on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and you know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as a woman does not, for the body of the patient is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply the cautery with a mixture of eggs, flour, honey, and the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stiffened or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but not healed, then you cauterize that stiffened member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the incision a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Apply it with a cure until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some swellings are cauterized with certain stupors that tend to the hands and feet, the spine joints of the back, and alleviate the pain of the nerves that afflict that member, and the stupor is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume this, but only he who knows the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body moving them.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of abscesses that are morphic.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an abscess is old and does not conform to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a preheated cautery, a little according to the size of the incision until the white and color of it are relieved and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Approach the treatment of that with a mixture of barley and lentils, oil infused with roses, fennel leaves, and either pigeon blood or yolk, each part separately mixed and all blended together, then limit a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	In this section of the treatise, the author provides guidelines for treating gout in the feet. He suggests using a cauterizing iron to make small incisions on the surface of the foot if necessary. The text also describes a method for reducing a hernia by returning the affected organ to its proper cavity and placing a hand over the area to prevent it from protruding again. The author further instructs the attendant servants to position themselves around the patient, with one supporting each leg, another holding their hands, and yet another providing support under the patient's chest.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Treatise on Cauterizing Crabs.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the area as it rotates.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the latest cautery in the middle area; however, I do not agree because I fear that it may become an ulcer, and I myself have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is therefore more fitting to cauterize it around the area with a circular cautery as we have mentioned, or with scissors.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Treatise on Cauterizing Abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	If an abscess is delayed in maturation, this can be due to excessive fluid or the patient's condition, as they may be old and weak or have little blood, or due to the time of year, and you wish to speed up the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with scissors, making small punctures; and apply leeches to that area so that it matures faster.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	However, if you wish to perform the perforation with a cautery, then heat up the cautery and form it into this shape: and immerse it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the cavity.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied in that location which is further away, to relieve the body of the arm; then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Treatise on Cauterizing Corrosive Wounds.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is corruption that walks through members, which corrodes in the same way that dry wood burns in a fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you see that the corrosion is in a place where cautery with fire is appropriate, then heat the iron cautery a few small and large pieces as needed for the location where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then, cauterize the entire area extending as far as you eradicate all of the corrosion and there remains no cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Leave it alone for three days, and rest on the cauterized spots soaked with oil mixed into it until all scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Cure that one with a poultice made from fresh meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If fresh meat grows healthy in three days without corruption, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization over what is damaged in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine because it falls in between cauterization and surgery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, fire-cauterization is of little help for the most part.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And as I have said, the acute medicine treatment is for the division (amputation), so take it when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization of nails and similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Motas veguadas: Pay close attention to the parts of the feet afflicted with what is called a claw, and it is large, open, which presses on the foot; and cauterize in these areas using two methods, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization with fire is that you heat the concave iron tongs resembling a pen handle, made from iron of suitable size to treat the entire nail, and have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then rest the heated iron on the nail and then rotate your hand with the tongs around the nail until the iron reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it alone for three days before blisters start forming.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply the plaster with wild mustard leaves mixed with salt and leave it on for one night because it will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Treat the affected area with meat poultice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it doesn't improve and there are recurrences on the surface of the body, particularly in the limbs and feet, you must administer cauterization with hot water, taking a copper or iron instrument or a pen handle, placing it on the nail; then pour a little hot water into the cup, keep your hand, and rotate it around the nail using compression from your entire hand, pressing the edge of the cup against the root of the nail, causing the hot water to flow along the root of the hole; wait for an hour for the patient to feel the pain caused by the hot water, then remove it because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, treat them all in turn until you have treated all of the affected parts throughout the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And treat those pus that result from eradicating the roots of nails with meat poultice.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is tremor due to irritation of the nerve, fever caused by irritation, or some similar cause, you must cauterize it with four cauterizations or more on the spinal vertebrae, between each vertebra with one cautery; in the feet, and above the stomach, use olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor will subside and hasten the healing of the underlying disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 15 (or, in Roman numerals, Capitol. XV)
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of abscesses accidentally occurring on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When abscesses and pustules are accidentally produced on the body, and they are made of coarse and corrupted matter; at the beginning when it appears, it should be cauterized over the entire cavity of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood or a long-handled razor, the tip of which is extended with fire, or a lingual cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases the cauterization should be applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method, and it is not trustworthy, and the superfluous matter is broken up as a result of which it heals from there.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it is necessary that this be done with appropriate evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 65 (or, in Roman numerals, Capitol. LXV)
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of bleeding caused by accidental cuts from arrows.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	In some cases the bleeding from an arrow wound that is incised should be stopped by covering the wound, or by making a wound of counter-incision or cauterization of the limb, and in such cases it remains difficult to stop the bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it happens to someone, you should press your hand on the opening of the arrow wound and hold it until the bleeding stops, and until the blood has ceased to flow, do not lift your hand from there lest it starts flowing again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And you should hold the olive oil cauteries few and large (in number) over them until they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from them (the olive oil cauteries) a small or large one according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein you should hastily apply it so that you have stopped the bleeding, and cauterize it until the blood has been drained and constricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you stop the bleeding and remove the cautery, then take another cautery cautiously among those that are prepared in fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood has been constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here present, and do not harm the patient with some other evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in such cases, especially if the artery is large. However, in four ways, one can stop the bleeding: either by cauterization as previously stated, or by extraction when it is not extracted (in which case the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted), or by ligating with thread or a strong bandage, or by placing them on medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood; they should be strengthened with pulley and compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that which provides appropriate constriction with thread and bandages or by position of causes that burn and of similar nature should not be trusted alone.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present or medicine, then you should apply pressure as indicated on the wound of that vein as previously stated, and understand the great care required until the blood has stopped flowing from the superior part of the wound, and no bleeding should occur over the arrow; and on the arrow it should be sprinkled with hot water of great heat until the blood congeals and thickens; but in cases where cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions, punctures, ulcers, phlebotomy and wounds and their similar conditions.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Avicenna (Albucasis).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter on all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and medicine burns, and their occurrences and causes, and the instruments necessary for this in each case, as well as the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter I will proceed according to that method so that the one who seeks this may be helped; therefore, I will describe what should be done in such cases.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, I command, my son, that you learn that in this chapter it is about terrors such as those in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary to be very careful in this operation, which involves evacuation that can lead to blood, and which threatens life, you must first apply the pressure of the vein or an incision on the abscess or opening of the wound, or making an excision or purification of the wound, or extraction of arrowhead or incision in stone (and similar conditions).
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and the most dangerous among them is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you when there is a dilemma, for in some cases you must act like men with many diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them there is one who goes away with his disease and is easily prone to death, because of the severity of what he finds in his disease, and because of the length of his illness, and because of the fear that is associated with certain diseases (which mean death).
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	Of those who give you their trust and speak to you, you hope for his recovery, but his sickness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, you must not agree with one who comes to you in such a manner; be cautious more than greedy and not presumptuous about any cause except for certain knowledge that proves what is necessary for you, and to which good outcome is attributed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication of where healing is turned, for in that lies help for you in acquisition of fame, memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and not lead or protect you, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter according to the previous chapter on cauteries, regarding the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved in what you seek and require concerning it.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this sickness often appears in infants and their cradle must be shaken and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant with her hands.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs because of a hidden cause which is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not see this sickness in anyone except infants; and all those that I have seen it afflicted upon, I consider them lost, and as such I have found this work to be disastrous for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and his head was so swollen that it could not be reduced by any means because of the size of his head, and moreover the moisture increased until the body went cold.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the skull and bone or added below the bones on the suture.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in this case, if the moisture is between the skull and bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in its width, and the length of the fissure should be two fingers' breadth before it runs, and this is the shape of a spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the moisture is below the bones, then it is indicated that you see the joints of the head opened from all sides and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand inside the joints and this is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Extract all the moisture; strengthen the incisions with strips and feathers; bind it with wool and oil for five days, then loosen the bandage and cure the wound with salves and ointments, and keep the head in balance; feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision, which you consider appropriate according to the size of the abscess and collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repletion of water appears, and do so as is most convenient for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	Also observe that you do not incise the artery and the flow of blood escapes, causing the death of the patient by the flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Second Chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incision of the arteries which are called auricles.
Capitol segon.	Third Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a cataract or ulcer occurs in the eyes or foot and this is ancient, and it does not respond to medical treatment, then the last remedy in this case is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you wish to incise those arteries in the head of the patient, and you press the area with a rough cloth to make the arteries appear, and keep the neck of the patient straight with a cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each on the opposite sides of where the auricles are located, and these are hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Also press the artery with a probe and incise each one with a sharp spatula that enters into the bone, and let this be the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, place the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' breadth, for when any vein is incised the blood is discharged with pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear on the pressing, then it is necessary that you measure from the auricle the width of three fingers, and press with a probe, and do so in the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood to be drawn is one pint. And do not draw more or less of it, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the repletion of the artery from him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Approach the wound, and since it remains over the bone any cause of suppuration, then incise it to prevent purulent cautery.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Approach the wound with lint and cotton cloth, and apply care to it within until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or new ulcerated sore occurs due to acidic humidity and qualities in the temples, or a sudden and vehement sore similar to those, and it is treated with methods of medical cure but does not improve, then we have recourse to this illness, the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his hair in the temples; and understand the artery apparent in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in a few people due to coldness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and apply heat to the area with a rough cloth or boil the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then you take the spatula, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And approach the artery with the spatula until you reach it; and press down on one side and extract it from the upper parts until you extract it from the spine and uncover it from its sheath, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	However, if the artery is fine, you will envelop it with the index finger's tip, and then make an incision from one side according to the length by which the extremities are shortened and tightened, and there will be no blood flow, because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate the blood from it with a vacuum pump. To three (This line seems to be indicating a number of steps or repetitions in the procedure)
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with strong thread or cord, and not allow decay before the wound heals and ensure blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And make an incision in the excess tissue between the two layers, and do so at that time or another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife before making the incisions in the extremities, and leave the site of that work alone.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has a fever or a hot complication, because cauterization is of those causes that aid in drying the humidity, and therefore it is better to use it as a supplement.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to approach the extraction of arteries that the place of the old wound be cleaned thoroughly, and place powder on it properly made, and apply dry medicine to make the flesh swell and warm until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during another observation blood flow from the artery occurs during the procedure, then you should try to stop the blood, either with a cauterizer or by filling the wound, and tighten your hand until the blood stops flowing.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes are not present, you should place a hot compress over the site until the blood clots, and seal the site with hot water of intense heat until the inflammation subsides, and tighten as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery made of two blades, since you have marked both places and wait for each one, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it can be elongated between the extremities, because it is not consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The thickness of both blades should be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the thickness of both blades is less than two, it is better, because if they are sharp like two knives close together, they will not cut through the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, because there is some coarseness in those, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this procedure is better than any other and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two blades should be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of chests with acute and acidulous ulcers from cold.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic ulcers and they are in the chest over the neck of the head, and no cause for improvement in them is found with any medicine, and at times the face of the patient turns red and walks as if it were ants walking on it, and the sores of this are extended, humidified until their hair falls out, and their parotids are scaled by the acidity of the tears, the ancient agro mesties used to treat these with this operation, and I call that cure a spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the patient to shave the hairs on his forehead and make three incisions, equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of each incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids, which are on the eyelid, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of each incision is adjusted to three fingers width.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry towels ready, use them to stop the bleeding.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert two pointed instruments into the incision, of which one has this shape:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the division of the temple to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove all the cartilage that is between two incisions and remove the bone chip that is on top of the bone, then proceed from the mid-incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then straighten the first instrument and insert another tool called scissors, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Stop the sides of that sharp tool at the cartilage and follow the bone, then push it all the way through to reach the mid-incision, and separate all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Continue the incision as long as it appears that you reach the cartilage, and then proceed from the mid-incision to the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the blood flow is sufficient, press the places of the blood clots with a compress.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then pause in each incision for a short time, and press on the powder in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixture, making sure it does not turn into an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm water or tea, and treat it with basilica oil and other remedies until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of abscesses by cupping and from heels descending from the divisions inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When someone has a painful and continuous abscess and the patient's heels are swollen and weak, and their eyelids ulcerated and their hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the front of the head with subsequent extension, then you should know that the substances and cupping do not come from any other veins but those of the divisions inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, small in length (and starts from the left temple to the right temple; and it should be an incision through the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are painful due to massage), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all the blood with a sponge or dry towel and then fill between the two lips of the incision with cotton or dry towels.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then press on it with powder in vinegar and oil to prevent an abscess from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has decreased, it is then necessary to cut the bone starting from where there is no flesh, and treat it with an extract of darnel root which will help the flesh to heal, as if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mixed them together, and made a paste that should be applied to these sores at the base of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what occurs in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that occur in the ears belong to one of four species, either mineral or resembling minerals such as iron and glass, or from plants such as wax or beans, or fluid such as water, vinegar and their likes, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when mineral matter or something similar to it enters the ear, and the ear stops functioning, close the ear to the ground, and if you see the mineral, distill it using some volatile oil or camphor, and administer the extraction, make the patient sneeze with appropriate conditions, and apply camphor to the nose for the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then cover the area around the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to its sides, since many times this is forgotten due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not addressed, administer the extraction with the instrument called gystic spicula, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is forgotten with gystic spicula, that's good; if not, administer the extraction with an implement of little duplication (i.e., a thin cannula).
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of iron and insert the tip of the cannula into the ear canal and close the exterior of the cannula with wax and soft oil to prevent the cannula from being opened except for it.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then draw out the air with strong suction, as many times as you have realized (i.e., noted).
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, take alum powder or prepared with vinegar, and place a small quantity of it at the end of the cannula, and cover that area decently with it.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it gently into the ear canal and extract the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if it is not forgotten with all the causes you have noted, you should be careful when cutting the skin that forms an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting it is that you first draw blood from the saphenous vein and extract it according to its virtue, and then place the wax between your hands and turn the ear to its sides, and make a small incision in the ear canal to release the pus in the area most pressing.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the incision should be of lunar shape to reach the mineral, and when the mineral is removed, close that opening with appropriate instruments; and sew up the incision at that time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that grows and swells, administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if you do not observe this carefully, take thin spittle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and apply the abscission of that fat which is swollen in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and leave it in several pieces, and extract it from there with scissors or gystic spicula, or by abscission as mentioned above, since the extraction is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with appropriate conditions at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and massage over the affected ear where the water is located, and if this is forgotten, it's okay; but if not, take many thin needles and leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of these into the canal of his ear and sneeze on a stone of that side and strike another needle against the needle inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop this with mineral until all the water has been removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water is removed, take paper or cotton to dry it. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end toward the fire until it is burned as much as possible.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And you place a cloth and another one on top, and do this several times until all the water is expelled, and then strain that with a straw as was said before about the stone remover.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Furthermore, when extracting an animal, if it is a small object, proceed as previously said; but if it is of large size and causes swelling in the neck, then administer the extraction using the methods and instruments mentioned earlier, and this will make it easier to remove than all other causes that may occur during the extraction.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Furthermore, when extracting worms generated in the ear, if you have used the method and ingredients mentioned earlier and your treatment does not work, then you must observe the ear at the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then you extract it using methods or subtle instruments; but if no cause is found, then take a narrow tube from below and a wide one above, as follows in form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow end of the tube into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if no improvement is observed in the patient, you seal and close the opening of the tube with wax as previously said; you administer distillations that have been used by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and observe it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion, with which you infuse the medical oils into the ear using this instrument, is as follows in form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, narrow below, with a small hole and flat above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And let it be such that the stopper for the tube is in the concavity of the conical tube, where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it appropriately around the end of it; then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any medicine of your choice into the tube (which is in the ear), and then insert the reed with appropriate force and squeeze it gently until the oil is expelled in the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	The oil that will be infused into the ear should already be warmed slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Ensure that the cause you are going to distill in the ear is not too cold, because the medicines of the ear do not tolerate it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of inflammation of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some young children suffer from inflammation of the stomachs of their mothers that are not perforated, and this happens in some men, inflammation in the tissue of the ear due to a blow or rotten flesh there; and this inflammation sometimes occurs at the front part of the hole of the ear that does not heal, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens at the front part of the hole that does not heal is in the greatest state of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which heals, it is necessary to place the ear of the patient in the sun and observe it there.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if inflammation heals up, open it with a thin spatula, whose form is as follows:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it (the ear) is narrow, with one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be twice as wide to avoid damaging the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is due to rotten flesh in the ear or in the tissue of it, then you remove it with subtle instruments and make a deep incision until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If inflammation is at the front part of the ear, you take a thin reed and warm it slightly with fire, then insert it gently into the tissue of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel inflammation with what the patient complains about due to pain, relieve the pressure by making an incision with ease; and ensure that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	You place a linen cloth on the ear according to the size of the hole that you have covered with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any herb and soak it in water and grind it into powder, then apply it to the same place; and if you see the ear already dressed, you must remove it and replace it with another that you will cover with a cork made with olive oil, until the abscess is cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillations.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of athazel which affects the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazil, which sometimes affects the eyelids of humans and is moist at some times, dry at others.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have them held open or bound with some sort of binding, and cut off the eyelashes at their roots, and place something over the area as described below.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with bleeding occurs, then you should cauterize the eyelid with a subtle cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wounds heal completely when there remains no cause for their recurrence; and when they are cauterized with fire, the eyelashes are burned up and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of swelling that occurs on human eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	When swelling that occurs on the eyelids of humans is caused by some factor similar in nature to swelling but more intense and lasting, it is called "mota."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	Addition of thick moisture in the upper and lower parts of the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure in this case is to determine if the swelling is coming from some foreign object that is harmful all around it; and the cause of this is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision along the length of the foreign object, and remove it completely with ease, and then suspend it with some sort of binding and cut off its root.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped to make the incision of the foreign object and it is difficult to penetrate the eyelid with the incision, then this may indicate some underlying cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the shape is large, adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, then there will be no harm to you as the anguent of the foreign object restores and absorbs it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is receding towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should clean the inner surface of the eyelid, then pull back the eyelid and suspend the swelling with some sort of binding, as you may need to make an incision. If the incision along the eyelid is long, this may indicate some underlying cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Make the incision, clean the wound with salt water; and care for the area until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	To ask for care in the eyelid above the eyebrow.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Asking for the treatment of a growth that arises in the eyelid above the eyebrow, especially in children, which worsens their ulcers and aggravates their cataracts; and they cannot see the light of the sun due to tears being produced there.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore, those growths often lie on the cheeks all the time and on the cheeks when sleeping; and the lower eyelids are usually wet, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the imminence of inflammation is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, the inflammation enters there.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Some method of operation is in that where the patient lies his head on your lap, and places a cloth over it and you apply heat, and make a circle according to the size that contains arsenic from all parts, and place that on top of it and press with your fingers all around so that inflammation is collected in the middle of the circle, and open a hole in the middle of that wetness with a spatula entering through the slit, but the slit should not be larger than the one made during lancing.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	However, in the opening, it is necessary that you cut through the skin completely to reach arsenic, because in the most severe cases, arsenic is processed through a slit in the form of white chalk.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges and twist between the right and left hand until it is separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to push too hard on the slit, so that with the spatula you do not touch the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	However, if the arsenic does not appear at the beginning of the slit, but you press in the slit a little and facilitate processing arsenic; and then extract it as previously stated; and submerge cloths from it in water and vinegar, place them over the area and strain them with sand.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And there is also salt that you place in the concavity of the slit to remove any remaining moisture from it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal it with care until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	However, if an abscess appears at the site of the cauterized wound, treat it with plasters made from cedar until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On ways to examine the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When ulcers of the eyes are caused by excessive pressure on the natural eyelashes and are chronic, it is necessary to examine them and find ways to treat diseases such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids, which may cause destruction of the eye that is called tactinir del huel, and treatment is carried out in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with an acute medicine as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done tactinir per incisione e sutura; or with cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye towards your left hand, and if it is turned, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the one in which there is no division below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through it, and this should be - near the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are - near the lashes, and pull the thread from above with the eyelid, and turn it towards the nose.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And open the division inside the eyelid below the pressed lashes with a spatula entering from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal; and extract the thread and place it under the eyelid with small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then press on the eyelid with tweezers as in the figure of a mirror leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary that the figure be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it varies in men, as there are those who require a large incision in the eyelid according to the degree by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And open with the spatula on both lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes as is the thickness of a king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the scissors in one of the two angles of the skin, and excise it entirely, and suture the two lips with surgical thread or fine wool, and remove the blood, and let any excess threads adhere to both eyebrows with some glue if you want to do so, but if not, don't care.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And remove the stitches from the threads in three or four days and treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound without stitching, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and the addition of oil; but stitching is better, and therefore ancient practitioners prefer it.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, if there is a need to examine the patient, it is a good action, and there is no fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	This is another method of examination, and it is by marking the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and then lifting the eyelid with three separated and joined needles according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to use needles, then take a needle with thread and insert the thread in the middle of the figure, and pierce the upper eyelid near the larger lacrimal duct, and near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the threads equally and lift your hand with this elevation, raise the entire membrane on which it is marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for the inside so that it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, and treat the abscess with cautery and lancing, and drain it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some times the eyelash hairs are converted into the eyelid, so you must use for this what I have said of incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Anoint the reed in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	You will transform the eyelid and cut the figure within it according to what I have described, and then carefully insert two reeds or thin sticks of a length equal to that of the eyelid and narrower than the space between them.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have made an incision at the ends of each divided part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Apply each thread with subtlety under the excess of the upper eyelid, and hold the reeds of each divided part tightly, and leave it for several days, as the membrane will die from the constriction and become denuded and eventually fall off by itself and be absorbed into the body.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break the thread with forceps, and care for the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when the membrane is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not penetrate.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two reeds that you will make as follows:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On lifting hairs that penetrate the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are non-natural, hard, sharp and penetrate the eyelid, perform the operation in such a manner that you take a fine needle, pause it in a fine cedar or lemon beech wood, and ensure that you adjust the ends carefully and not harm them in any subtle way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the threads should be equal to the width of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And prepare another fine thread quickly nearby, and use the ends of it if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Place the patient's head in your lap and position it towards the sun so that your work is visible, as this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair that requires pressure, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Pull the hair out and insert it in the incision, and let there be one or two or three hairs but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Pull your hand out with the hair until it is outside the eyelid, and remove it from the incision with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the incision is closed and the hair is not yet outside the eyelid, you will pull the incision to the divided part nearby with the thread that you have prepared, until the incision is opened from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And observe it with the view of the eyelid, as you will pull out the incision and the thread, and grind each tooth and clamp the eyelid, and leave the clamps for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it on good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer natural hair and lift it up with it, or let it remain until it grows to an appropriate distance, and you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of this excoriation that appears on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eyelid is excoriated and it contracts when closed on one side, whether due to poor healing of a wound or cut or burn, and it is called leprosy, and this excoriation may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of a wound or cut or burn, or similar to their misfortune.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in that area is to cut through the consolidated tissue and separate the lips of it, place a piece of linen cloth on it, and bind them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to use cure for the causes that dry it out or compress it; because if you do this, excoriation will return even worse and there will be no healing at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for that cause those things that soften it, such as fennel, and soak it with a solution of its seeds and root, or gum arabic, which should be melted with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it and heal with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The secret of your cure is that you perform everything without any consolidation, as it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have said is nothing but a correction of excoriation that does not restore the shape of the area as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of excoriation that appears on the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This excoriation that appears on the lower eyelid, which is truly called excoriation; and it may be natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental is caused by a wound or cut or burn or others similar to them.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation in that area is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And stretch the skin at the upper edges with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and incise it widely with a blunt instrument.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if the shape of the eyelid is restored as it should be, good; otherwise, take the edge and place it in the split shape, and with that convert the lower eyelid, and open the two fissures on the sides of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the two extremities of the two fissures should be at two angles of the incision that you have made until they meet, and their angle formed there should be a figure of them when they come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter L: Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And place the skin in that area for the width of the sharp edge below it, which is the thickness of the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread, and heal those areas with what was said of the softening agents and plasters until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if excoriation occurs due to a split or stitch or burn, it is necessary that you make a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid as described before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate with a plaster between two lips as described before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary of the sermon on the treatment of excoriation whether it is above or below, the operation should be carried out according to the shape of the excoriation, which is in various forms of spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skillful craftsman always prepares means in every method that is possible to return the shape to its natural form or as close as possible, and the patient according to the operation and the instruments in the greatest discretion.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion between the eyelid and the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, that the eyelid is adhered to the conjunctiva or cornea and it is hindered by the ease of movement and natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the outer edge of the lower eyelid, lift it upwards, or stretch it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you incise the adhesion with a blunt instrument, which is not as sharp as the incisions, having a rounded tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the instrument without hurting the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it excoriates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And place salt water in the eye to rinse it, or distill it in rosewater dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Approach separating between the eyelid and the cheek with a spatula of warm water, place on the cheek a cloth infused in alum solution, and use a third day for consolidative causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	This seems to be the title or section number, but without additional context, it's impossible to provide an accurate translation. The number "xvi" appears to be Roman numerals, suggesting that this text may come from a European origin. However, without further information, I can't be certain.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the nail and on the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail can occur in two ways: either it is nerve-like, hard and delicate; or it is non-nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture, which when struck, if it is hollow inside, immediately absorbs oil, becomes separated, and the oil is not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the tear duct extends beyond the large one, which gradually covers vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of working on it is that the patient bends their head towards you, and you open the eyelids, raise the upper eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with oil of moderate thickness and extend it to the corners above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Approach taking a needle and pierce the skin of a cow or bull or ox, or something similar, or strong iron, or duplicate the tip of the needle slightly, and insert it into the middle of the nail, penetrate it with the needle, hold the nail firmly; extend it to the corners above, excavate the skin around the base of the nail which seals the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way, you follow it with the skin to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Approach you incise the remnant of the tear duct at its root with a scalpel or small scissors, and cut the natural tissue of the tear duct to prevent continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	In some cases, the nail with its sole extended or strong may be like this, as we have said, and it should be excised with a lion's claw, which is the shape of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Be careful that with the scalpel you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause a rupture, and ensure that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the incision in the eyelid with a little bit of salt ground or lime made from sandalwood, let it sit for one day, and care for it with water until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle into it, or it is not filled with oil, then this type of nail is cured with medicine, and healed in this way as I have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you open the eyelid of the patient and take a scalpel lion with fine sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	refinement (or subtlety)
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is rarefied and condensed and used in that remedy, then distill it from your own hour into the head oil made of sinander or rose oil or salted oil, and apply it to the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then you repeat the operation on it until everything that is in it has been removed, unless the counter-abscess forms in the oil, in which case you let it go, and at first you treat the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the eyelid flesh, if observed to be of great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and cut it from one side, and do not finish the incision so that you do not cause a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the rose oil and sinander oil into the eyelid for as long as it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of hernia and what is born from skin growing into the oil.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyelid oil of axes, skin grows red and covers the pupil or is close to or extends beyond the eyelids and presses the eyelids at the sides and resembles a rosebud on a balcony railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	However, the operation on it is that the patient lies down his head in your lap; and open the eyelids of that one and collect all that skin with convenient hooks or tweezers; and then incise the skin at the beginning until everything is finished with scissors, and be careful not to cut the oil that you must keep for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Make the incision with which you cut that one or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors according to what form comes close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when your incision is complete and all that skin is removed, fill the oil with salted oil or distill into it red powder similar to the powders of corrosive medicines, and place a piece of raw egg white over the oil until it is assured that there is no counter-abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of hernia and the abscess is filled with pus and you fear an abscess counteracting it, then let go the oil and treat that abscess with whatever can dissolve it; and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do with the skin growing into the oil of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be sure to avoid all care of the oil free by natural means or by accident, act with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Chapter XIX.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge of red veins which are hard on the oil and prevent clothing from being worn, and loosen the oil for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at first that you consider whether the oil in which knowledge is present is strong and there is no other illness except knowledge; if so, you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to lie down his head in your lap and suspend those veins with a hook or two according to your discretion, and that hook should be of double refinement like this:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two hooks gradually on one body like this:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And those veins, which are sometimes fine and subtle, should be gathered together, with subtlety, and the blood withdrawn little by little until you see the veins to have receded and become slack.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to injure the body at the end of the operation; if your action is before midday and firm in your actions, do not cut anything but the veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill over the wound with green or red vinegar to burn away what has been left of the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to gather everything at that time, then collect all that pain subsides and apply something that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain is soothed and assured that it has become an abscess safely.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the procedure as needed until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of a hernia at the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat a hernia with cautery or acute medicine as mentioned above and it is not healed, do not try to manipulate it, but rather cut through the abscess matured, extract all the moisture that is within it, and dig down until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument that has this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a sharp-edged head, and it should be made of iron or wood, and the head should be rounded like a pea that has been pierced through with a drill or alum pierced subtly (like this example below).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place the sharp-edged instrument on the corrupted part of the bone and rotate it between your fingers and press gently until you know that the corruption has been shaved off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and strengthening agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and good flesh grows back and the body separates from the wound and remains for forty days without being renewed, an abscess does not form, and there is no recurrence of the problem, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, do not try to manipulate it, but rather reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should make an incision with scissors or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, take three pieces according to this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the iron should be triangular and its shaft narrowed to the tip as sometimes it is shaped like this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Place the iron on the bone, which is the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little beyond the wound, and rotate your hand with the three pieces until they penetrate through the entire bone, and the patient feels the air come out as their hand releases it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with drying and strengthening agents such as they have been prescribed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and area has hardened, return the material that flowed out at the sides to the nose, so it is easy for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the protrusion of the skull.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the skull protrudes completely and there is no harmful swelling or decrease, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then place a warm cloth over their neck without incision and draw out pus by good suction; and apply liniment on the bulge made of catachrone, aloe, cedar oil, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the padding on the skull with little powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is to take lion's wool, and each piece should be folded into four layers; and make powder from it.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Place one layer on top of the other according to the amount that the skull needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen them with durable cloth and firm binding; repeat the suction without incision; and close the swellings and tighten the skull during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament becomes softened in between, it is necessary to be firm.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And close the ligament during the day and night as we said before.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If you see that the hernia has already been reduced, it is good, otherwise, repeat the plaster with powders and constriction and fumigation until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	This seems to be a heading or title for a section in the text. It's difficult to provide an exact translation without more context, but "Capitol" is likely the Latin word for chapter, so this could mean Chapter XXI (the twenty-first chapter) in English.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	This line appears to be a heading or title for a section in the text as well, and it seems to be written in a language that is similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translation of "De la inscizio" from Italian or Spanish would be "Of the incision" in English, and "de la" means "of the" in both French and Spanish. "eminencia de la tunica uvea" can be translated as "prominence of the uveal tunica" in English. It's possible that this section is about making an incision on the prominence of the uveal tunica, but without more context it's difficult to say for certain.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it protrudes out through the eyelids like a grain of sand, and you wish to make an incision, then the procedure is as follows: you introduce the needle into the edge of the uvea from below where it was divided above, and bring another needle up through the tear duct. Then insert the first needle again in its position; and cut the place where the double thread intersects and lift off the part of the uvea around the needle, and hold that spot firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and wait for the woolen thread soaked in oil of alum to pass through the eye and reach the suture.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the wound with something that helps it heal until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Sometimes, a large protrusion is gathered together with a circle of cloth around the wound and then perforated with a thin spatula at its base, allowing the moisture to reach the white part of the eye, and causing the protrusion to descend quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then hold firmly until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	This seems to be a heading or title for a new section in the text. The number "xxii" suggests that this could be Chapter XXII (the twenty-second chapter) in English. However, without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what topic this new section is about.
De curacio de alconati.	This line appears to be a heading or title for a section in the text, and "De" is likely the Latin word for "of" or "about." "alconati" does not appear to be a recognizable term in any of the Romance languages (Latin, Italian, Spanish, French) that the original text seems to be based on. However, "alcone" is an Italian word meaning "eyelid," so it's possible that this section is about treating some kind of condition or injury related to the eyelid. Without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what this section is about.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This condition called "alconati" is not simply watery discharge from the eye, but rather something different.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of working on it is to have the patient place their head directly and steadily on a pillow, and then grasp their head with both hands and press gently until you see the discharge come out from the affected area. Then, let it dry without descending, and keep the eyes open, so that the patient can see the causes as they did before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, you should know that it is watery discharge.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	However, if the descent of the discharge is not prepared as described earlier, then have the patient press between your hands and take a thin spatula, hold it over the white part of the eye (the pannicol) surrounding a small area of the conjunctiva near the cornea in the crown (at the location where it emerges), until the discharge is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once the discharge is expelled, you should then distill water that has been infused with oil or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	This seems to be a heading or title for a new section in the text. The number "xxii" suggests that this could be Chapter XXII (the twenty-second chapter) in English. However, without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what topic this new section is about.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Treatment of water descending from the head.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the specifics about the water in the division and what must be pierced according to the sermon declaring it, then you should choose the appropriate one according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should secure the patient between your hands on a chair and hold their head tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected eye, if the eye from which the water is coming is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take a lancet, if the affected eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the point of the lancet near the crown for the thickness of the eye's white in the eyelid above the lower eyelash, and then press down on the lancet with your thumb.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And pierce the white part of the eye and feel that the lancet has penetrated due to blood flowing out.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The length of the path of the lancet to the puncture should be measured from the pupil to the end of the iris, and that is the crown of the eye; for you will see the iris with the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Place the lancet into the area where the water is present and then press down on it once, so if the water flows out immediately, you should inform the patient to open their eyes immediately and let the water flow out of their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then wait for a while; if the water has flowed out, you should wait a little longer to make sure that no more water flows out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	When it is dry and no more water flows out, you should extract the lancet with ease, then gently press on the area with your hand a little at a time, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gemma into the water and use that to wash the eye inside; and then apply an external ointment or stopper or infused wool in oil roseate and albumen of egg white and ligua over the affected eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those who are from our time apply a compress with albumen of egg to that eye.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you find it difficult to insert the lancet into the eye due to its hardness - for some people's eyes are very hard -, then you should take some sputum, which is called "alberid", and this is its shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore pierce that conjunctiva and do not injure your hand in the process, and it is not necessary to make a large incision.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the lancet as previously instructed.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must complete the treatment, prepare a comfortable sleeping area for the patient where they can sleep on their back in a dark room and prohibit any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Wait for nature to take its course, and do not turn the patient's head to either the right or left side at any time.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Let the patient rest according to their disposition for at least three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then move the patient to that dark room and remove the bandage from their eye, and have them look at various objects, and return them to rest on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	It is not necessary to perform this procedure during curative hours or immediately after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You must remove this because it can easily escape due to its great and violent movement.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs, it is necessary to loosen the skin around it within seven days and correct the abscess with the same water that caused it.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you clean the wound and place a plaster on its oral surface to guide the healing of the wound for several days, as long as it exists in the most dark place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually direct it away from that place and investigate its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that in alcohol you are not excused from the disciple seeing it several times, and then you must be daring with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have now learned of one of those who are called The Alchemist, and one said that he made fire in the Airy Magdame pierced with which water is drawn off.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen this in our land who has perfected it, nor has water been read about in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of magical seeds for which he who knows not these can use them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of herbs or iron specifically, and they are the extensions of them with this subtle triangular subtleness, the pointed end being in the shape of this.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the healing of dead flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse fleshes some of which have a cause similar to the scorpion with many legs, or to the polyps feet; and this illness is called "polyp" because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there is cancerous flesh, leprous, of dark color; and it is that which is called the lion's flesh, not dark.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those who do not have fraudulent or cancerous lion flesh, it is necessary to make the patient seize it with his hands and place it in the sun, break the nose open, and pick at the lions' flesh where it is found.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove that from the surrounding areas, and then incise what you have captured of it with a sharp subtle spatula between the parts where you know all the flesh has been removed; because if any cause remains for which abscission is possible, then you scrape it with one of the subtle tools until no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	However, if it is lorded by pus or an abscess occurs, you must stop it; or if they are malignant abscesses, you must cut and cauterize it until it is abscised and all the cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And place salt or vinegar and water in the nose near the incision.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	However, if the nose is opened and moisture enters the palate, then you know that it has been cured.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	However, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that inside there is dead flesh in the puss sores of the nose to which abscission has not occurred.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must insert a file into it with some thickness, and use many nutz (small files), and pause between each nutz the amount of the finger or the thumb, and guide the patient and insert one end of the file into the nose with the ray or with another means that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And because this will be done, that you attract its smell to the channels of the nose until it reaches the back of the throat, which many observations show resembles this action by children in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And pause the two extensions of the file, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a meat saw with the files on the file itself, and do this until you know that the flesh is at the file's teeth.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And remove the file, and pause in the nose near the drainage of pus a cup, and do this for three days or more until the pus that was left from the flesh is corroded.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And in the end, pause in the nose with a lead pipe for several days until it is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	However, if there is no cure, use it (the procedure).
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making capilla purge maker with which essences and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do it with silver or herbs, which is similar to a small open lamp or little conch, and the metal is similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want to, make a closed cannula like a cane, and the cannula of the capilla purge maker should be flat, open; with which you have when you suck out oil or any liquid that you want from the juices and causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capillaries are precious: the recipe of strengthening castor oil, white balsam, ginger, and mustard seeds, saffron, long pepper, asafoetida, and epithymium of cumin. mix with the juice of wheat and cabbage, and they are made into pills, and a pill should be prepared with hot water, and it is placed in the patient's nose facing each other.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the boils at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Boils that are observed at the extremities of the nose and swell in some days to a considerable size before they burst, need to be treated according to the regulations specified for them.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and let it drain completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a cushion or apply a hot iron or medicine to burn the area.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it swells, consider if it has hardened, darkened and lost sensation, do not touch it with iron as it may be a cancerous abscess; for boils that hide such an abscess can cause great harm to the person who has it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is tender and not dark, and incision is possible everywhere, you should drain the pus from the patient and make the incision without fear, cure the area with what drains out and apply pressure until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose and lips and ear lobes when the continuity is broken by ulceration or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the continuity is broken in one of these cartilages, the operation should not be performed unless in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when there is any reason for that, consider if it is a fresh ulcer with its own pus, and you should align the two lips of the wound with suture and place your hand over it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of broken continuity are already separated and each is healed, you must cauterize each part of its incision with pus until it comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then you should align the two lips with suture and tie them, sprinkle pus from dragon's blood and let it dry on the plaster of dayfinicon or any other consolidating plaster, leave it for two or three days, remove it and replace it with another plaster until the sores are healed, and care for it with mouthwash until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	However, the method of suture is to attach the broken continuity with sutures or needles as in abdominal suturing, or attach it with adhesive as you have learned.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in the incisions inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Boils that occur in men in the incisions of their lips are caused by hard abscesses resembling pimples, and some of them are smaller and others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must stretch the lips and incisions of each of them completely, place the abscess with dry sage powder until the pus is reduced, and wash it with vinegar and care for the area with astringent water until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the tight flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Every now and then press on the tight flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called albulus, so you must hang it up or tie it with a thread and incise it as necessary, and let the blood flow or lance it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place a cushion over the site to be incised or another styptic powder or cauterizing agent.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If the flesh returns, incise it again secondarily and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return again.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	For the reason of tooth extraction.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth from the inner side and from the outer side and between the gums are attached sharp, jagged, or blackened roots that are yellowish or greenish and because the gum is corrupted and the teeth are loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, it is necessary that you hold the patient's head with your hands and raise his chin, extract the teeth where these sharpnesses and causes similar to sand appear, until there remains no cause for them, and do with the root and the yellowish and greenish discoloration and others until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If what is at the beginning of the procedure remains, that's good; if not, you must repeat the procedure on another day and the second and third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth have various types of pliers of different shapes and figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the pliers used to extract the tooth from the inner side are different from the pliers used to remove the tooth between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of pliers should be prepared, which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary to take care of the tooth from its pain with all caution and delay in total tooth extraction because there is no substitute for the waiting time when it is extracted, because it is a subtle substance that excuses itself during the tooth extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is full of pain in that tooth, it is necessary for you to be absolutely certain which tooth is painful, because many times the pain deceives the patient and leads him to believe that a healthy tooth is causing pain, and you extract the former and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, because we have seen this in barber surgery.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is painful, and if you know it well, it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with spatula in which there may be some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of all sides, and apply warm it to the area or fine-tipped forceps gradually until it becomes soft.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply some oil or an ointment of strong consistency or structure to the area with forceps of good quality and hold the patient's head between your knees so that he does not move, and apply pressure on the tooth in the correct position, taking care not to break it and not to cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if the instrument is not forgotten, take one of them and put it there with ease and force until it is removed as in the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or corroded, it is necessary that you wrap the fracture with cloth and tighten it with a fine thread at the end so as not to break it during your compression on it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	It is necessary to work carefully with incision in the entire circumference of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not break and remains divided, and return over the patient because the pain may be greater than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity during the tooth extraction, because they do not administer what we have recommended; because many times they bring upon sick men great pains that are difficult to treat, and all the roots of the teeth remain, or some of them remain, or extract it with bones from the jaw as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And before tooth extraction, wash the mouth with water or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of blood from this area, as often happens, throw some vinegar on it and if it does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps should be long-handled and fine-tipped at the start, long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And should be such that the handles are sometimes thick until when they are narrowed, they are not bent, and they are short in length.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of iron from India and straight in length, and in the tips of these there are teeth that interlock and tighten strongly when pulled, and sometimes the tips of these are shaped like the beak of a heron (or stork) called ciconia, which has a strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital. XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of broken bones in the jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the removal of a tooth that is broken remains for some reason, you must stop at the site and bind it with lint or tweezers similar to the beak of a heron (or stork) called ciconia or gawain, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of these are made like a file or pliers.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey with these forceps or tweezers, you must cauterize the root and remove all the flesh, inserting the tool called atali, which is a small lever with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be short in length with a large thick end, not bent to prevent breaking.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Thus if the root is forgotten, it will be fine; otherwise, help yourself with other instruments whose forms are as follows: The first instrument has a triangular tip with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the third instrument should be that it has a triangular tip and is very thin.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you are helped by this instrument, which has two arms whose form is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments which I shall mention for tooth-shaving; for it is also done with this instrument that resembles a large claw, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	the triangle-shaped twisted or short blunt tip, which should have some thickness, and not be too narrow to avoid splitting.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Also know that the tools for teeth movement are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle craftsman himself determines, according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; because for those diseases that ancient practitioners would not have mentioned or paused over, they had no special instruments due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are split, or if they swell, place a hot poultice on it in its place with whatever is appropriate for the purpose from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and assist with this gesture which has the following form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be gradually made smaller, and kept in the mouth to prevent it from swelling or escaping until the entire bone is healed; then restore the area with appropriate medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small purulence in the bone, cut out that pus and its blackness, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth protuberances above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude not according to their natural shape, the form is unlawful, and more so in women, and especially in virginal women; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and cannot be sutured or lined with ointment, root it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument of the following shape; similar to a pig's tusk, made from Indian steel of sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Make your cut with the following shape in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and avoid cutting any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a tooth protrudes excessively due to wearing down, grind it with an Indian steel file of the following shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It should be entirely made of Indian steel and the handle should be rounded; it should have several small pointed tips like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be ground gently for several days to prevent damage to other teeth and gums.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then straighten it at the end, and cut it with other scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if part of a tooth is split and the tongue touches it, you must grind it down to where the sharp edge of that fragment remains covered and sutured, and fill it in to prevent the tongue from getting hurt or the word from being spoiled.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with a gold or silver filigree.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are damaged due to shock and removal by striking or hunting, and the patient cannot chew food, and you have treated it with stiffening medications but your treatment has not worked, then in order not to let them spoil, strengthen them with a gold filigree and not silver, because silver turns green and becomes porous after several days, while gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The filigree should be made with the appropriate thickness and fineness such that it can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is to take the filigree and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and let it grow with one or several twists between the damaged teeth, until the wire reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply the filling to the damaged area where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is healed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Your string should be used to tighten the filigree of the roots of the teeth that have not fallen out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Cut off the excess filigree with forceps or pliers, and add them in each place with gestures, and turn and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so as not to hurt the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Loosen it gently as if unthreading a Roman thread.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it loosens or breaks, strengthen it with another filigree in all circumstances.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown in various examples:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When a tooth or teeth are removed and their roots are returned to their original location and they grow again as we have recommended, and new teeth sprout.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only skilled and wise craftsmen should do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes a cow's bone can be used for some reason of the teeth, and it is made in the shape of a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth has failed, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament that appears in the tongue, which prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that appears occasionally on the tongue, sometimes naturally, or which a person does not have by birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the procedure is that you open the mouth of the patient and their head is on your lap; raise their tongue, and approximately incise the ligament nerve as far as the tongue's base is free from its recent congestion.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is some hardness or knot there, and it is fixed due to injury consolidation, then you pour oil and cut it as far as the ligament has been incised and the knot has been loosened.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a gap in the skin of the incision and to cut through only the arch and bring out blood flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And let it be washed with water, vinegar or cold water to rinse the incision site; and then place a clean cloth under the tongue, as this is the part of the body that the patient should keep moist at all times so that it does not consolidate again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is blood flow, place a piece of cotton soaked in vinegar; but if the bleeding stops, then cauterize the area with a cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And apply the appropriate remedies to heal it (the ligament).
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the removal of a salmon-like swelling under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Occasionally, a painful swelling resembling a mole appears under the tongue, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and in severe cases, it swells so much that the mouth is filled.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure is to open the mouth of the patient facing downward and examine the mole.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see a dark-colored or black, hard mole that the patient does not feel, do not touch it as it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it has a whitish appearance with moisture, you pour oil on it, and then incise it with a thin spatula from all sides; if bleeding occurs during the operation, place cotton soaked in vinegar over it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And return to your work once you have treated it with the appropriate remedies, until it is cleaned with vinegar and salt; heal it with other treatments suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the removal of moles with two ears (pedunculated moles) and those that are not attached to the urethra and other moles.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is a swelling in the scrotum filled with fluid (hydrocele), they are gland-like structures that can appear on the outside and are called pedunculated moles; when you treat them as mentioned in the division, but it does not heal, consider if the mole is hard, dark-colored, with little sensation, do not cut it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red and the area around it is thick, do not cut it with a knife due to bleeding; let it mature first, and then either pull it out or let it break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white, round, and the area around it is thin, then it should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure is to determine if the mole has rested for at least ten days with cauterization or if it has decreased in size with some reduction; then place the patient face down, and hold their head in your lap, open their mouth, and the servant holds the tongue of the patient from below with a noble instrument of the following shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	As you press the tongue and show the mole to you, touch it with your finger, take oil and apply it to the area around it; then pull it out in pieces as far as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or if you are pulling the mucosa for some reason, and the mole is incised with an instrument of the following shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the prongs of it are curved so that the orifices of each are opposite, sharp, and the tip should be made of smooth iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, incise it with a spatula of the following shape: Sharp on one side, dull on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one mole, incise the other according to this method of incision, and apply cold water to the area to prevent infection.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if bleeding occurs, apply a solution of coriander or mirtle leaves and similar to those used for styptic purposes until the bleeding stops, and heal it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes we find growths or ulcers other than those two ears, and incise them as I have said in the section on incising two molars together.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have treated a woman with an ulcer that originated in her armpit, which was black and painless, and had already closed the armpit of her own accord, and the woman breathed laboriously, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and was approaching death if it lasted for another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The ulcer had grown so much that it burst through two openings within half a month.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I will make an incision in one of the openings and pull out that one, and tie off its large portion, and then I will incise the other opening where the incision from the first opening meets, and I will close the mouth of it, and press the tongue against it, and I will insert a finger into the opening in the ulcer.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I will cut out a large portion of it, and only a little blood flows from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the armpit of that woman is healed, and she should begin to drink water, and I will soon provide food, so that I do not continue to incise the ulcer for a long time, and another ulcer appears in place of it, which I will incise until it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I will anoint and cauterize the armpit of her, so that it heals more quickly; and I will also walk around, not knowing what God has in store for me regarding that matter.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incising an abscess when it becomes an ulcer.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr develops in an abscess that is ulcerated and long, it is called a fistula; and if it is in the thick, round portion, it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is cured as we have said in the division, and does not respond to your care, and sometimes an ulcerated fistula remains there and is subtle, then you must incise the one that is rounded; and if it is along its length and is bloody, dark or black, and is not sensitive, then you must be cautious with the incision, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it as I have described its whiteness and length, you should take hold of the patient and press their tongue against an instrument that is shaped to match its form and place your finger into the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the section on incising two molars.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	You must not incise it unless it is aligned with the natural term without adding anything, because if you incise too much, you will injure its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what I have recommended in the section on incising two molars, and take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, you must use oil for cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterizing it is only with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, press their tongue against the instrument that I have mentioned, and take some of the water that was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the wound, which should not be thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument with the same shape.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external part of the concavity in which the medicine is placed should be shaped like a spoon's handle, and the instrument with the medicine should be placed on the wound, and the patient should cough over their lap so that saliva or mucus from their mouth passes through the internal medicine, so that it does not cause any infection on the armpit of the patient and that it dries up.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine and squeeze it over the uvula for about an hour until you see it turn black and swell due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, you can tie it with a thread and wrap it around the end of the finger, immerse the thread in the medicine, insert the finger into a tube that is larger than the thread until the thread adheres to the tube, and perform this procedure as many times as needed for the cauterization of the uvula, and let it dry and fall off approximately three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and be careful to clean the area around the uvula with a cotton swab dipped in boiling water, and use the solution that is in the circuit of the medicine, and let it be cleaned with warm water, healed outside with an ointment, and inside with guargarismes until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, which is healed by subfumigation in this manner: take camomile, hyssop, origanum, rue, sciceda arabica, chammomile, crushed, and similar herbs, and combine all or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; let the pot be well heated with moderate heat, and in one part of the pot there should be an opening, over which a concave instrument made of iron according to this method is placed; it can be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	The intestine should be introduced into the mouth of the patient up to where the steam can reach the uvula, until the uvula is moistened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then insert the intestine into that moist area until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess, for it would constrict the abscess too much, which should not be done, instead you should make the incision of the abscess in a cautious manner.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If that instrument is not at hand, then take a cane and form a hole with honey in the mouth of the patient to keep the steam from burning their mouth, as the honey stopper prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capital XXXVIII. (The numbering system seems to be referencing a medical text or book)
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and adhesions in the glans penis, and other causes. (This appears to be the title of the text)
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Moistened areas adhered in the glans penis or thorns or any other cause. (The first part of a description of what this treatment is for)
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you should extract what is apparent from those areas, which can be seen, by pressing the tongue with an instrument only, so that it is clear what is in the glans penis.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	What is not visible and hidden in the glans penis, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before food has been digested in the stomach, because a strong cause attached to the glans penis will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or ragwort root or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of sea sponge and force it into their throat strongly, then have them swallow it, for when it reaches the location where the thorns are, they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	However, take an eel and boil it, then let the patient drink it while holding it firmly; or take a porridge and put it in their mouth and pull it out through their throat.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	However, if those causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument made of lead in the following manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Although it appears to be a mix of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, the sentence structure, word choice, and medical context suggest that this text is in Medieval or Early Modern Italian. Here's the translation:
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And lift the patient's head upwards, and be careful to touch the bone of its neck, so that you can feel the bone and the cartilage or spine, or so that the doctor may touch it with his hand."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"However, it is better that the patient enters [the cavity] itself, because of his knowledge of the location of the connected cause and he feels it inside, then he pulls his hand up with the instrument, all according to the quantity that was prepared beforehand."
Capitol .xxxix.	This seems to be a title or heading, likely indicating the start of a new section in the treatise. In this case, "Capitol" is probably a reference to a chapter or section number, and ".xxxix." means the thirty-ninth chapter or section. The numbering system may differ slightly from modern standards, as this text appears to be written in an older language.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"On the extraction of a pus-filled abscess on the neck."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When a pus-filled abscess is treated with the medicine that was mentioned in the division of cure and does not improve, consider moving it to the neck of the patient, since you should be prepared with an instrument for that purpose."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"Therefore, if you see the pus-filled abscess, extract it gently and carefully with a small instrument or a delicate tool."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the neck of the patient, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula. Do this several times (until the pus-filled abscess dies and falls out of the neck) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"Then grab a water-filled syringe, open its mouth in that area, and wash the opening with it; do not let any obstruction or dirt enter it, and replace the water every hour with fresh water, for the pus-filled abscess often begins to drain when the water is felt."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"However, if the pus-filled abscess is not drained, fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument that was recommended for the fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"Do this, and it will fall."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"Another method of operation in fumigation is to take an oil in which charcoal is burned and the oil is covered with a cover on one end, and the tip of the instrument should be inserted into that opening; and then start the fumigation; place the patient's mouth over the opening of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost before you know that the fumigation has reached the pus-filled abscess, for the pus-filled abscess will soon fall."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If the cat doesn't purr, you must perform subfumigation multiple times and prevent the patient from drinking, cause them to eat salty and alkaline foods, not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the shape of the instrument with which arterial blood from the groin is treated when it appears; and it is similar to forceps in some ways, but it has a curve at some point.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The instrument is placed on the patient, and its extremity resembles a stork's beak, which is covered, sharpened with a file, to ensure that it does not slip when compressing something.
Capitol .xl.	Capital .xl (40).
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse on the treatment of abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many kinds, in many ways, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in the perforation and incision of them by two ways, one is for the kind of abscesses that are filled with pus; and through compressing moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method is for the places where this happens in the body, as an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Abscesses are some which should not be perforated unless they reach maturity or completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some abscesses must be drained when they are ripe and not allowed to mature according to their course, such as abscesses near a joint, because an abscess near a joint causes the prolongation of the problem until the pus is drained from around it, and its ligaments or nerves in that joint become corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or is an abscess belonging to a major organ, and if you delay the perforation of it beyond maturity, it will infect the major organ; or is near the buttocks, so drain it before it becomes ripe, otherwise it may spread to the sides of the buttocks and become a fistula, or be done in the area around it but not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is necessary that you know the time for the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it has become ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is ripe when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, along with the decrease in redness and pulse, and the increase in the abscess's sharpness, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that the perforation should be made in the place below the abscess and where the pus is coming out during healing of the edge.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The perforation should be done along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the joints or at the ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places that are not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use the perforation according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to wait for the perforation until the digestion of it has been confirmed according to its course, as we have said; because if you perform the perforation too soon, the course of the pus and pain is prolonged, and the edges of it become hardened and its depth increases.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Other abscesses must be drained according to the thickness of the flesh or body depending on the necessity, or according to what the member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to make a small perforation, and in large abscesses, a large and wide or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other abscesses are those in which the neck should be concave and incised when it is done so that bread can pass and when it is made in a place that has already opened, such as buboes or carbuncles.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those who are incised with a section, there are three angles; and of these is the one that is incised in such a way as the figure of myrtle leaves, as in the case of abscesses from arthritis.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those where a round section and crescent-shaped section are administered, these are similar.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	The one that is not like superficial abscesses such as lion's paw abscesses, you must perforate it with a shallow or simple perforation.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you must perforate it but be careful not to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted a portion of it, apply pressure on the abscess for another day, then extract a larger portion, and apply frequent observation until it is healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Furthermore, if the patient is weak, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decline, as animal spirits often dissolve with the discharge of pus, and it can cause death for the patient, you should take precautions.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	You should approach this chapter with great caution, and when you perform perforation on these abscesses, ensure that the surrounding area is clean, and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a simple incision, in which case you may apply some remedy from old wisdom; if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are numerous, you must pause at each step until everything is accomplished.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If part of the abscess is removed or if you have excavated it around its circumference, you must then cover it with old wool or thread made from cloth, like when you treat bread or razors, without moisture; hold it for three days, and treat and care for it with something that is suitable until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during your operation, you must administer warm water and wine in which a cloth is steeped, and place it on the site of the bleeding, observing it frequently.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding continues, you must administer treatment and care, and apply powders that have been recommended in various places of this treatise and other medical texts.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is wintertime, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you must apply poultices made of powder in wine and oil, and place them on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summertime, and the locations are fleshy, you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, keeping them warm until the third day, as we have said, and you must then remove the abscess and clean it, and apply treatment to it that is suitable until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the understanding of abscess treatment universally, but according to the distinction already mentioned in each type of abscess and its individual methods of treatment through specific chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On incision of abscesses that occur on the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the head, small abscesses occur, and there are certain types of nodes that contain tunics which are formed by them; these types are numerous.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	These [abscesses] have blisters, and some contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Some have moisture similar to powder and are similar to them, and some are stone-like and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the incision of all [abscesses], and in the removal of these [blisters], there should be no fear, as excising them does not counteract archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation for these [abscesses] is that you probe them with an instrument whose shape is similar to this one, which is called scissors, until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if it contains moisture, then you should cut it with an incision along its length in a superficial incision using this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Start the incision along line B to line G. Once the moisture is evacuated, you should remove that part which contains the moisture, and leave no cause of any kind behind, as prolonged observation will return if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, or water and salt; fill the wound with this mixture and leave it for another day, as it will dissolve everything that remains of the membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then you should repeat the application of Egyptian ointment on the wound secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that no further cause of the membrane remains; then you should care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If the abscess contains fatty nodes, you should incise it according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	With an incision having the shape of a cross, make an opening between the two lips of the incision and cut it through completely from one end to another, and force your strength in extracting the membrane that contains this.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your archery causes opposition, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And as for the cauterized boil, perform the section and treatment according to what I told you; and it is easier to make a section on the cauterized boil because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some of these boils are stones in the heads of some men who have none or very little moisture; this is caused because I made an incision on a boil in an old woman's head like hard, rough, white stone, which could not be crushed, and if someone struck it, he would be hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other boils occurring on the head, this is not within this chapter, such as boils that come to the heads of children and are caused by reasons related to the ears, but the section of all these should be a surface incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part, so that the body will be relieved at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply such remedy as is necessary for treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter forty-second.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	They are observed to swell deeply into these boils in the neck and on the shoulders and armpits, and some swell deeply into other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and those that are produced between them, and all scrofula of these is from its own covering, just as in the nodes and boils of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the kinds of these scrofulas are swellings, because some are stone-like and those containing moisture, and those that are malicious that do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see with good disposition in the incision, of which the color of what is manifest is similar to that of pus, and it is bad in all parts, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, nor does it project, you should make a superficial incision on the upper part of the body from the line of G to the line of B, remove the entire scrofula, and stretch two lips of the pus or one lip if you have necessity of those, as we have said in the boils of the head, and extract that small one bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful not to cut the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that your hand is not hurt or it disturbs the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or archery and prohibit yourself from operating, then stop in the wound treated with vitriol plaster or other powders which cause bleeding, and let it rest for a while until the acuity of the boil subsides and the wound is softened and begins to be pus-like.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have finished.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And ask the patient if there is any other cause of the small scrofulas, therefore incise those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is for the cause of a large scrofula vein, then you must not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then bring it with a firm twist and let it fall by itself without any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire scrofula, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and sew it as soon as possible without any waste.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is waste due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you should incise the root of that one, and remove it and administer suture and what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofulas containing moisture, perform a superficial perforation there where the maturation occurs, and stop the perforation of what causes the base of the pus in the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And apply perforation, mix with ointment and resemble those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is cleaned, then treat it with generic flesh ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter forty-third.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On incision of the pus of a boil occurring inside the gallbladder.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients made this incision in the pus, and I have not seen anyone do it in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men having scrofula, the extraction of the gallbladder should be avoided because it is not beneficial since all the veins and the major ones of the patient are there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have cauterized boils in the mouth or gallbladder or two ears, when the illness is not in the bile duct, it is necessary to perform incision of the gallbladder to avoid the danger caused by obstruction.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to operate on the epiglottis, it is necessary to incise three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section in the latitude between two circles according to size, so that the section should be in cartilage, not in the trachea, and this location is suitable for incision as it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are hidden.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is afraid, it is necessary to extend the neck cloth over the goiter and then make an incision in the neck until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if any cause is found there.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the cervical vertebra as recommended, and it is meant on the section of the neck for the knife which is from that exit and by the dislocation of the voice box.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the time has elapsed in which perforation is feared, attach two lips of the neck wound and sew it only with cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And apply medications that make the flesh grow together until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Zahrawi says that the total of the serum which has been recommended, exposure means nothing but veins of some of these apostemas have already healed the goiter of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the artery of him is cut, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the wound for any respiration, and may be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, order the wound to remain open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed; and this malignancy lasts for three days; then order the wound to be sewn up, and heal it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen by my experience is that a serving woman took a knife and placed it in her goiter and incised a part of the trachea, and I was called to heal him, and I made the wound as silent as the dead, and uncovered the wound and drained the blood that was coming out from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was confessed that she had not incised a vein or trachea, and the wind came out of the wound, and I healed it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the serving woman did not die if there was no cause in her throat, and after some days she returned to recovery of her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the incision on an apostema that occurs in the goiter outside, which is called a hernia of the goiter.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the goiter is an aposteme large according to the color of the body and it is a malignancy in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it has two ways, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural it is not a matter of cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is in two ways of which one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is similar to an aposteme made by the swelling of an artery, and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make a presumption about him unless he is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should examine him and if you find him similar to fatty lumps, and not suspended by any veins, then you incise it in the same way as you would with nodes, and extract it with what contains his flesh and bursa; but if not, you investigate his entire being, and place a cure over the area with what is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the incision of types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of nodes and I have already said all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary for me to recommend the difference between a node and an eruption when there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, with an eruption is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of excess subsides; it is a complete putrefaction that now stops the fever, the pain and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that cartilage lion which is in the nose.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it begins like a pimple and is made in the same way as a vesicle, either large or small, and they are of two species, either fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are malignant, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, expose it and examine it at the beginning with a probe which is called intromes, according to its form as it will come in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the method of inquiry of apostemes and all nodes, and it is that you take this probe and insert it into the area where the humidity is found in the aposteme, and you will turn your fingers around it little by little until you know that the probe has penetrated the wound.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you put your hand according to the size of the aposteme, and then extract the probe and examine what comes out of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the moisture is forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section as mentioned in other lancetations.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no trace of intrusion lacking moisture, then know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry it on the area with a cross-shaped incision according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that which has an incision, and excise the entire cyst with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, on it, and extract the pus from it with a ligature.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the healthy part, so watch out for it, and you should extract it in pieces before any cause remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If some cause remains, either too little or too much, tie the ligature accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you see a small part remaining, complete the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and strengthen the wound, place it on top of the cauterized spot as an aposteme, and treat the other with another remedy until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is a large abscess, you should incise both lips of it and treat it with whatever medication is appropriate.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or not pulsating, you should take care and fill the wound with sticky plaster made of vinegar and lime and keep it tight for two to three days, until the wound heals and the boil subsides; then return to incise what has been broken from the abscess.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the necessary forms of tools in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these, there are the forms of intussusception, and they are of three kinds, which are large, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large intussusception is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of a medium-sized intussusception is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small intussusception is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, of copper, or of well-cut handles, so that the instrument penetrates well in the lancetations.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of probes, and they are called probes, one of which is called a lancet.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They are of three kinds, which are large, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large probe is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized probe is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small probe is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	They should be used for lancetations, discharges, fistulas, and boils where the cause is either bone or other reasons.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are round, thick, or lion-shaped needles, like large needles with which the skin is sewn and they are made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	Black plums are experienced by the experts, who recall that through these openings the fistulas in their cavities should be reflected, which should be redirected with their lightness towards those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	It is of three types, for some are long, others medium, and the others short, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The experienced man makes a form from plaster:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The experienced medium man makes a form from plaster:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The experienced small man makes a form from plaster:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the claws are of multiple types, for some are simple, with only a curve, and they are of three types: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them are empty claws, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Of those empty claws, some have two curves, and they are of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them are ones with three curves, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple claw, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium simple claw:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a few simple claws, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an empty large claw:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium empty claw, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a few empty claws, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large claw with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium claw with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a few claws with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large claw with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium claw with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a few claws with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and scrape the knots and abscesses, and they are of three types, for some are large, others medium, and the others small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those with which incision is made are sharp and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not held in such a way, but they are used together in the scraping of the nodes to avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and for that purpose the patient is healed and brought some tranquility through the cauterization which is necessary for the healing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the ligatures, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large suture:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium suture:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small suture:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Made from linen and similar to a needle with which alcohol is injected.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the pointed edge with hidden spatula, go to the incisions inside and outside, whenever you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are concealed between the said devices for the perforation of abscesses and not perceived by the patients, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those [people].
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of these [are] of three species; large, medium, and small; the shapes are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of lemons, round with some length, and they are fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	It is necessary that these species of abscesses be large, medium, and small, so that by removing the flux of blood with speed in necessity, and then, when at first there is no medicine [available], you can drain it.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as in the armpits of the arms and chest, breasts, stomach, groin and similar [areas] of their fleshy parts that are moist.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made with small tools resembling fishhooks according to this shape; through which the blood is drained when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of men's breasts that resemble women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some abscesses are swollen in men's breasts like those of women, you should perform the treatment by having them sleep with their chest covered [in some way], and inflate the breast, and make them resemble a woman's breasts, and we recommend it as a remedy, far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	For the one who performs this treatment, it is necessary to incise [the abscess] with a lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and excise all the pus, and fill the wound with carnation medicine, and sew the two lips of the wound together, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast drops to the sides and softens in size like a woman's, then it should be cut in two parts so that its pus rises to the surface, with two incisions similar to a lunar shape, from which each one is contained within the other, up to the point where the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape from line B and line G. And excise the hardened material between the lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the incision that is necessary to make because of the patient's discomfort and bleeding, then you must fill the wound with a caustic solution immersed in cotton and leave it until it corrodes the hardened material, and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from the side of the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The abscesses that come from the side of the nipple are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this shape: from line G to line B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, you fill it with old cloth and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And the cloth should be left on and healed with an appropriate poultice until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the abscess of the species of nodes or scrofula is, you should cut it as has been said in the section on scrofula [treatment].
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound is extended in such a way that it exudes pus, you should apply a cautery as has been said earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses that occur due to an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the hardened material that is on top of it becomes consolidated, then sometimes abscesses occur and the signs by which it can be recognized that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: since when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and attached to the front of the body; and when you palpate the abscess with your fingers, you feel a sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	The one who is swollen (due to a vein) returns to the body's manifestation.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If the ulcer is due to a vein (and not an abscess or strangle, neck, or other part of the body), it is large, so its cure must be avoided and the one in the external parts (head) should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	If it is due to inflammation of the arch's opening, divide the septum longitudinally (separating the bones) and approach the septum with sutures and the arch, and separate the surrounding tissues until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then apply forceps on the needle and make it penetrate into the other side (opposite), tighten the arch with double tension in two places, which causes you to extract two arches that are located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then press down on the area between two ligaments with a spatula until blood comes out and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer a treatment to induce fever until the ligaments dissolve, and cure it with appropriate means until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is due to section of vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and the septum, and insert the needle into the opposite side that you have your hand on, and run double thread through it until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts and two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear pulling out the thread, then insert the needle into the abscess through its entire depth and tighten the four threads.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then cut off the abscess in its middle part until what is inside comes out, then you incise the septum's excess, leaving what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then press down on the lump that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and administer the treatment that is made with heat and ointment until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter one: abscess resulting from twisted nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess may occur in the arch and vein, and similarly occurs in nerves when it is caused by injury or excessive work, and so on.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The most common places for it are in the joints of the hand or foot, or any location where joints are injured.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	The abscess is severe and resembles the color of other parts of the body, and occurs in the largest areas away from them and when it is tightened with intense pain, causing the patient to feel dazed.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	An abscess is not aggregated in the chest, and therefore the septum is left open, and it spreads throughout the body and does not go to the sides or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those in the joints should not be sewn up tightly, for it could lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But if it is in the head or forehead, open the septum with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, take care of it with forceps and excise it with scissors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, suspend it with hooks, excise it, and close the wound with suture, and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter eleven:
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Chapter of sectioning an abscess that occurs at the chest (sternum)
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	The next chapter concerns a certain kind of fungus that affects the abdomens and other parts of the bodies of certain people, which is called "funguals." These fungi are characterized by having a subtle root and a large cap, and their lobes are usually closed, and it can be small or very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have seen one such case, and in the abdomen of the patient there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them in terms of color or size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lobes of those growths were turned outward and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise and probe into the foot at the point of eighteen inches. And the other one at the point of five inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and if the color of the pus is white, humid, and subtle; then you should incise with a lancet, and there should be cautionery in your presence in the fire, because frequent observations must expel the section without blood; and if it bleeds, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is poor and timid, protect yourself from incision with a knife; instead, take fresh lead and apply it to that abscess, using the method that has been described; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the string of lead around the constriction; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large piece of lead until it is separated and falls off by itself, without labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if it is of large size, then during the incision there should be some cause for fear and terror, especially in those who are in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you incise the matrix of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And care for it until the wound has healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise a swelling of dark color, with little sensation, and regular shape, because that is an abscess cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will remember the crab associated with this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of protrusion of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The protrusion of the navel is caused by many reasons; either through fissures in the abdomen, which allows the intestine or hernia to come out as it does in other ruptures; or through blood that flows from a vein or artery, as has been described earlier, or due to compressed wind.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is caused by a fissure of the abdomen and the protrusion of the intestine, the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and there is no pain, but it appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then you should place it in that position with that which has been recorded earlier, with even greater diversity; and when you press it with your hands, as described earlier, it becomes concealed and returns again; and there is little leeway in that situation, and you must introduce hot water and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to humidity, then there is no need for caution or concealment when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or compressed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to blood, then follow these warning signs for the swelling: it becomes black and decreases in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to rotten flesh, then the swelling is severe, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain size.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind, then touching it is harmless.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in that area is to consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery, a vein, or wind; you must be prohibited from treating it because there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter where abscesses due to arteries and veins were mentioned.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, you must command the patient to be standing and spread apart; then you should touch around the entire umbilicus with a probe, and command him to stand facing towards your back over his own two legs, and surround the umbilicus with a lancet in the area that you have marked with the probe; and extend the swelling at the incision points with one finger; and tie it up in the circular area with thread or cord and use an appropriate tying method.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Approach the wound of the abscess extended on the belly and introduce your finger into that cavity where you find it, and if you cannot find or protect it by the belly, then you extract it and force the intestine to the incisions inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found a membrane, then take an uncus (an instrument); and cut off the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If the arrow or vein is contrary to your incision, then encircle that spot and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong fields and pierce the circumference which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making the needles penetrate; and hold the abscess firmly in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you want to, remove the needles and let the extended flesh fall by itself; or incise that which is thin and softens, and then care for it with water until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is of no flesh or due to moisture, it is necessary that you sink the abscess as we have said and draw out the pus or the moisture which accumulates there, and apply water to it and allow it to heal and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division, of the types of cancer and in what manner it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is advisable not to cut or ulcerate it; we have also said that cancer arises from the womb and caution in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some cancers are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as cancer of the head (breast or genitals) and their equivalents in other members, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, it is not necessary to try to cure it, because I cannot heal it or have not seen anyone else do so, nor has it been brought to a good end.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient alone and purge him of black bile several times, and fumigate it if there is a manifestly swollen repletion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for the operation with the preparation in which it is located, and prohibit the use of any tools that are necessary for it; and make a deep incision all around with the saw, good perforation, until no cause of the reasons for it remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Allow the blood to flow, and do not open it lightly, but press the areas and wash off the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if your incision of the thick blood causes a cut in a vein or an artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and apply the other treatment to it until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 40.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of edema.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the types of edema of water, and the signs of each type, for its cure with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by cutting is not the type of edema alone, and it should not be approached by cutting for the types of tympanic or hypoarchic edemas, because they are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of tympanic edema with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient already has debility or is affected by another type of edema such as if it is in the throat or abdomen and similar to these, be careful not to treat it with cutting, because there is fear of it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of excess virtue and he has no other illness except for edema alone, and is neither child nor old, the method of operation on him is to raise him between your hands and administer him an emetic to his abdomen with your hand, pressing the water out from the lower part of the navel, and take a pointed stick in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	and is made of two pointed long parts, with a sharp extremity like a stick; but it should be short in some way, so that during the operation with it you do not enter the intestine, and avoid doing that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of edema is from the intestines, because then it is necessary that you with the section move away from the navel by about three fingers' width to the lower side and in its straight line above the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of edema is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is necessary that your incision be over the rib on which the patient wants to lie so that fluids do not accumulate at that site unnecessarily.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And perforate the entire incision with an instrument and enter into that section, lift your hand with the stick between the incision and the swelling and excise it; and if the size is less than a fingernail or around it.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And perforate the swelling to where the stick reaches the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract it and insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or iron or lead, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end is incised like a pen, as often happens:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the outside of him, wear an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately put it over the instrument, so that it evacuates the water in the best quantity at that time, because if you evacuate more than is needed at that moment, the patient will likely die due to resolution of his animal spirit, or he will become closer to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate that amount according to the virtue of it (the water) and according to what you observe in the patient concerning the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of his condition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument and retain the water that causes it (the pain), immediately being held back by the plug which holds the thread on the cuff of which you are recommended to pierce, in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it (the treatment), and draw out a small amount of water, and do this for some days with caution, and take care not to let water remain except in small amounts.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then cure him with burial in hot sand, and stir it up in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medications until he is cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the extraction of the water (the fluid), as I have previously reported in that which is mentioned before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 40.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary tracts.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of his mixture (the amniotic sac) is not perforated (or is too narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perforate it immediately after birth with a thin cannula in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then tie a thin lead wire around the cord (the umbilical cord) and leave it for three days or four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wishes to urinate, let him be removed and brought back (to the bed).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not tie the lead wire, it is possible that the urine which flows through there will not close this opening (the umbilicus).
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one whose umbilical cord is too narrow should be treated with a lead wire, as I have said, for many days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But in those cases where the umbilical cord is not in its place (the navel), it should be cut, because in such cases, the one who is born with the cord above his anus cannot urinate during delivery, until he lifts his penis to the birth canal above; and this is not conducive to generation, since the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the end of the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp instrument (such as a feather), or make any cut, so that the meatus (urethra) comes out similar to the head of the penis, and the umbilical cord falls into its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation of blood flow, because this often happens; and pause at the point where the bleeding occurs, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 46.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the treatment of an inflammation (albater) that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and ulcers, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Sometimes this inflammation (albater) occurs in the penis and is a dangerous growth of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	One (the inflammation) is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant: it should be suspended with a thin thread and removed entirely until it is cleaned; then apply an Egyptian ointment (ointment made of crocodile dung) on the affected area, and apply the ointment daily until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the abscess is malignant and colored, then you must administer a cautery close to its incision and lancing it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is at the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must open the abscess that is inside first until it consolidates; and afterwards take care of the outside, for when you treat the outside at the same time, it is not ensured that it will not be punctured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Here is the translation:
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Here is the translation:
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Here's the translation for this line:
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	Here's the translation for this line:
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Here's the translation for this line:
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Here's the translation for this line:
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Here's the translation for this line:
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Here's the translation for this line:
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 77.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Here is the translation of this sentence:
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Here is the translation for this sentence:
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Here's the translation for this sentence:
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	Here's the translation for this sentence:
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here's the translation for this sentence:
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Be careful in surgery, avoid using a nail, as it may spoil your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's belt is naturally short, and it often grows in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen this happen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Be careful with the modification that you make with scissors and linen, because forks are of proportional incision, so the accuracy above is the same as the accuracy below; therefore, as your hands press in proportionate two points, you will make an incision according to a comparison at a time; and this causes compression of the linen with a figure that contains the belt of the buttocks from all sides, so there should be no error in it.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is that you should keep the child mainly, especially if it is small, and not do anything more than placing the linen on the buttocks only, and let him rest for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then do everything in that way that is possible so as to make the child happy by receiving his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make the child stand among your hands prepared and not be afraid; hide the scissors in your hand or place them under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then place your hand on the child's buttocks and blow into the belt, and pull it out where the head of the buttock is, and then remove any accumulated material from the area with scissors.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then fold the area marked with linen, and tie a knot on it with a small piece of linen, then sew the second linen on top of it tightly and in a good hold, and cut between two pieces of linen.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the belt slightly and stretch the buttock's head, let small amounts of blood flow slowly, which is better; then sprinkle powder on it and over the powder place cloth soaked in a mixture of eucalyptus oil and warm water, and leave it for another day; treat it with medication until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors used in surgery is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	One pair of scissors should be blunt and the other pair sharp, so that the jaw of the scissors is not too narrow, and the length of both blades should be the same as the length of two handles joined together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in surgery is to cut off the entire internal belt or make an incision into it unnecessarily.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should carefully stretch the area before making an incision with your nail at the site of the lesion and make the incision evenly.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold the area with your finger, then use oil and make an incision into it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If the swelling lasts for three days without improvement of the lesion on the buttock, you should lance it carefully and remove the pus with ease, then make an incision as prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Be careful not to cut into the head of the buttock, as this should be avoided.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, treat the wound with the powders recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If you incise the belt properly and observe the edges above, you will avoid any problems.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And continue treating it with what was previously mentioned until it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On treating retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or solid matter, or blood clots or fibrous tissue, similar to those mentioned in the section on treatment methods.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not resolved and the bladder obstruction persists due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder, the patient should be placed on their side.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Approach the feet of that person on his back and extend his abdomen from the area above his lower back, and have the patient arch his back as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then close the neck of the bladder with pressure to expel the stone from the back part, so that urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as previously mentioned and the cause becomes very severe in the patient, it is necessary to perform extraction on him with an instrument called a syrinx, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and be very thin like the cannula of a bird's feather with the thinness of a ray long in the shape of a palm and a half, to which there should be a fine tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of extracting urine by that person is to take the fiel (a type of thin cloth or linen) and fold it in two at its edge, ensuring good lubrication; then introduce the edges of the fiel into the area behind the syrinx, and incise it if any excess cause from the linen is present. Insert the linen into the tube with force, and bring the syrinx close to the bladder and the album (a type of water-soaked cloth or sponge) to avoid injury.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Make the patient lie on his back, and wrap the bladder and scrotum with oil of olive and rosemary oil.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then bring the syringe close to the scrotum with ease until it reaches the bladder; then fold the scrotum over to the opposite side of the penis; and push the syringe into that area, pushing it towards the bladder. The patient should feel relief when the cause is reached, and not be harmed as per this order, but rather guide it in the correct direction.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then extend the thin cloth or linen slightly, as the urine will moisten it.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that (stone) and perform the cure for urine, using a syrinx and not ceasing to use it until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 15.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of clysterization (enema) of the bladder using a clampscrea (a type of tube or instrument) and similar tools that are suitable for that purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or an abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood clots are present there, or if it is blocked by a hardened growth, and you wish to distill waters and medicines in that area, then use an instrument called a clampscrea (a type of tube or catheter), and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If the area outside of it is deaf, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case there are three types: two from one side and sometimes the other.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, there is a concave location where something accumulates, according to its quantity it is added until a cause is pulled from the humidities, and when it is pushed out, with what it is pushed out, and when it is expelled long (a sign of an abscess formed by the naphta in sea battles), it should be pushed out with a plug made of lard.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the plug into the moisture and push with it towards the upper parts, because the moisture is pushed into the cavity of the plug.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the plug into the anus (as recommended in the enema), and push the moisture with it, because that moisture will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient feels relief.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of a thin catheter used to catheterize the bladder, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with a head shaped like a small feather, and the shaft should be straight inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then grab the bladder with forceps and stop the moisture you want to catheterize in the bladder, then tie it firmly between two ligatures with a double knot, and heat the moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the catheter into the anus.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then apply pressure with your hand on the bladder and the fluid until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	However, if there is no bladder, then you take a porous substance (likely a piece of cloth) and make a circle out of it; pierce the entire circumference of that circle; then forcefully insert the fingers into those passages, so they are rotated until you find the opening; and place the circle around it, as it would be sewn together, stopping at the point where you want to draw from the moisture (urine), oil, or water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you tie that (the makeshift sheath) with the instrument in the same way as you did with the bladder, and apply pressure with your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lx (60)
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the types of stones and their treatments with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the lungs and stones formed in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned that operation with the hand is performed on a stone.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The bladder stone proper is the one that is implanted in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they are narrating it with explicit explanation and brevity.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that bladder stones occur more often in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its consistency, and appears in gravel; the patient will strain to pass stool, and after a while, blood will appear.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	Healing in children under the age of 14 is possible; however, healing in old people is difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, young women should be treated in a different manner (possibly due to their unique anatomy and physiology).
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	If the stone is larger and treatment is easier, then it is contrary if there is a small stone.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when treating this condition, it is important at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a catheter that extracts all the pus from the wound; because that pus sometimes prevents the detection of the stone.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Approach the patient with their feet and place them in a reclined position to allow the stone to descend to the opening of the bladder or to pass from that location after some observations.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then prepare the patient, and let their legs be placed apart, so that the bladder is fully exposed, descending towards the opening on one side.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Prepare the necessary instruments for lithotripsy (stone breaking).
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, you should cut it as soon as possible.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If the patient does not feel the touch completely, then you must anoint your left hand with oil and apply it to the patient's genital area if they are a child or massage it if they are an adult male, and insert your finger into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then search for the stone with your left hand.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Press on it with your finger and remove it through the incision from which you made the opening.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; command another attendant to extend the patient's legs upward and push down on the pubic bone in the area where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then introduce a spatula with a rounded edge, the shape of which is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Cut through the area between the rectum and the pubic bone (not too deep), and make an incision on the left side of the stone. The incision should be made along the stone and your finger should be in the rectum. Make a transverse incision, so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the size of the stone that can be cut off without difficulty, but not too much because a strong pressure on the stone must be applied from below with your finger in the rectum, and it should be done without unnecessary difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You should know that some stones have an angle or ridge, making it difficult to extract them.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	The stone resembles a walnut in shape and is round, and comes out easily.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If the stone has an angle or ridge, align it with the incision.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If this is not successful, then you should try to apply pressure on the stone or squeeze it with gentle gestures, with the tip of your fingers pressed against the stone and not moving away from it; or insert a curved and thin instrument underneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then make a small hole in it and if blood flows out, drain it with vinegar of vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there are more than one stone, first press your hand against the bladder opening and make an incision nearby; then make a small hole nearby; repeat this process for any additional stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, it is advisable to make a wide incision because the patient may experience one of two possible complications: death or prolonged distillation of urine due to incomplete healing of the area.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer emetics to make the stone come out if it is not successfully removed, or use forceps to break the stone into smaller pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with ointment of aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Then place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water on it, to promote the formation of an abscess.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then turn the patient on their side, and do not remove the bindings for the first three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed the bindings, pack the area with water and mud, and treat it with diaphetic and diaphoretic substances until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess forms in the wound that is acidic and corrosive, like if blood is congealed in the bladder (and this is known as urinary retention), then you should interfere in the wound and remove the congealed blood, because if it remains, it causes the bladder to corrupt and rot.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the wound with soap, water, and salt, and apply the appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the hours of treatment, you should always keep your hands on the patient and adjust the medications applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the vaginal meat, and urinary retention is prohibited, then treat it with something that promotes drying, because prolonged observation of this treatment is accused of causing dryness; and I have said and explained before that you should take a soft iron perforator, whose shape is:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, pointed, inserted in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then tie the stone-catcher to the vagina below the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the vagina and perforate with ease until the perforator reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Turn the perforator in your hand towards the small stone and perform the perforation gradually until it penetrates from one side to the other, because the urine will soon be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on the broken part of the stone from outside the vagina, because it is hollow and filled with urine; and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for any reason that prevents it, then tie a string below the stone and another above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then crush the stone between two ligatures in the vagina.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bindings and clean the congealed blood from the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And there is no need for strings below and above the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the upper string is unnecessary, because when the bindings around the stone are removed, the stone falls back into its place and the wound reopens.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And because of this, when you remove the upper string, you should lift the stone to the incisions above, or it will return and you will have to start again as I have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are seldom formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if stones are found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited due to many complications.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason for this is that a woman who has not yet menstruated is weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you will not find a woman who is well acquainted with what it means to expose herself to a doctor if she is a virgin or if she has a husband.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you will not easily find a woman well-versed in this art, especially one skilled in surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location for incision on stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring prolonged pressure and causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessity arises for you to act upon it, then you must take a woman's foot that is knowledgeable and small.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If that is not available, then search for a foot that is skilled and subtle, or present a woman experienced in the art of women's health, or a woman who has divided her knowledge in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So have that woman present, and command her to do everything you will instruct her, from the examination of the stone at its beginning; the reason being that she should determine if the woman is a virgin, in which case you must place your finger in her rear end and search for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If she finds it, press it shut with your finger and then command her to incise (cut) it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, command the experienced woman to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, with her left hand on the bladder, and press it firmly with good understanding.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then, gradually withdraw the stone from the bladder's opening towards the vaginal opening, until it reaches the place where you recognize the disease (the stone).
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And make an incision at the junction of the intestine and bladder where you have recognized the disease and place the stone in that location, so that the finger does not remain pressed against the stone without reason.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Make the incision small at the beginning; then enter the scalpel into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to its size, as much as you know that the stone will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Know that the types of stones are small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have rough edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many types there are for this purpose, which you signify concerning what you intend to do.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to cause bleeding, adjust it in the location treated with vinegar and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation when the stone has been expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure that you have prepared the instruments that I have mentioned for the removal of stones in men, so that they can assist you in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to cause bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is through the artery that is incised, then you should pause powder on the location and apply it with pulvils and stringent substances, but do not repeat this; instead, leave the stone and do not extract it, because a strong person will die from it.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then take care of the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the coagulation of the blood has been given several days, and the area heals, then you can return to your operation when the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the incision for hernia repair.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia inguinal is not just an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is located below the groin muscles and contains the intestines, but it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is in the actual fat located near the groin, which has been prepared by nature in the area of the hernia, until it becomes another hernia; and this is the sac of the intestine between the white sac that we have mentioned, but it is not correct.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, so this material is infiltrated there, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This wetness has various colors: either it is turning to yellow or blood red, or purple, or black and foul-smelling, or clear white, and this is the worst.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this accumulation of water is known are: if it is in the white area (which we have mentioned), then the abscess is round and gradually declines in size like a figure of an egg, and the genitals appear, for the wetness contains it all over.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the wetness is in the fatty tissue itself, then the abscess is round with an indentation like an egg and for this reason it is considered another watery swelling.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the wetness is between the scrotum and the white area, then cut along the middle.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To know the color of the wetness, you should examine the color of the wetness in the abscess by cutting it open and looking at the indentation formed; and based on what is found in the indentation, decide whether it is inside or outside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it, it is necessary that we order the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty their body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then lie them down on their back for some reason or other, placing several cloths under them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then set yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on the right side, who should extend his hand two fingers' width from the scrotum to the midline of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a flat knife and cut the scrotum in the middle at about the level of the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision straight and parallel to the line of public hair, extending until reaching the white area encompassing it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, observe and remember for yourself not to incise it; and your excision with which you excise by dividing should be suspended in the most yolk-like and subtly examined wetness according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the swollen bladder full of water with a wide hole and drain all the water out.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between the two labia of the incision with sutures, and extend the bladder to the sides; do not touch the scrotum, but cut the bladder in that manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Cut it all the way through or in pieces, especially the thin layer of it, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the water is processed from outside the scrotum at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside, and then close the two labia of the scrotum with sutures, and treat it like any other wound until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the bladder becomes rotten due to another illness, then you should put on the necessary vessels, drain the bladder, and treat it as mentioned above.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two parts, you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other one; and if it appears to be an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And absorb the blood, and enter into the incisions linen dipped in oil or in red-dyed oil; and place another linen that you have soaked in wine and oil over it, extending it over two genitals and the abdomen; and lay drapes folded and powdered on top of it, and lie them down on it as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and take two cloths and dip them in linen dyed with carmine according to this resemblance; and make the ends with which they are pressed tight or with wet linen, and attach them to the undergarment of the undergarments, one end taking hold of the buttock towards the back and the other towards the pubic bone, and two ends on each side and two others above the knees, and all the attachments should be adjusted in the undergarment of the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some hernias are treated artificially with cautionery in place of suturing with iron; and it is that you take a cautery knife and make incisions in the place of the inguinal canal, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white chalk containing water is exposed, and then you take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce that chalk with the cautery and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then stretch the chalk and incise it, excise it with incisions, and excise it with a subtle cautery ignited; make an incision in that area as far as possible until you eradicate all of it; be careful not to let the fire touch your hand.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safe and long-lasting without bleeding, and better than an operation with suturing.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an abscess during the time of suturing or cauterizing, or bleeding, then it is necessary to treat that complication according to what it presents itself as, with the appropriate treatment as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not expect a second operation due to its difficulty, then administer perforation as I have recommended; and you must be certain that, based on what has been said about the symptoms, that this hernia is abscess-filled.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must place the patient on an elevated cushion, and make a perforation in the abscess at the lowest part of it with a tube of thin reed or silk thread, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the opening wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place a cloth over the area and press down on it to keep it in place, so that the water remains inside.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat that area until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if the complication is due to the discharge of fluid from the wound at that time, then you do not perform perforation; this is not done unless the white pus in the wounds' orifices causes a complication and prevents the release of the fluid, in which case it is necessary for you to place a plunger or instrument with which the fluid is extracted from the glands, following the prescribed form; or adjust the opening of the wound with a small stopper.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the fluid returns and accumulates after about two months or more; and when it has accumulated, then perform perforation according to the prescribed method, for the patient will pass their days in this manner.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On suturing of a fibrous hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in suturing this hernia, there is great fear of danger even in the best arrangements; therefore, I advise against it and recommend that it be left alone for a better outcome.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that case and the characteristics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that abscesses are born in the bodies of which the genitals are composed and are caused by several factors: either by acute angry fluid that is infiltrated into the genitals or by injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body and it is not found in pain, and this is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A large boil has been lanced, whose color is dark and does not show any signs of healing.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are made due to the tension of the arteries, and because of inflammation in those areas where a memory (scar) has already developed or inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	However, what is due to inflammation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersal of the boil when it is pressed with the fingers; and it is not necessary to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	However, one that is caused by inflammation of the vein should not be dispersed from it for any reason with compression using the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that an incision should be made over this type (of wound) and over the other fleshy areas; and you insert the sutures of the genitals, and place the gauze at the sides above, and extract that from the white cavity, and release the suspensories of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensories again that you release from all parts of the sides of the abdomen.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the hernia has already consolidated with the surrounding flesh, then you must extract the hernia and suture it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion caused by some reason within the cavity or between the vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and suture it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	However, if the adhesion is due to growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you must suture everything there, and extract the hernia as mentioned before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in warm oil and vinegar, and then take care of it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of a hernia caused by a rupture.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A ruptured hernia is a boil enclosed by some covering similar to a scrotum with softening of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the memory (scar) that precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	Nevertheless, we must say operation in what was done at first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that it is necessary to retract the patient over an elevated table; and place the suspensories of the testicles at the sides below; and place the sutures of the genitals with fingers in the groin areas where they are proven to be strong; and have another servant who can extend them with great tension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then place the spatula with a sharp, narrow blade for a transverse incision through the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then remove all parts from that area as mentioned in the incision of an artery, which are located near the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then place a double-edged needle in that area, and pierce the first with it where you have said the wound occurs, and pierce the other wound with the second needle at its end.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make an incision in the middle area with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and remove what has been accumulated from foul and corrupted fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And take care of the wound with treatment for other wounds where you want pus to be generated in order to cause the vessels to fall apart, since it is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However, if the wound occurs in all areas, then you must extract the testicles or cut off the testicles to disconnect them from the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels, and they become atrophied, or be cut off in order not to help them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision that extends in the cavity of the abdomen on the sides of the intestine of the stomach, so that the intestines protrude from one of the intestinal loops.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture can be of the cavity or an extension of it, and these two types occur due to various causes: blows, falls, shouting, heavy lifting, or similar reasons.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this (type of hernia) is that it occurs gradually over a long time and not suddenly, and it has a swollen boil near the navel because the abdomen compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it occurs due to an incision in the abdomen: at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it has a swollen boil near the sutures below the navel, which is precisely the intestine, and the body of it protrudes beyond the sides of the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some wounds are overlooked with the intestine and is called forgotten intestinal hernia (hernia entestinal zirbal).
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some wounds are made with ventositas (a medical instrument) and some wounds run in the intestinal fissure and it is held, and this is very dangerous for the patient, and some wounds cause bad pain and especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this disease (type of hernia), caution is required as it can be dangerous, so it must be avoided to hunt in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The procedure for that operation is to instruct the patient to gently push the intestine back into its cavity using their hand, if necessary, and then secure it with your hands around the waist, lifting up the legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Tie the sack which contains the testicles at their divisions, and cut open the sack of the testicles entirely; and then insert your finger into the two labia of the section as needed to divide the section with it.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the division can be enlarged to the extent that the testicle may be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And remove the ciphaque which covers the sack of the testicles, until the hard white core of each division is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the testicle, between the white hard core and the covering of the scrotum, and between the layers of the scrotum, and free it from any adhesion that is at the back of the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then take hold of the scrotum with one hand and, using your left hand, stretch the white hard core away from the scrotum and lift the testicle towards the section division; and command the assistant to extend the testicle outwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Look for any causes of the hernia wrapped in the hard white scrotum.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find anything, you place it outside the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle that is of true size with six fields, and pierce it through the lower part of the scrotum which is the section; and then cut the edges that protrude beyond the field until there are four fields, and compress some of them in the manner of a cross; and sew the scrotum to which we have said is below the scrotum of the testicles with great force from two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then roll up the edges of the fields and sew them with strong stitching so that none of the instruments used for this operation can transmit any cause by which an abscess may occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And wait three days after the first stitching; and then remove the scrotum that is below the scrotum of the testicles to the size of a finger, and cut off everything remaining in a rounded shape, leaving only the testicle.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut open the section of the scrotum that runs with blood and pus as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and wait until it heals; and administer the stitching that we have recommended (and sometimes the white scrotum is cauterized, which we have said should be done near the incision for fear of bleeding, but this happens often); and leave the stitching until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the healing is delayed, let boiled water be embrocated, and wait until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Cure the wound with another remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter sixty-six.
De hernia ventosa.	On hernia ventosa (on bladder hernia).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been cured by iron (by surgery).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And in the early days they said that it was treated as we have recommended for hernia by water: namely, that you lay the instruments near the incision with ease; and you cut off the abscess with what opens it, until the instruments fall out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter sixty-seven.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that occurs in the joints (or shoulders).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a disruption happens in the joints (or shoulders) as we have mentioned, and it requires treatment.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Do not give the genitals any cause of hernias to the genitals; and if there is one, it is a small matter and should be returned at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the duration of time with it is prolonged, a small incision should be made in the scrotum until the hernia comes out into the scrotum; and this happens because the scrotum (or testicles) is extended, which is in the joints as we have mentioned, causing the scrotum to become soft, and the area should be treated and cauterized.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of this is with cautery, as previously mentioned.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is healed by ironing in this manner: and the patient will lie on their back with their legs spread apart, and the area of the dislocation should be treated with cauterization by burning with an iron strip as wide as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then strengthen the scrotum (or testicles) white that is below the navel, until it becomes visible.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the rod and place it on the prominent area of the scrotum (or testicles), and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then place the two prominent areas at the end of the rod of the scrotum (or testicles) together, and sew one with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then extract the end of the rod and do not insert anything into the scrotum (or testicles), nor extend the hernia or other causes as you know in the treatment of internal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	The treatment of this is with the healing of sores, and when the fields are inserted, clean it and restore the sore into its place until it is solidified, because the scrotum (or testicles) will contract and the prominence of dislocation is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this location, as it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the scrotum of the testicles in some men becomes soft because the flesh that is between it is softened, and its care should be taken.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is caring for it in the treatment of this to make the patient lie down with their legs spread apart, and insert the entire scrotum that has become soft into the natural scrotum; and then bring two folds together with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, sew the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the stitches, and take care of other sores until they are healed and the fields fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of my memory I mention it here; and its remembrance is only necessary in two ways, one because this knowledge is in the science of the doctor when he is asked about it, and knows the cure for it when it occurs; and the other reason is that we sometimes need castration of animals for our benefits such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting (or amputation), or by incision and stitching.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the method of amputation, the procedure is that we should seize the animal in hot water until its genitals become softened and lined up.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand into your hands until they are resolved and do not appear again.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration by incision and stitching, it is necessary that you have the animal and press the scrotum of it with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie them (the testicles) with a suture, and make an incision on each hole with one cut.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And make an incision of those that you have cut off.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on the testicles, but the subtle scrotum which is above the bladder.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	The method of amputation is better for castration because it leaves fewer causes for the animal to desire sex.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Take care of the sore until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the care of hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	In males, hermaphrodites occur in two ways: one is where a space appears in the scrotum, and within that space there is a sign of a female-like mound with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes, that person also has a urinary canal in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in females, it is different: the female mound above the pubic bone resembles two male testicles slightly, with a small amount below the public hair, like the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The care is of three types: one for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary to incise the affected flesh and arrange it within the area where the problem escapes from, and also to care for it with the treatment of other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second type of men who have a urinary canal in the scrotum, neither treatment nor operation is done to it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of looseness and flesh protrusion due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Looseness that is adjusted naturally within the area that is tightened and is kept under control with care, but sometimes it is aggravated in some women to such an extent that it is spread out like in men and enters the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must remove the excess looseness with your hand or with a scissor and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not continue to incise too deeply, especially in the area of the vaginal opening, so that bleeding does not occur.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And care for it with treatment until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Born flesh is flesh that comes out of the mother's womb to fill it, and looseness is exited from the vaginal area as if by childbirth (and for this reason some of the first ones called it "cadaverous disease"), so it is necessary to incise it as looseness is incised and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of arachnoiditis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arachnoiditis is when the female mound is not perforated, or if it is slightly perforated.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by disease that has occurred previously, and it can be due to excess flesh, subtle or thick stitching.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused either in the mother's perineum, or in her costal area, or in the upper or lower abscess of it, and avoid coitus, engagement, and childbirth, and prevent menstruation as much as possible.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of that condition is made by the midwife, if the opening is obvious, it should be cauterized; but if it is not obvious, you must search for it with your fingers or with a ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opening is due to subtle stitching and is near the two labiae, you must cut it and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers on the two labiae, and place your fingers where you find the most swelling first.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be on her back, her legs spread apart, and apply force to separate the two labia until the subtle ciphus is broken and the opening is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool, dip it in oil and place it over the area, and apply heat to the wound so that the wound does not become consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the ciphus is large and thick, then you must cut it with a lance or mirror broom (mirtle).
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is caused by a tumor, then suspend it with a thread, and make an incision in it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And are the medicines that stop bleeding without incision, such as aconite and dragon's blood, and quicksilver, wrapped in linen cloth.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from being easily closed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for a few days and administer hot baths of limewater.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then let it be healed with other means of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes during the birth of another creature, it happens that an incision should be made according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for cancerous ulcers, then to the cancerous ulcer that is in the mother, there should be no opposition to iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of diarrhea, dysentery and red hemorrhoids that happen in the anus of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Diarrhea is recognized when mucus flows continuously from the veins' openings, and when chronic diarrhea occurs and it becomes purulent (pus-filled).
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already mentioned in the division the types and signs of these, and I will say which receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that diarrhea and theyls (pus-filled ulcers) when they occur in the cervix of the mother and do not manifest to the senses, there should be no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the cervix of the mother that can be felt, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to put the woman in a hot bath and apply a linen cloth or rough cloth with scissors or sharp-pointed blades to make an incision.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And apply powder over those (the incision) to stop the flow of blood from one of the non-incisional powders without incision, such as aconite and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And wrap her feet in warm cloth for an hour and place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make a decoction of wormwood and milk thistle seeds, and marshmallow root and similar ones.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And apply barley flour mixed with honey, wine, and egg white, and make a plaster with water on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is separated (clotted), that is good; and if not, make it adhere with two leeches, and to the nipples without incision.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And apply wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or the juice of angelica or the juice of gurravia with white wine and make it adhere to the area; and treat the area with mouthwash until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But linen cloth that is rough observation, it is necessary to make an incision in accordance with what I said earlier in the treatment for them (pus-filled ulcers).
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Title. LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On perforation of an accidental hernia in the mother. (This is a guess, as it is difficult to determine the exact meaning without additional context or understanding of medieval medical terminology. The text appears to discuss medical procedures related to various body parts and conditions.)
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various kinds of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as those caused by crabs, lapidated abscess, ulcers, buboes, erysipelas, fistulas hemorrhoids, gurarrias and typhus, among other abscesses. (Again, this is a guess based on the available text.)
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these diseases their kinds and their signs, as well as their treatments in the division. (It is unclear what "division" refers to without more context.)
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the cauterization of an abscess that occurs in the mother when it is one of those accompanied by pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it with iron is done. (This sentence seems to suggest a discussion of a specific medical procedure for treating a type of abscess in a woman.)
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with impact and pain and fever, and sometimes it swells and if you feel that catches over it, then do not operate on it, but cure it with something that helps with maturation until the acuteness of the accident subsides. (This sentence appears to offer advice on when to perform surgery on an abscess in a woman based on its symptoms.)
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is necessary that you restrain the woman on a bed with two beds; recline her on her back and place her feet apart from each other farther away from the abdomen, and open her legs widely, and place her arms out of sight below her shoulders, and let each person attend to what is appropriate for them. (This sentence seems to describe how to position a woman for surgery.)
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And approach the woman following the direct left side and administer the instruments with which the opening of the mother's abdomen is made, the shape of which will be appropriate for those circumstances that arise. (This sentence appears to describe how to prepare for surgery on a woman.)
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you place yourself next to the woman and enter the instrument into the abdomen of the woman up to the point of the abdomen, and what goes inside the woman from the instrument should not be more than the point of the abdomen and the woman should remain quiet. (This sentence seems to describe how to insert an instrument into a woman's abdomen during surgery.)
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the point of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you place powders on the texture of the abdominal point to prevent the intrusion of any instrument into the abdominal point. (This sentence seems to offer advice for avoiding injury during surgery.)
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you place the force that runs through the instrument from the left and that the one who administers the instrument turns the handle until the opening of the abdomen is made. (This sentence appears to describe how to operate the instrument during surgery.)
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the incision appears, and it is touched with the hand and lanced and moistened, then it is necessary that you cut off its head with a spatula of lard. (This sentence seems to describe how to prepare the incision for further surgery.)
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you place a plug made of wax soaked in rose oil or other oil with some stickiness in the incision in the abdominal point. (This sentence appears to describe how to close the incision after surgery.)
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the mother and over the penile wool, clean wool immersed in water in which are boiled bad things. (This sentence appears to describe how to dress the wound after surgery.)
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let it be healed for about two days with gargling that is appropriate until it is healed. (This sentence appears to offer advice on post-operative care.)
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some days are washed the mother and the wound in such a way that it is consecrated with water and honey, and with water in which rosemary or long aster root is boiled, and return to gargling. (This sentence appears to describe post-operative care for the woman.)
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the mother and swollen, then it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, having a cure for it as was said in the division. (This sentence seems to offer advice on when to perform surgery again or how to care for the woman.)
Capitol .lxxv.	Title. LXXV. (It is unclear what follows next without more context or understanding of medieval medical terminology.)
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To show women how to treat miscarriages when they occur unnaturally according to the figure (This sentence seems to describe a specific topic related to women's health and reproduction, but it is difficult to determine the exact meaning without more context or understanding of medieval medical terminology.)
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the woman recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman expel at the parturition out of her and desire to smell the air, and above it is rubbed with what comes from the part, and hastens the expulsion of the miscarriage, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it is the emergence of the child on its head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the navel. (This sentence appears to describe how a woman can recognize a natural childbirth and the position of the fetus during labor.)
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the woman's belly be compressed so that the fetus comes out gently, because when it comes out on its head, the second one follows, and it is cleaned of these superfluous things with good cleaning. (This sentence seems to describe what to do during childbirth once the position of the fetus has been determined.)
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if it is another type of birth that is not natural and not acceptable, because when the miscarriage comes out on its feet and its body is expelled in front of its head and its limbs, then one hand or foot. (This sentence appears to describe an abnormal delivery.) The head or hand of the patient is turned towards the abdomen, and the neck is strongly bent over the collarbone, resembling an unacceptable figure.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all those causes, and to avoid errors and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should display the whole figure of it, and what method is in it for it to be understood and established on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is coming out of the head naturally, and it is very strong in the woman and difficult to give birth to, and sometimes its power has already weakened, then do what women usually do, and evaporate the vaginal fluid with fenugreek oil and moist oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	The midwife should place a small sponge dipped in water between the woman's lips and tear the second one, or dry it with her fingernail as far as the wetness reaches.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	The midwife should press the abdomen of the woman until the birth comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, it is necessary that the woman be lubricated with hen's egg white and fenugreek mucilage with a comb.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And call him (the husband), command him to be quiet and make him vomit with a mixture of emetics; open his mouth and nose for an hour because the birth will soon be forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two other parts of the birth are forgotten at the beginning, it is necessary that you reduce them gradually with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the instrument does not obey, have the woman lie down on a stool and raise her feet up, and place the stool on the ground; keep the woman from falling forward during the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the two parts have not turned inside out and the birth dies, then incise them and extract the rotten part of the birth or tie the body to the hand with a cloth and extract it, because that will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The position of the fetus on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the birth is on its feet, it is necessary that you push them upwards, and turn the fetus head down, grab it by the neck and pull it gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But if it is inside the vagina, then you should command him to vomit and make him cough with emetics because it will soon be forgotten if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with the recommended remedy, then you should gradually return the fetus to its normal position because that will soon be forgotten with a little more effort.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if everything recommended is forbidden, then take alum mucilage and dissolved gum, grind them well in the mortar, and anoint the woman's vagina with the resulting paste on the lower abdomen of her.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Place that sponge in warm water until you obtain the hypogastric bones.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And if the separations of it are swollen, then give him subfumigation with myrtle and rest him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after an hour of subfumigation, you should make him vomit and clean his mouth with a sponge, and raise the lower part of the vagina with gentle pressure, because the birth will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The position of the fetus on its shoulders and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the birth comes out in this way, you should gradually introduce the hands, and have the woman lie down on her neck, with her feet hanging down and the hands resting on a cushion, completing them.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on the abdomen of him and extract what is below his heels until it is prepared for the lower part of the vagina.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the birth is not forgotten, take his feet and move them violently, and gradually press on the pubic bone little by little until the fetus is firmly positioned at the vaginal opening.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Place the fetus' hands and gradually pull it out while having the woman vomit until the birth is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The position of the feet hanging down one of the arms.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Find a way to reduce the arm, but if you cannot do that, lift the woman and make her turn around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if turning around is not possible, have her lie down on the bed and strike her buttocks violently, and administer the remedies that I and recommend of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the labor has begun, make her lie down on a bed and study the reduction of the arm, and pull the fetus by its neck in the normal position, have her vomit and command him to compress himself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The position of the fetus on the expanded neck with the opening at its mother's waist.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife have the baby's hand and gently turn it little by little with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when the hand is pulled out and it is finished, then rest on the spot with the recommended oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Command the patient to swallow little by little, and when you have made him do that, then place a cushion under his head and command him to incline it straight towards the right side, and command him to compress; and make him vomit with a mixture.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare the birth on the left side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother is suffering from terrible pain in this manner, consider it, and then you shall incise the second opening with your nail until all moisture has been evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the baby is suspended on the face and neck of the mother, then you shall incise the navel, to prevent it from being retained and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the baby into the birth canal until it reaches the pelvis, and command the woman to press her loins, and it will come out easily, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Delivery of twins or multiple babies.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born in the loins, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and late to happen; yet it happens due to nature, not artificially.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count those, whether they be more or less, as a second opening; separate them by cutting the ligament in their navel, distinguish each one. Sometimes it happens easily naturally, and sometimes it happens due to an unforgivable act, such as recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If they are difficult to deliver, you shall perform the childbirth and proceed to what was said about abnormal figures, then you shall treat them as recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the mother is subtle and performs what promotes ease and subtlety, and slowness, and if she is skillful according to all figures as prepared by the art of medicine for her salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it forms in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes the number of periods can be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and it is necessary to verify if a woman has aborted within five or more, for this reason was made the measurement by the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, for great harm can come from such a similar appearance, and therefore she should take care of it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the dead baby.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you take care of a dead baby according to what was said in the division of medicine and it has not been delivered outside, and you are determined to use force, then you must consider whether the woman is healthy and free from any accidents where danger is feared for her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her left side with her head inclined downwards and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant shall take one of two parts, or bind them to the left side to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the baby.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you shall moisten the mouth of the woman with oil, and with mallow juice and fenugreek, and seeds of marigold.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and juices, and insert her hand into the mother with ease, and surround the place where the fingers are in the baby.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In such cases, you must consider whether the baby is ready to be born on its head. Then you shall place your fingers in the ears, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, in the shoulder blades, or under the hip bones, or near the ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the delivery is on the feet of the baby, then you shall place your hands in the groin or the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And you must hold the finger with your right hand and bend its curvature in the place between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with ease and place your finger in one of those places that were mentioned earlier, until it reaches the blocked cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another finger alongside it, or the third one if necessary, to attract it inwards and not extend it according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	It should be bad all over, so that the situation is alleviated as it is with tooth decay during its removal.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in this case, you must make sure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the woman should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and turn it around what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Thus, if the delivery of the baby is delayed, then you shall tie your fingers together in a place closer to where it is coming from; and do this until the entire baby is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is extruded before the other and cannot be reduced due to constriction, then wrap it with a cloth; and carefully extract it completely, and incise it at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And in the same way, it is necessary to do so with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the object is large or it is difficult to insert it because of constriction, or water is trapped in the head, then place a spatula between them and split the head and extract the water, or cut it open with an instrument called "alundat", whose shape will resemble that of other instruments as described in the following chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Perform the same procedure if the object is of large size by nature: then make an incision with an instrument such as an algamatus or alundat, and carefully extract the bones with forceps as described earlier.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is extruded and constricted, use a pair of forceps to break it into smaller pieces so that the moisture in the area can drain out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated or blocked, you should incise the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abscess of the abdomen is opened or is pus-filled, it is necessary that you perforate it to let the moisture inside drain out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the object is on the feet, its attraction and direction towards the mother's mouth should be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is constricted in the abdomen and feet, you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and feet to let the moisture inside drain out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are stopped and turned back, place your left hand inside; if the mouth of the uterus is blocked, insert your right hand into the cervix and search for the head, then grab it with the mentioned instruments and pull it towards the mouth of the uterus, and introduce a finger or two fingers and push it further in.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the uterus is constricted by an abscess caused by pus, do not rub it excessively; instead, administer a mixture of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply ointments; follow the patient in warm water that softens and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the object is on one side of the body, try to pierce it if possible; administer the substance mentioned in the live fetus case.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If that is not possible, incise it into pieces and extract them.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	It is necessary to remove any cause within the second stage (of labor).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your task, administer the cure for abscesses caused by the uterus as mentioned earlier.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If there is a flow of blood, direct it downwards into salty water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman in her womb whose body was already dead, and on top of that fire another woman was lying down, and the second one was also dead by fire.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A pus-filled abscess occurred on one of the limbs and it swelled up until fire erupted from it, and it began to emit black smoke.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some strong-attracting ointments on him, and extracted a bone from it, and after a few days, another bone came out; I was very amazed because there were no bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	I healed the wound and extracted many bones from it, the woman living in such a way for a long time, her arm became paralyzed.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not wonder too much about this, but rather that it was a sign and assistance for what the physician administers with his hand in treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of the instruments needed to extract the object.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of a lever for use with the uterus:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a strengthener in which the two arms are locked, with two rods on each end of two poles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This medicine must be very subtle when used as a suppository, and it can be made from oil or from the root of the plantain.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The diameter of each tube should be twice the width, and the edges of both tubes should have a thickness of one finger. And the length of each tube is half a palm, and in the middle of two tubes there are two adjustments that have already been fixed, the length of which is slightly more than a palm, and the diameter of each is about two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened with the prescribed medicines as you turn them.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Make another similar substance, equally subtle and light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it from oil or the root of the plantain, similar in shape to forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of them there should be two adjustments like this, and the length of these adjustments is one palm, and the diameter of each is about two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you want to open the mother's belly, do as follows: place the woman on a bed with her legs hanging down, and open that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Place your hand over the instrument similar to forceps, as when you use them to grasp, according to the size of the mouth of the mother's belly that you want to enter with it.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The ancient remedy known as vertigo:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Make the medicine in the form of a pill, which is called Empelium.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Make the medicine in the form of amisidat, which is called Amigdalitis.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, like scissors sometimes, and occasionally it is made long like forceps, according to this shape, with teeth like the teeth of a saw that are cut and ground.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Make the medicine in the form of a small Amigdalitis:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Make the medicine in the form of an Uncia having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Make the medicine in the form of an Uncia having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Make the medicine in the form of scissor-like forceps, with teeth for the head that are ground and enclosed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Make the medicine in the form of a spatula having two ends, with the head detached:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Make the medicine in the form of two thin spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments should be used with skill, and when many are multiplied and the species of it are prepared, the craftsman, who is more agile in its operation and more skilled, should use them according to his quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not stop using these instruments, for their need is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the second tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is retained, it is necessary to command the patient to hold his breath, and then you should make him vomit by pressing on the stomach and the nose, and if this causes him to vomit, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, you should take a handful of herbs, including lavender, wormwood, anise, chamomile, Arabic senna, cinnamon bark and Saint John's wort, and use them to perfume the mother's mouth.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water and left on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a hollow cane in the mother's mouth, and keep it inside until the steam reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make him vomit as previously mentioned, and the second tooth will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	However, if this treatment persists and the second tooth does not come out, command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sage or milk of althea, and insert it into the uterus and search for the tooth there. When you find it, take it out little by little, but be careful not to push too hard so that the mother does not contract excessively.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	The ribs must be bound tightly on both sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of tightness, for it will obey and withdraw from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is narrowed, we have previously recommended treatment with vomiting and steam therapy with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if it has not been expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, be careful not to overdo it in repeated attempts at extraction, but rather let what comes out of the mother's mouth lie on a cloth, and fumigate and treat it with tetrafarmacon; as this will cause it to dry up within about three days and dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the patient becomes unconscious and rises to the head, and to the stomach, and this harms the sick person; therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations suitable for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Moreover, anciently sub-fumigation of garlic and dried figs has been spoken of.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated should be designed to retain menstruation and postpartum discharge.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It can be made of copper or earthware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The narrow end should be placed in the cone and the wide end on the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be carried out over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	It should have an opening through which the sub-fumigation is consumed and repeated another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Cure for an unperforated child's bottom.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their unperforated buttocks swell up thinly and are painful, these should be massaged with oil and applied heat.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife should pierce the swollen area with her thumb; if not, she should pierce it with a sharp instrument, and be careful not to touch the anus.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then cover that wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure it with an enema until it is relieved.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may become swollen again, then stop the piercing for several days and stop it when the child wants to pass stool.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And there occurs swelling of the anus due to ulceration or abscess; therefore, that consolidation must be incised, and it should be treated with what has been said about cure and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Cure for fistulae that occur in the anus.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulae that occur in the perianal area, low and thick, should be cauterized near the anus or in the space of one division.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is either a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node is old and corrodes from foul white moisture or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulae penetrate through it.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrations are recognized by what is emitted from them through discharge and swelling; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation (discharge), and often it comes out of them through worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes those fistulas appear in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the hip joint and into the nose of the uterus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is to place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe or iron into the fistula, but only if it's not too painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is too painful, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel it at all or there is no cause for evacuation, diarrhea, worms, or swelling as mentioned before, then you should know that it is not penetrating and you should take care of it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or penis, the meaning of it is simply discharge of that urine and avoidance of that area while the location is being treated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the hip joint or bone and pain occurs in the surrounding area, then the sign of it is that the probe goes into the joint if there is no pain at the bone, and pain in the surrounding area of the fracture; and that pus will soon appear from it; and that no medication works on it, nor does it heal with saliva.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these fistulas healing is not achieved easily, and the healing of them is long and difficult work for foolish physicians upon which they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for as I shall recommend to you, and what I have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the patient should lie down with his legs elevated and his hips raised towards the stomach, and place your hand over them; then insert a thin probe of lead or iron into the fistula if it's not too painful until you feel the probe in its location.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel the probe coming out from your finger penetrating, or if you feel something between your finger and that spot, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and do not work on it then, because there is no healing in it, as I have already said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some might say that it heals in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medication for which healing is hoped, it is that you ignite cautery in the fistula as described before and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistulas are adjusted to fit together like the feathers of a bird's wing.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And cover it with bandages until the tissues are healed, and treat it with medicines that heal and strengthen the tissue, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healed in a certain time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe is inside and does not penetrate into your anus, and between it and the spot that appears as a tumor or cyst, and sometimes the fistula occurs on what appears to be a cyst in the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the skin dry with the probe; and continue drying until the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is released, and through the probe it is cut and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And clean the tissues surrounding the fistulas that resemble a bird's feather pen and do not remain in it for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flow sometimes comes out between you and your work when you clean those tissues, you should use millet and a light instrument to cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire heals well: it adjusts the tissues of the healed areas, and drains the pus by drying out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And cover it with bandages or with a cushion until the wound gets better; and then treat the sore with hard healing saliva.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines that are drying and draining; when they are restored, it is healed and there will be no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If the wound is closed and there is a thin membrane or flesh between you and her, and it appears to be ready for penetration, then there is no operation on him but according to faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is administered in three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to cut it open inside, so that you can achieve the cavity of him for you to enter there and cure it properly without cutting into the hollow containing the intestine, and taking place immediately from the patient's body without his will; and place a dressing over the wound as we have said, or use another sharp instrument on the wound or on another, and clean the pus that is cut inside near the anus, as we have said, or the wound or another instrument of sharp edge, and clean the fissured flesh that is in the incision, so that it can be closed with a crust; and then force yourself to restore the whole wound by cutting, and if the openings of pus do not consolidate and remain open at the parting of the anus, and the fistula remains open, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you enter the wound into the fistula, it is near the anus around the surface of the body with a cord and at the edge of the anus, then take a sharp instrument like a needle prepared for piercing as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter into that fold covered with five layers or around those layers; and then insert the needle into the fistula until it achieves the cavity of him.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	However, if you penetrate into the edge of the anus inwardly, then you pull out that thread as you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends together, and stretch each one, and leave it for a day or two until the thread penetrates more deeply into the flesh; and then stretch it as far as those fleshes are penetrated, which are between the ends of the thread and where they meet.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	However, if the fistula's opening is not penetrating, then you make it penetrate, in any way you are prepared, but it should not be painful because it is not for you to do this so as not to cut into the intestine; and place a dressing on it until it heals.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of using a splinter with a sharp curve on one side and the other end flat, so that it does not cut unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Diarrhea occurs in two ways, either it is like charcoal passing from the rectum, or it is similar to oil from mustard.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From these it can be small or large, and the blood flows from them constantly and it is one (single), and there are clots, and they exit from the rectum, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those which exit from the rectum in months of little moisture, from which yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous clots, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The treatment for that which is within the rectum is to command the patient to sit and expel it before the rectum dries up and diarrhea appears.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take a hook or whatever you have with your nail and approach it (the affected area) and make an incision in it (the affected area).
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if hooks are not available there due to the moisture and softening of these (things), then take them with a rough cloth, a comb or wool floss, and remove them using tweezers, and then make an incision in it (the affected area) and sprinkle some cautery powders on top of the incision, so that they are close to the cauterization; or cauterize it according to what is described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And treat those with the other treatment until they heal.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the rectum does not evacuate (obey), then you anoint the patient with a cathartic in which there is slight bitterness, and it should be washed with water that is in the rectum and that will help to evacuate gently when the patient defecates.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if diarrhea is outside the rectum, the cause of it should be made light (eased), and you take them with your nail or with a hook, make an incision in them, and then treat them with the water that I have mentioned until they heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	The one who makes an incision should administer stitching of them in this manner: take thread and insert it with the needle into the opening where the diarrhea comes out, and take out the diarrhea at the edges above, and make the needle penetrate the opening of the other side, and wrap the two edges of the thread over the edge farther from the needle, and do this transversely; tighten the diarrhea with strong stitching, and tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, leaving one untouched and not stitching it, so that the excess blood can flow out from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the rectum and place it there, and place it on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Leave it inside until it falls out (on its own); and when it is expelled, treat those with salve or the other treatment until they heal.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Clots occur due to drying up of a wound or constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	Since they have been neglected for a long time and are not effective in that medicine, it is necessary to cauterize them with the tip of the spatula or your nail until they become wet and the discharge below stops, which prevents consolidation; and treat those until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with great haste before they become hardened and are scabbed over; and treat those until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of abscesses, it is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that abscesses are crucial, and they do not appear in red spots similar to clavicles, but rather throughout the body and more prominently in the sides of the thighs and chest, and they should be suspected from pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it should be incised what is around the clavicle, and kept with tweezers or a hook, and it should be removed from its opening; and treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, you can cauterize what is described in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Verruca (warts) are small rough, fistulated round elevations on the surface of the body, and clots occur in more children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for it is to stretch and incise it, or tighten it with thread or cloth until it falls out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, you can cauterize it, as described, with fire or with a strong medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now, eradicated are both internal and external ulcers with the instrument I will mention.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Moreover, an ant-like elevation, small but furrowed or large and fistulous on the surface of the body, moving towards the anus, if touched it becomes inflamed like a formication (itch) and formed around the body. And when this happens, it should be treated.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for this is to take a thick cannula or a cannula with a sharp point, place it on the formication inside its circle; then turn your hand along the cannula within the circumference of the formication and press it in the skin, and eradicate the formication from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, do this with an iron or steel cannula as follows:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Make the partition above the cannula thin, soft (not pierced), covered so that it appears swollen and the rotation of it is hindered.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the formication as described in the cauterization of an athlete's foot in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the instruments that are administered to make a cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Cauterization is sometimes made with silver or lead or melted iron or hammered; and sometimes it is made with small and large instruments according to the patient's condition, since the one who receives treatment for small children should be small; and those whose buttocks are soft or painful, their cauterizations should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large or small cauterization is:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which the bag is attached should be wide as follows; and it should have a distinction where the bag is attached in this manner, just like sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end below, which is inserted in the anus, should be soft (not open) like a lion's mouth, narrowing towards thinness; and on one side there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and make the smaller one smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which are placed the medications of animal bladder or sheep's wool should be one palm in depth.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	It should be perforated by many openings as it is rolled up; and if the space between the openings is thick, make it thinner.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And carefully insert the needle into those holes, using a strong thread from the same needle, or surround them; adjust the bag accordingly; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be tight at the head of the cauterizer between two distinguishing marks with a strong pull, and cauterize each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the bag with the medicine, heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Place the patient on their back and raise their legs up; place a cushion under them or a blanket, as is customary among men; then oil or albumen of egg white or mucus of fenugreek or similar should be applied to the end of the cauterizer and inserted easily into the anus with ease. Then take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and press it vigorously inside until everything that is in the cauterizer is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cauterizer and the patient lowers their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine is missing in this way, take as much as possible; and if it sleeps for an entire night, it is more effective.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you cauterize it in the diseases of stomach solution and its symptoms, then you must repeat the cauterization until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a subtle lancet and leech, for with these leeches are the children criticized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	In treating ailments.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already stated in the division of treating ailments what is suitable for the free man, and I say this: the treatment of those with more serious afflictions and medicines according to their needs.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that ailments are differentiated according to what they are caused by and the area where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The causes of ailments are often such as injury from stones, or wound from sword or axe, or blow with a spear, mace, arrow, or similar means.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Ailments that occur in the parts of the body are such as a wound on the head, neck, foot, stomach, or chest, and similar to those affecting various members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I recommend the treatment of certain ailments according to this reasoning and rule, and for other ailments you should consider different reasoning and rules.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	I begin with simple head ailments, for the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by a stone or similar object, and the patient has already bound the headband only and the wound is large and you fear that the patient will develop an abscess, then immediately puncture and drain the cephalic vein as quickly as possible, and do not delay; and extract the blood according to the amount of its potency, unless any other reason prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is flowing from the wound is scant.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	The phlebotomy should be made on the opposite side of the affected part, and keep the patient away from overeating, wine, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any reason for caution, then reduce the food intake and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Wait on the wound if an abscess develops, apply oil of roses or wine that has been steeped in it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of an abscess, wait on the wound, if it is fresh and the air has not changed the powder that I will recommend for you.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has already changed it, then wait until it is healed with some ointment before it.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or from an incision of the abdomen and similar, and the edges are not properly aligned, then align them with sutures as I will recommend for you.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed bone and tendon, and is not properly sutured but only supported by a small suspension, then incise it again and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh under bandages, and order the patient to avoid heavy foods until healed: eggs and bread cooked in broth or similar until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If the wound becomes gangrenous and does not adhere to the bone, you should incise it all thoroughly and drain it, and treat that area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these ailments it is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been amputated by medicine, you should examine the artery; if it is gangrenous but not amputated, you should incise it with a spatula or lance, and if necessity compels that what I have said does not suffice, then cauterize it before the blood is amputated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is light; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder on them, for it solidifies before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of using the powder is as follows: take equal parts of oil of thistle, dragon's blood, and non-extinct herbs; grind it all together and sift it, then fill the wound with it and compress it firmly until it adheres to it, and coagulate it with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Apply this powder on top of it with pulverized linen and let it remain there, but do not remove it until the abscess has formed, for the medicine is not effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done alone, when there is no pain or bleeding from dragon's sap.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	Then perform this operation in serious diseases when it is necessary to pause on them and tighten, and these are recent wounds that have not been affected by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has affected them, especially in summer, then do not use this position for this powder, but rather treat those with what was previously said, unless you are to pause on sores that have been treated with an ointment of various herbs, or that you are to poultice over those powders made from wheat flour and water and honey that produce a powder; and treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, you should extract this with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you will say the treatment for fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	For wounds on the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is treated like a simple wound on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve or artery in the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, do not apply cure directly to it, but rather avoid any treatment that causes violent stiffness, such as zinc and zinc oxide, which harm nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any cause of frost to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is with the brain, which is the head of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is treated with light medicines such as being washed with soft water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and thus when it is washed with soft water and other remedies in this manner, and soothed with moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or sew the lips of it, and treat that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound has depth or occurs in its base, powdered, then you should perforate it in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, separate or dry it up, or tie it, or cauterize it if the need arises.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of it are cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the lips of the neckbone with sutures on the neck of the vertebra and do not touch that; elevate it and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with proper support, and allow it to rest for several days; and treat that with soothing poultices with stiffness and inflammation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has entered into the bone with danger, you should perforate that, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that can be; and what cannot be handled, allow that to rest until the wound dries up, and separate it and the swelling and pain around it should be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, you should sprinkle powder on that which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound is formed as a fistula, treat that with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	For wounds on the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and is caused by a sword or knife or lance or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound caused by a lance or knife, and sometimes the depth, you should consider whether the patient feels windiness from the wound; if so, you should know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if the depth is not great and the wound is recent with blood, you should pause in the first hour on powder, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of it and return to the heart and increase the patient's pain, but rather allow it to heal gently and remove the dressing twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the dressing is not present, you should pause in the orifice of the wound and allow the fluid that comes from the moisture to drain out; make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is applied remains in place.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has passed for three days or more and the patient does not experience spasm, tremor of bad heart nor constriction of veins, and sometimes good dispositions occur, then you know that the wound is saved; and then take care of it with a few and with other treatments until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing is delayed and the wound has remained open for a long time, then you know that it has become a fistula; treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is from incision of space or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what comes before suture (if large), or with powder (if small).
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the wound has already caused decay in the bone, and it is already filled with pus, then you twist the wound and try to extract those pus pockets, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then let it heal over that the wound may be relieved, for the extraction of them is eased.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And in other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the remedy for care is the same as what has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of large intestines or the nerve of the intestine, in some cases it protrudes, so intrusion and suturing must be done carefully and with great precision.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is done in a difficult manner, and since the reduction of it is very difficult, if you do not insert it into its place immediately, for it swells and grows, making the insertion of it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two cases mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that abdominal suture is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and necessary for stitches of other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other proper sutures are specific to other wounds, but they are especially important for abdominal stitching.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one with exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore tell that if the wound is small and there is a cause of intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the small disruption as previously mentioned, or when the intestine has come inflamed due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this happens, it is necessary that you heat the intestine in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or that you take it in warm water, camphor, spike and wrap it with it into the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Sometimes you find that in which there is stiffness, and it is better to use only water in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and wormwood are steeped, for this relieves the insertion of it with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the insertion is not relieved by this treatment, then you cut the disruption a little with an instrument with which you make small incisions of wormwood.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and not necessary to cut immediately, nor occupation due to lack of necessity.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one rounded part sharp and the other non-sharp, the end should be thin but not as thin as a spatula, it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, it is necessary that its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if possible over what has happened, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But if the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on their back, place their legs as far apart from each other as the head; and if it is above the abdomen, then you must place their head and feet as far apart as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must place your attention and reflection quickly to ensure that the side where the wound is is farther away than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary to administer this in large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, prepare what is ready, and make sure that the one who will minister it is among your most trusted, who should hold the disruption completely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and prepare to cover up what might cause another suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing method: one that takes a needle, or a count of needles depending on the size of the wound; and place it at the end of the disruption of the thumb, and tighten the needle once, without putting thread in both ends of the knot, with the two ends of the knot and the two ends of the string that is below the knot of the parts inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added two ends of the knot and two ends of the string, and they are done four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Approach the wound with a firm double-edged blade around the needle's circuit, and some observations of both sides simultaneously, and approximate the lips and wound for a proper fit; and leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that place, and approach it as firmly as the first needle; do not cease this action until it is necessary with the needles to complete the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles should be of a moderate size between coarseness and finesse, because fine needles easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to pass through the skin, hence it is necessary that they be of moderate size in both coarseness and fineness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	The needle should not be inserted into the skin too close to the edge of the wound, because the flesh should not be easily cut and the wound should heal before it is consolidated.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the stitches so that the wound is prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then make incisions at the ends of the needles so that you do not injure the patient during their sleep; and pause over the pulp of the stitches, which should be spread out all around, and leave them until you know that the wound is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches with needles in this manner are most suitable for small wounds, because it is enough to sew them up with one needle or two around that area.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second stitch is more common: and it consists of sewing all four sides, of the skin and two edges of the opening, in one observation, with a needle that is firmly wrapped around both coarseness and finesse.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then when the needle has penetrated these four sides, you should withdraw it from that side of the partition from where you began, in order to draw out the pus rising up on the other side of the wound, so that the stitch is as strong as a sewn seam with cloth, which are stronger.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the thickness of the finger tip.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I sewed the wound that had occurred in a man's stomach, which was wounded by a sword, and it was the rupture of the wound greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the belly button of the same place and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it when the intestine had been outside for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound healed in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured it and it healed; and may it live for many years, and it will continue in its condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by miracle, since I did not cure it with a gargle, because it was in a place where no gargle or any medicine could be found, instead I waited over the wound for two observations every day and rinsed it continuously with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you two types of stitches according to the narration of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin by sewing the skin, and insert the needle from the outer edge to the inner edge.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters the skin and at that point pulls back enough so that the tip of the finger where you inserted the needle is left; and then insert the needle from the inner edge to the outer edge in the other end of the member.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made it penetrate once more, then make it penetrate again in that same end of the member from the inner edge to the outer edge; and leave the tip of the finger that is on that side, and insert the needle into the other end of the opening from the inner edge to the outer edge.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that same penetration in the skin in the part that you had made penetrate into the intestine in the tip of the member towards where all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin at that side and sew the other side with the one that is of the intestine in the other direction, and withdraw the needle from the skin that penetrated, and bring it back to that skin and sew the other side of the member with this extremity; and withdraw the other needle from the skin that was inserted there.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and then another, and do this again after each observation until you sew all that is outside according to the example given.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the summary of this method of stitching is that you sew with a skin stitch by which you sew fur, so that you sew the skin once from the side of the end of the skin, and leave the other side until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	However, the second type of stitch that I will tell you, which is called Gallia, and it is from there and recommended by them, is to sew as follows: gather all parts together according to their corresponding parts, so that the sides are united properly by nature; and apply the other side of one part and the other end of the member to the other end of that part, and this is done as I have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Push the needle into the end of the affected part at the incision outside, and make it penetrate inside that same incision only, and remove two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside the incision at the other two ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each of those (threads) and make each one penetrate from the incision inside out to the outside of the incision at the other two ends of the affected part.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than common loose stitching, and it is the suturing that requires careful consideration.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is a text by Guidonis.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And many say that the belly's stitching should be corrected with two needles, so you insert one needle through each of them, and begin from the start with the needle you have at hand, and make it pass through the other hole according to the stitching of those who sew hearts together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the remedy for ulcers is judged like other ailments.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is because when you achieve the recent ulcer with the patient's own blood before the air changes it, and reduce the intestine and sew it up properly, then stop over that carnivorous powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the ulcer, then stop over those medications that are presently in your presence until they become solid and the threads can be inserted and it is consolidated, and take care of it as with the treatment of other ulcers until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medications, then stop over it immediately, because it begins to rot, put old wine and change it every two days as you have taught me, until it heals, because simple ulcers do not require other medication in most cases.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the ulcer communicates injury to the main limbs, then it is necessary that you immerse sheep's wool in boiled oil or raw oil and stop it over the area between the joints and leave the rest alone.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the patient's intestines, because it has gone unattended for many days, then you should cauterize that with black stiptic wine, especially if the purulence occurs in the intestine and makes an exit through the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that healing of a large intestine is easier than in thin intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wounds that occur in it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins that are there, and the size of it that is in them, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your judgment as you would sew together intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed time and has turned green or black, then you must tighten it with a needle over the spot that is discolored from it, because in tissue there are veins and arteries, so blood will flow out.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert what is another lymph there, and stop two ends of the needle hanging outside the wound, because on top of you it will be relieved from the attraction of it, you should sew up the tissue and the flow of pus from the ulcer.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recall the treatment of ulcers when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it in some men, because I saw one who was plagued in his belly with piercing lance and the ulcer was on the right side of the stomach, and the ulcer was old and made a fistula, and it healed through care and persistence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I continued the treatment of it because it was not completed in healing, but I continued to treat it carefully until the area is healed and the wound is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the area consolidated, so I turned to the patient who had an accident in his belly; and not one should fear because of this accident and ruin in their many decisions eating and drinking, but let them take baths and exercise in their usual manner.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when an ulcer occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it must be tied in this way: and you take large crumbs; and then adjust the two lips of the ulcer and stop one crumb of those with its mouth open over the two lips of the ulcer; so when you take it in your hand and tighten its mouth, detach the head from it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then you stop another crumb near the first one, and do not continue to make crumbs one after the other according to the size of the entire ulcer.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that [part] and its wound; and let the attached capsules remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed, and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the intestine may be stitched with a fine thread made from animal gut, which is thinner than a needle; and it is necessary that you take the end of this thread of intestine, make an incision, and then sew the end of it with the thread, wrap it, and insert the thread through the intestine, and sew it up in several places, and reduce it at the incision.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of suturing with ants is not to be trusted or relied upon.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the wound is large and broad, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then you should not rely on this method, but resort to surgery instead, since it will not heal the area completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess that becomes necrotic and old, and turns into an ulcer that does not heal and persists for a long time without being drained, is universally called a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula, in truth, is a hard, white nodule that does not cause pain and has a concavity similar to the concavity of an asclepic's stone; for this reason, such an ulcerated abscess is called a rizated abscess, meaning asclepic's stone.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	An abscess in men is moist and drains pus, but the fluidity subsides after a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this liquid becomes moved, is thin and thick, and can be either viscous or watery.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have previously discussed the classification of wounds, so now when I mention ulcers, any ulcer that does not heal or is covered with necrotic tissue is not one but due to one of the following causes: lack of blood supply in the body; malignancy of the wound; hardening of the tissue between the lips preventing the growth of new tissue; inflammation of the area; poor quality of material transmitted into the ulcer; unsuitable treatment for the ulcer; corruption of the region, and it is a pestilence; or because of the nature of the region, such as Saragossa, where digestion is difficult due to the slow healing of abscesses by nature, or where there is one bone, multiple fractures, or osteomyelitis.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the treatment for each with medicines in the classification.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Therefore, it is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistulas, which is performed by surgical intervention using a knife.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; as such, there are fistulas that reach veins and arteries, nerves, the spinal cord, the intestine, the bladder, one of the ribs, one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed like that of the hand and foot; and these are those that provide proximity to the main part of the body and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, one of these types of fistulas is among the difficult-to-heal diseases that do not receive treatment and occupation with it is laborious and involves ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If one of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the areas mentioned and you expect healing and hope for its discovery, but wish to learn more about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows a straight path, insert it into the area.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with tender lead, for lead, having a lightness to its body, is relieved and curved in counteracting the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to touch it with probing.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, close the orifices with other orifices, for the moisture that you use to plug one will pass through the others and run out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then, examine carefully, according to the method available to you, whether this has bone or nerve, and is the concavity of a long fistula or close one, or is a fistula with horrible movements and is on top of everything with all your strength, all your questioning, all the questioning you gave the patient, and the discovery of pain should be your compression with your hand on the spot, and similar to the signs and causes of an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have been standing over all those causes with true attention, then go to the cure according to confidence: it is that you consider whether this is an apparent fistula near salt, far from joints, or of nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places which I told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	You then dry the fistula according to what has been said in the narrative of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and rotten flesh, and that which was born in the orifices of the skin, or nails and similar, and cure that within which has healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of deep length, and according to correctness, you must first incise it as far as possible for you, and cleanse it of all its rotten flesh; then administer warm poultices covered in medicines acute, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	You then perform this some number of observations until the acute medicine has burned all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with fresh gauze which produce healthy flesh until it has healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, you then cauterize it according to what you have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then you examine it and incise it as recommended if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, you remove that to the point where the corruption has been contained entirely; then cure it with what causes it to be fleshed over until it has healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and bleeds like that, you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; then you examine further and carefully reason about it and cleanse it with your last remaining strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, it is good; and if not, you know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been achieved, and in that case it is not to be cured but only let it be.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the rotten bone is small, or can be pulled out, then you pull it with delicate forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If they are moving bones, you perform the extraction of all those carefully, and do not leave any cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of the moistures opposes you, and in its incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise the leaking flesh or skin here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then wait over the wound that could possibly heal the wound, and leave it until the environment of those bones is covered with flesh and leaking skin, and guard the wound so that it does not consolidate, and constrict the incision which you have made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear, wait on the wound submerged in oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian honey, or one of the green ointments, for when they burn those leaking parts, and the bones are separated from their adhesion, and the attraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the thigh or hip bone, and what is rotten from it is only the face of it, then you remove that with resin only to the point where the blackness and corruption has been removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is rotten from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then you make the necessary incision to close that and incise everything into the location where the corruption has been achieved, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what applies to a man in his thigh, that you place it aside and assist him in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about thirty years old experiences pain in his groin, and from within the parts worsens with material inside the body up to where the material reaches the groin, and this is pus material, with large abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was extended due to the error of doctors until the abscess had burst, and materials gathered from it, and its healing was delayed until the wound became fistulated, and pus formed in the openings, which all gave off putridity and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the care of many doctors continued for about two years, not with wisdom but with art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the opening of him and the materials that flowed from these openings with great force, and le corps de cet homme était totalement stable et sa couleur était citron.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I entered one of these openings and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Et je me rapproche et inspecte rapidement toutes les ouvertures, et je trouve que celles-ci arrivent à leur point d'origine tout autour de la cavité.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Ensuite, je m'approche et incise dans un de ces orifices jusqu'à ce que je découvre une partie de l'os et que j'y trouve une putréfaction qui est terreuse et corrompue; elle était déjà corrompue une partie de la cavité en aval, jusqu'à ce qu'elle ait pénétré dans la moelle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Et je garde cette putréfaction corrompue et préparée de l'os découvert.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Et je suis sûr que cela n'était pas dans l'os mais cette putréfaction qu'elle a été écartée et préservée, car j'en ai déjà éliminé une partie.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Et je place la guérison de cette plaie avec une médecine consolida pour un long temps, mais elle n'est pas consolidée.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Et je reviens et inspecte encore l'os de manière similaire au premier examen, et j'y trouve une continuité de la putréfaction dans l'os.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	Et je conserve cette putréfaction et je m'engage à faire sa guérison et sa réparation, mais elle n'est pas réparée.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Et je reviens pour une nouvelle inspection et ne poursuis pas à inciser l'os peu à peu particulièrement et à perforer la réparation de cet os, et il n'est réparé que lorsque j'incise autour d'un pouce de lui, et cet extrait avec sa moelle, et je lui applique ensuite des médicaments pour la guérison, mais cela s'améliore légèrement et se soigne.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	Il n'est pas nécessaire d'inspecter à nouveau cet os et de couper son extrémité, mais il faut la préparation de la fragilité de cet os et la faiblesse de sa tolérance ainsi que la peur de mort car il s'y est avéré dans toutes les circonstances en raison d'une insuffisance d'évacuation de sang malade.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Et il se soigne entièrement, et il n'y a rien à cet endroit de l'os carné qui durera, et la préparation de cet os est bonne dans son corps et renforce sa vertu, et il conserve ses dispositions et ne fait pas contraire à ceux-ci lors de ses mobilisations ni de dommage dans aucune circonstance.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mais si l'os est déplacé dans le corps, alors il faut que vous le coupez selon cette méthode : vous prenez modérément et fortement cet os à l'extrémité de celui-ci, et commandez à quelqu'un d'étirer celui-ci vers le haut ; puis vous attachez ce lien de laine plus épais que le premier lien ; ensuite, vous appliquez ce lien sur la chair qui est sous l'os déplacé, et étirez cette extrémité pour que la chair soit à ses bords, et alors vous découvrez la chair au-dessus du point où vous souhaitez le couper, et vous faites en sorte que le coup ne lame la chair.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And a table or stool is placed decently beside the bones, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to use a saw which does not cut through corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	It is necessary that the saw is over the small corrupt part little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear on its surface to sensation, perhaps the sawing of it will be seen later.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupt and not evident, one part is continued with the other, and the corruption is at one or several places within it, then you should cut through all the skin completely; and then place a cushion and saw that part where the corruption ends, and continue sawing on the other side until the corruption is completely removed.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Let the sawing follow the location of the corruption, as I have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is at a joint, cut through that corrupt joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but trickery.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, it is necessary that you investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and that you cut through it, and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and that any trickery be corrected by you, as long as it does not harm your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and blades are suitable for cutting these bones, depending on the location of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of operation instruments appropriate for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation means something to you concerning the type of instrument that is needed; when you have extensive study and experience in the methods of this art, as well as knowledge of various diseases, then you will already have prepared what is appropriate for each of the instruments, for all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you are forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will require as simple ones with which to proceed according to your prohibition, which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Forma de serras (saw blades):
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de otra serras (other saw blades):
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Size of another saw: large
Forma de ray:	Shape of a ray (or splint):
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be in the shape of a cross-headed nail and let its points be shaped like nails driven in.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not advisable to press the joints if they are corrupt or have a large opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of larger scissors than others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller scissors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of pliers (tongs):
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw made correctly: should be arched upwards and the sharpness of it made of iron, and its limb should be made like a dagger point.
Forma de lu:	The shape:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of scissors with concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another pair of small scissors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another pair of scissors with curved ends:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small scissors resembling a tweezers (forceps):
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of teeth that cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of smaller teeth:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incision tool that resembles a saw and its edge is used to cut bones in various locations:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of the saw that is used to cut through bones (osteotome):
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The end is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and it seems that all the causes mentioned for scissors, teeth, saws are covered by this.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Cutting through bone edges (osteotome) and cutting tendons (tendonotome).
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	If the edges become thickened or for an intrinsic or extrinsic reason, or if you have treated the corruption with medicines and the cure does not help, or if the corruption spreads to a limb without any known cause, then it is necessary to cut through the limb up to where the corruption is, so that the patient escapes death or a more serious injury to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the person affected is that the limb turns black before it has been seared, or if the blackness spreads to the limb until it reaches the root and takes over the entire body; thus, take care to cut through the affected area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous bites such as from a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and similar creatures.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or injury is at the end of the finger, then you should cut through the finger and not give space for the corruption to enter the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you get to the wrist, then you should cut through the radius bone and not give space for the corruption to enter the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If it affects the elbow, then you should cut through the arm up to the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If the corruption spreads past the elbow and sometimes reaches the shoulder joint, then it is the death of the patient; and administering another cause other than this in treatment is a waste of virtue (or effort).
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, if the corruption affects the foot and spreads to the toes, then you should cut through the toe bone.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If it takes hold on the heel of the foot, then you should cut through the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	However, if it penetrates into the ankle joint, then you should cut through the calf up to the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the corruption has reached the ankles, there is nothing to be done except dismissal and letting the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting through the limb or sawing it is that you tighten the ligaments on the side where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament on the other side; extend a ligament at the sides away from where you intend to cut, and extend another ligament towards it; separate the flesh between the two ligaments using a spatula or other sharp instrument until all the flesh is exposed; and then make the cut or saw through.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It must be placed that the linen is folded from all sides so it does not touch the area, and comes to the patient's wound adjusted and cauterized dressing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the operation, you must cauterize the area thoroughly or place some powders to restrain the blood flow; then return to your treatment as soon as it is finished.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then tie the affected limb with a suitable ligament and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend that you use an ointment for a man in his foot, which I also recommend, this is because it occurs to him blackening in his foot with a condition similar to burn caused by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption initially affects the affected area and then spreads throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore, that man should prepare himself by applying poultice that accelerates healing to the affected limb with the intensity of pain and burning sensation, and he incises that foot into the joint, and it heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that corruption has been occurring in the hand, as indicated above.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Therefore, it comes to me, and it is performed to remove that surplus with what can be placed on the hand of medicines, returning the corruption of the body; and the surplus does not spread and begins to affect the other affected areas starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	He called me to incise the hand of that patient, but I did not want to do it because of the risk of spreading the corruption, and rather fearing the danger of cutting off his hand, for the virulence of the illness was great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he lost hope with me, he returned to his land and informed me that the man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not added to this narrative except for helping with what is known about this illness and as a signification by which it should be understood and followed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Cure of sinuses and the quality of clysterization with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	If an abscess occurs in any fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until pus collection occurs, then it should be broken and perforated, and pus should be released from there, leaving the area like a vessel, and the bandage that is placed over it as fine linen, and no secondary corruption occurs, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space continues to expand until corruption enters any member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment is to incise that bandage entirely as it is rolled up, and moreover when it is thinned and made like linen, and make sure it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the bandage will stick and that the corruption has not occurred as a result of secondary consequences, and if there is a gap in the bandage, then cure it with clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is considered to be a sinus, and if it is large and the arm that is affected has a fetid odor, then clysterize it with an Egyptian medicine which is oil, vinegar and zinjabar crushed into small pieces, and placed in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and effective.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; clysterize the sinus with this mixture, and tighten the orifice of it, and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract that with caution; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the stench is gone.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when the above-mentioned medicine is not available; and you take the ashes of wheat, place them in water, and boil that until the sinus has been purified.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then clysterize it with water and honey mixed with crushed zinjabar, or with vinegar and honey mixture, because by nature honey purifies and cleanses, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and moreover when in vinegar there is an excess of stringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you find that the sinus has been cleansed for several days and you are convinced that it is healed, then clysterize it with a solution that makes the flesh soft in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take some diaphinicon and dissolve it in rose oil and stiff vinegar; or clysterize it with certain medications and other remedies that have the properties I mentioned earlier in the treatise on enemas.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula for clyster, then you should widen it gradually with a small iron and pause when it is wide enough covered with Egyptian oil or basilicon oil until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the orifice is wide, you sew its lips together with a stitch and leave it in the amount in which there is no addition during clyster.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifices from which the arm flows up to the armpit are raised at the shoulder, then dry that in the base of the pit so that the arm can run inside, because when the arm is bent in the bend of the joint, the flesh is generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone pit as you wish, then you must pierce and prepare the limb with the necessary preparation so that the arm can easily run out of it without any obstacle from the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take medicines that are to be applied on the sinus appropriately for extending them onto a cloth of it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Let the cloth be of such size that it communicates with the entire sinus; and make an incision with scissors in the right side of the sinus opening, making a wide enough cut so that the sinus opening is visible; and extend another piece of cloth from the mouth of the lion's den according to the size of the incision, and place it over it for distant position of the sinus opening to relieve the pain in the arm and not let the cloth be too thick, but apply it again after a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the sinus opening, which you constantly moisten to release what accumulates in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what runs from the arm is a lot or little, or is digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you examine the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there, and if there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in that manner, and you see the material that has been discharged onto the sinus opening adheres or is adherent, then you must detach or wait three days, and when you detach the wound, then you change the cloth for another and renew the dressing.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a large space with subtle pus, do not despair of the adherence of it, for healing comes close, for some men have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and from those is made the contrary of it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus is discharged for many days without digesting the arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you must adjust the medications to dryness, and if the medications are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried just as with a diaphoretic ointment when there is excess addition of zinc.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the later treatment is that you take diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and add to it an old guaiacum substance, and mix them together and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems similar when there is no arm, use diaphoretic ointment, honey that is thickened inside, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and crush them together, heat the mixture over the fire, mix it with linseed oil, and apply the mixture to a linen cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and apply the linseed oil mixed with the crushed myrrh and aloe that you have thickened inside, and sprinkle it on a linen cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered with long aristolochia and the root of celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and centaury flour, and you use these simple ingredients or adjust them, crush them and sift them, and powderize over the honey that has been recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the joint of it, and you make an incision in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistula treatment as described before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of phlegmon and the scratching of nails, and adding a digit and cutting a section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Phlegmon is an abscess that you should not remove the nail of the toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can be strong in other places, and when it is prolonged and its healing is expensive, or it becomes an infected abscess, or it is corrupted, and it eats away at the root of the nail, and strongly corrupts it all, and it carries its corruption to the bone inside that smells fetid, and the end of the finger is cut off, and its color is made black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have it with what has been said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then you must incise with an iron all the superfluous material that is broken off of the nail and cauterize the wound near it, for cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy, and you do not want to compress the tissues at the edges of the nail, and it begins to push and pierces it, then you must pause a sharp needle next to the edge of the nail that pushes the flesh, and drive it up and incise the flesh gently, and place on what remains of the flesh medicines that are corrosive until it is completely moistened; and apply ointment to it until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already invaded the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, because no time is healed when the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the rot and corruption continue to spread within the bone, then you should incise it as soon as possible according to its location, and provide care for it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	And if the nail is struck with percussion or pressure, and intense pain occurs, then you should first anesthetize the patient, and then cut the nail with a spatula having a sharp transverse incision from top to bottom, making sure the incision does not reach into the skin where the nail ends, as this will cause intense pain for the patient and lead to excessive growth of the surrounding tissue in the area; and provide care for that location using something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if the digit is swollen, which often occurs in men of all ages, it is hard and fleshy overall, and hard in the bones or hard in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And those who are born with a joint abnormality, or whose abnormality is in the digits of the said joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But if it is born with a digit abnormality in the said joints, or the joint is very weak, it is diseased.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born with fleshy growths, the incision is easy, and you should incise it with a long knife to remove the abnormality.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But if it is born with joint abnormity, the treatment is difficult; and therefore, avoid abscessing it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is born with the said digit, then you should incise the skin around the bone at the beginning with a round knife, and use a suitable saw to remove it, and provide care for it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	And consolidation that occurs in the said digits between their motes observed or due to human birth defects, or consolidation of wounds or burns, or similar, it is therefore necessary to remove that consolidation before the digits return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their bandages of the infused oil in rose oil to prevent them from consolidating easily, and separate between them or place a thin layer of lead between them until it is consolidated as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if there is consolidation in any of the said digits with the palm, then you should remove that consolidation according to its preparation and suitability for the member's figure.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From incision of veins, they are called varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are called "vices," and they are swollen, thick veins filled with mucous-like substances that occur in the limbs of the body, and their greatest danger occurs in the legs, especially in travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is necessary to administer purging of the body with black bile several times using strong emetics and draw blood from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for them with iron is done in two ways: one is that it is incised and the black blood is extracted, and the other way is that the vein is raised and everything is removed.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is done in this way: first, the leg is wrapped with hot water until the thick black blood is resolved, which is a dark substance from the leg, and then the patient's leg is stretched to the most superior part of the thigh above the ankle and below the knee with one bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and the black blood is raised with the strongest hand from the lower part of the leg above and below the vein until the desired amount and what you want to extract is removed, which will alleviate the patient's condition.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And apply that, and tell him to avoid foods that cause black bile production.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment by anesthetizing when the veins are filled and you notice this in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	If the elevation of them is done in this way: you check the patient's leg, if it is swollen with pus, then immerse it in hot water and wrap the leg with hot water until it softens and the veins are overflowing; or exercise it forcefully if there is no bath available, until the member is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cords on the correct side of the vein with a long or short incision depending on whether it is at the front or back of it, or in the bottom part you should use the scalpel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the cords with scissors and peel off the vein from all sides until it is felt, and you must recognize that which you see descending darker.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, when you see the white cord, you should recognize that it is a vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place the rod under it and lift it from the cord until it is raised and moved aside, and suspend it with a hook or lion's paw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision parallel to the first one for three fingers, and peel off the cord above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Approximately translate the given sentence: "Then raise that and incise it in the posterior section (of the body), and approximately extract that and elevate it into the cavity from which it protrudes through the second section, and approximately extract that from the section above it."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"Then extract it from the section that is above all sections, when it has protruded entirely; and then incise it."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"If you are unable to extract and elevate it, then insert a sharp needle with a strong double thread through it and pull it out, or insert the lance and rotate your hand around it until it is caught."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"Be careful not to incise it, for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate the knot and the pain may worsen for the patient."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"When the whole has been expelled (or pulled out), place a poultice made of wool soaked in vinegar and both olive oil and un-olive-oiled oil over the wound, and let it heal."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"If the wound is contracted with a curvature that encircles it in such a way as I have mentioned, you must then cut through the entire curvature and the areas of encirclement, and suspend it with sutures until you elevate it completely."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"Be careful to not incise the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult to elevate (the knot); use your discretion in this matter."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The following is the form of the incision on the wound:
Forma de unci orp:	The following is the form of a stitch:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not suitable for the incision to be made thus like in nails nor of acute extremity so as not to injure the vein; and it is of large flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut through the vein due to its subtlety; having excessive thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is produced in the thighs in lands like Ategi in the Arabic lands, in lands of Arabia and India with scant vegetation and where there is no herb or grass.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is said to be produced in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	Its formation is caused by decay, which comes from the intestine, as venomous snakes and worms and parasites breed between the intestine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	A sign of its occurrence is the swelling of this vein in the thigh, and the area becomes inflamed; and from there, the vein begins to emerge from the site of that inflammation, which appears like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	When the end of it appears, then you must cover that area with a leaden object weighing one dragon and two dragons, immerse it in water and hang the lead suspended from a leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And for as many days as any cause takes it to the edges outside, encase that in lead and leave it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the pain persists, then you should make an incision in it and cover the remaining part; do not incise that which remains inside unless it has already emerged, because if you incise that, it contracts, goes into the flesh, causes abscess and pus formation in the area, and leads to a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore it should be treated gently and removed gradually until it is completely expelled from the body without any remaining cause within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein, it has been expelled in some men whose length was five palms and one digit, and I have already heard of one that reached twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is incised during the time of treatment, insert a probe into the cavity and penetrate it with a long probe along the body until all matter is evacuated; administer pus from the area for several days with medicines; and treat that with the care of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein often recurs, and more so when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it frequently causes pain, and it is expelled from each wound it forms.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore treat that as we have said in the previous section, with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of a cut on worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is known in some places as cow disease because it often invades cattle and there is only one type of worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, which moves through the body upwards and downwards, and is finally manifested in the sensation of each member until it bursts the intestine and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	Its generation is due to the decay of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, and parasites in the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it is expelled to the nose, causing violent sneezing which enters and destroys the nasal cavity, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, do not do so unless its movement and manifestation at the sensation is known, and then you must press what is on top of it and what is below it firmly and tightly, and apply heat on it and remove it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is bound in the flesh and not absorbed, you must wait for it to die, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it is expelled at the nose near the head, press on the forehead firmly and tighten it, apply heat to it, and remove it; and the patient must use cleansing of the body with medicines evacuating foul humors, and be careful of foods producing decay.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of an incision on sciatica.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called sciatica in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is felt as pressure on one member after another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have seen this as I will advise you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and found her arm swollen and saw a small inflammation on the brachial vein of the arm, which had been torn open for an hour, and then saw the inflammation move upwards like a worm creeping along, but less conspicuously than silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he goes into the pain of that location and settles in the muscle, and stays there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then correct the other body by entering the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Then I tell him to rotate himself throughout the entire body as he sees fit; and it was very amazing to me at the transformation of it and the swiftness of one member after another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	He had already seen before that in the most severe cases according to that method, but I have seen many more who claimed that pain is transformed from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in the ulcers as it occurs in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	He did not think it was that, but rather it is because the woman was old, where the body and veins were exposed, and in this case, that windiness [inflammation] appeared as a transformation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear in this retroactive treatment in those who are weak and have bodies with veins softened by moisture.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish the treatment of it and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply ointment to the ulcer as we have said, instead you should strengthen yourself over it and gently and dryly press it until the constriction is released, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see the ulcers on your own body, then cure that by excretion of the body and by expelling windiness with it, and coat it with pills made from wormwood and pills of serapion and similar substances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of thistles.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Thistles are diverse depending on the species and the location in the body where it occurs, since their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, mute ones, they are solid ones; and some have three angles, and those with tongues; and those with thorns.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and organs in which it occurs, is according to two methods: since the limbs or principal members such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, hernia, bladder, and their equivalents; and therefore when you catch any of these major members and symptoms of death appear to you, I recommend that you avoid extraction of that thistle in those who it is certain that death is occurring in the one in which there are the greatest possibilities. And if these symptoms do not appear to you, and the thistle is not concealed deep within the limb, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms of the scurvy is when you catch thistle and pierce the bone, and it is excreted from the cavity that is above the brain, since this can cause strong vomiting, blindness, dizziness, fever in ulcers, inflammation and fever of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and loose stool with bile, and loss of speech and destruction of voice, and excretion from the wound of white moisture similar to powder, and eyes discharging fluid similar to the softness of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if these symptoms appear to you, then you should abstain from the treatment and extraction of the thistle, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the symptoms of thistle when it catches in the heart, which is near the left breast, and feels like something hard stuck in there and not empty; and the movement of the thistle is similar to that of the pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and there is a burning sensation at the extremities, sweating, fever, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends upon it quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the thistle has pierced the lung are manifested by foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are congested, and the color of the patient is changed, and he breathes heavily and demands cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the thistle catches in the scrotum that is near the foot, and pain occurs near the small ribs, it should be treated with great and intense pain and sighing, but not all of the limbs of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the thistle catches in the stomach, then there will be strong vomiting from the wound of something indigestible.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the thistle catches in the abdomen and is stuck there, then a tear from the wound appears, or cloth or hernia that is torn apart, and there is no hope for healing by the extraction of the thistle.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the thistle catches in the bladder and is expelled outside with urine, then some cause inflammation in the external parts, and there is great pain over the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other limbs such as the face, neck, neck, shoulders and back, and their equivalents, are saved in the majority of cases if the thistle does not obstruct a vein or artery and it is not poisonous thistle.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you what I have seen of the nature of these thistles, which indicates something about your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that an arrow pierced the tear duct of the nose in the nasal root of a man, and you extract it from the other side, remove the earwax from his ear, and it heals, and no harm comes to his nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow pierced a Jew in the eye, which entered his nose, closed his eyelid, and was hidden, so it could not be removed except for a small tip adhering to his shaft, and it was a sharp Turkish arrow with a lion head without earwax.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew was saved, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another arrow pierced a Christian man who had been shot in the neck, an Arabic arrow with earwax, and it was deep inside his neck; then you incise along both sides of it, and it was already submerged in his neck; then you soften it with that, and carefully extract it, and he recovers.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another arrow was extracted from a man who had been shot in the stomach; at first it seemed he would die by that; but after passing thirty days without any change due to his condition, you incise over the arrow and tie it, and he recovers, and no further harm comes to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I also see a man in whom an arrow was shot in his chest, and the wound has healed over it; after about seven years, you incise the wound to remove the arrow.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I also see a woman in whom an arrow was shot in her stomach, and the wound has healed inside it, and she does not experience any changes due to her condition, and the woman does not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I also see another man in whom an arrow was shot in the face and the wound has healed, and the arrow is removed; here, there is no great pain, as with similar cases.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extract the arrow from the man of the king who had been shot in the middle of his nose and it has already declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	I was called to treat him within three days of his wounding by the arrow.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I probed the wound of the arrow to find out if it was narrow; and when I did not feel anything there, I felt a prick in his right ear, so I thought that prick might be from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	I filled the area with plaster containing astringent and digestive properties, assuming that the location is suitable to reveal the arrow's location so that it can be cut there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	No harm came to the location where the arrow had entered; I continued with the plaster for many days and no further harm occurred; the wound healed during that time, and the patient was released from the external incision after several days, until one day he felt the arrow in his nose and informed me of it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied an acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up, and with the probe I verified that it was indeed the tip of the arrow; I carefully extracted the small tip that was attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I closed the wound with that acute medicine until it opened up and I could clearly see the tip of the arrow; after some time I sent word to him for up to four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	When the wound is opened wider and it becomes possible to insert forceps into it, I remain cautious and work on it with various tools until one day I take hold of it using forceps designed for the purpose, as described in the end of the chapter, until I remove it; and then I restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered completely, without any further harm to him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows according to this rule and significance that I have not mentioned, because the divisions of this art and the difficulties of that one are not understandable through narration or understanding these texts freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise craftsman considers much in little; and what is present regarding what is absent; and he must perform new operations and invent new instruments for the descent of foreign causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they are shot, but according to two methods: either by attraction to the location where it entered or by the contrary of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And the arrow that is shot through the location where it entered or is an artery in a meaty location and is shot and lost.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not immediately remove it, you must leave it for some days until the flesh that surrounds it can be softened and its exit is facilitated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is shot into bone and you do not remove it immediately, you must leave it for some days and move it daily with traction and motion, until it is expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if the abscess does not open by itself in about several days, then you must perforate around the sack in that bone of every part, very subtly into where it is expanded by the abscess, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the abscess is located in the skull bone and has progressed into one of the ventricles of the brain, and it appears in the patient with those symptoms I mentioned earlier, then you should refrain from extracting the abscess and leave it inside until its being is equalized for a few days; because if the abscess reaches the brain, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the abscess is not located in the skull bone but only in the spine of the body and the patient remains for several days without any cause of those symptoms, then you should try to draw out the abscess and draw out the pus.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is not located and does not require extraction, then you must administer medicines around the abscess as has been recommended, and treat the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the abscess is buried in the body and not felt, you should explore it with a probe, and if you feel it, you should draw it out with suitable instruments for extracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot approach it due to the swelling of the wound and the length of the probe, and it is not a bone or nerve or vein there, then you should make an incision on the wound until it is expanded and it is possible to extract the abscess.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is covered by a layer of flesh in which it is embedded on all sides with every effort you can make, then you should carefully separate the flesh where it is located; and if you cannot approach it through the removal of the flesh in the fracture of the earlobes and twisting of those until it becomes necessary.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the abscess in any location where it is, you should use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it becomes obedient; and be subtle with very gentle care not to break the abscess and make difficult its drawing out and extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot approach it at your time, you should leave it for several days until the surrounding parts can be opened, and apply it to where it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If a counterflow of blood occurs in it, you must administer what has been said about treatment in its section.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Be careful with your incision of the vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer remedies in every possible way for the evacuation of the abscess; and do it with ease, tranquility, graduality and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, you should press the abscess to make the patient conform to the figure in which the abscess should be evacuated, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible based on the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But those abscesses that are located on the opposite side or which have already begun to expand towards the outside, or make the margin of the abscess bulge with feeling of the part above the adjacent skin and sometimes prominently; then you should see about it; and the incision should be according to the amount in which forceps can grip; and apply pressure to draw it out because it is easy to extract.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is held in the bone, you should turn the probe against it until the abscess penetrates into the bone, and expand it with your fingers, and draw it out.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, leave it for several days, and apply it to where it becomes suppurated.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the head of the abscess is in that place, you should push it with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the head is cut off and you want to administer pressure, you should insert it into it, if it is closed, a concave instrument to enter the concavity of it in the cavity of the abscess and then push it with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the abscess is concave, you should push it with a strong instrument entering into it because the abscess is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the abscess is inflamed, you must concave all the flesh in which it is located, if possible with what is available, and take care of it with what is suitable.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the abscess is in the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the ribs, and it is near such that you can touch it with a probe, and it is possible to dry it out on it, you should dry it out on it and be careful not to incise vein or nerve, extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and care for it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps for drawing out abscesses:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of them should be like the beak of an eagle that are made with a saw when they catch hold of the abscess to prevent it from being damaged.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made various types, large, few and medium-sized, according to the size of the abscess and its extent, and the size of the wound, and the tightness of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape the concave end of this limb in such a way as if it were the beak of a bird to relieve the indentation of the hernia and push out the intestine.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape the swollen (or affected) end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	In this way, as if it were the tip of an arrow, relieve the indentation in the concave hernia and push out with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Venous ligation (or tying) procedure.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins used for venous ligation are usually ligated with silk threads. At the head (or neck), there are usually 16 of them. There are usually two pulsating veins, which are near the ears, called "auricular" veins; there are also two herbs visible in each temple, and two veins that are in both eyes (these are called lacrimal veins); a vein located at the midpoint of the forehead and another at the end of the nose; two veins that are at the neck; two veins that are on the upper lip; two veins that are on the lower lip, these veins are called "angelic"; and there are two veins that are under the tongue. These are the veins that are known as "pulse veins."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are ligated in the arms are usually 5. Of these veins, one is the cephalic, and it should be ligated with wild silk (or uncultivated); the people call it "the head vein," which is also called a tributary, and it consists of a branch of the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic; the people name this one "the main vein of the body," and the basilic vein is ligated in the domestic vein, and it's named "cubital"; the common people call this one "the abdominal vein;" the brachial, which runs down the arm, and it is ligated at the wrist (or lower end of the forearm); and it is the one that is lanced (or pierced) and is visible; the cephalic tributary, which is between the aforementioned vein and the smallest vein; and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is located near the bend of the wild silk (or uncultivated) latissimus dorsi muscle; another is called the saphenous, and its location is near the lower end of the domestic cubital vein; the sciatic vein, and its location is near the lower end of the wild silk (or uncultivated) latissimus dorsi muscle; in the leg there are other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The benefit of the veins near the ears is in treating ancient catarrhs (or inflammation), emigration, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins depends on what I recommend to you: it is that you should shave the patient's head and wash their head in the occipital region where both veins are located with a large cloth moistened well; hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that they appear in two places near the ears, and make sure the bandage is applied at the locations of the veins near the ears in two depressions on the head; and you should do this with your fingertips, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your fingers, here you should try it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the scalpel lancet (or small knife), which is pointed, and insert it below the vein into the cavity where the lancing (or puncture) will enter the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand over the vein and cavity at the incision points and make an incision in the vein with the pointed instrument (or lancet).
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths or around that amount; and make the incision deep enough as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply pressure with your fingers and hold it until it stops bleeding (or heals).
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And at the beginning of this book, there is a discussion about making incisions and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, the benefit of the two arterial veins located in the temples for venous ligation is in treating ancient and evil emigration, ophthalmia (inflammation of the eye), chronic recurring eye conditions, and acute congestion of the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of the operation (of lancing) that one should perform is as follows: restrain the patient's neck with their chin pushed towards their chest until both veins appear to your perception and the pulses of the veins become evident; then you shall attempt to proceed with caution.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then raise the collar above the vein at the partition and point it towards you, insert the lancet in the incision below, lift the vein upward, and make an incision in that way as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then release the constriction of the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and press on that area with your thumb and strengthen it with a strong pressure; leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the explanation of theirs (the previous instructions), as well as the incision and attraction, has been given at the beginning of this treatise.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the help of lancing the vein on the forehead is similar to the lancing of the jugular vein in ancient cases of facial pain, migraines, and inflammation or festering ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of lancing that one should perform is as follows: the patient should hold their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and take the instrument that is called "fossor," which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of the fossor on the vein at its top and strike it with the tip in the manner of use, and let the blood flow according to the amount that you wish; then release the patient's perforation and hold it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes, the lancing is performed with a large lancet, but it is not necessary that the lancet be of acute extremity as other lancets, rather it should be of broad extremity, and lance it transversely because the bone is close and strong, and the lancet would break easily in it if it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The help of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of the eyes due to scabs or inflammation and sores in the eyes, as well as facial pain, is:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of lancing is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage and you should lance it (the vein), while standing above their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	The lancing should be done transversely across a short distance with few punctures because there is not much flesh in the area, and if the lancet is thin, it will break easily at its end.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Let the blood flow as much as you need, and press on that area with your thumb, and hold it for a new day, then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The lancing of the nasal vein is given for acute fever and violent cough, as well as facial pain, migraines, and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of lancing it (the vein) is that the patient holds their neck and places your left hand on their nose, take a thin long lancet and insert it in the middle of the nasal cavity according to rectitude because the vein does not appear to perception there, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is necessary that you press the lancet gently and let the blood flow according to your need; hold it for a night because it heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The help of lancing the two guiding veins (venae comitantes) is for the constriction of the glands, the beginning of leprosy and various pains and itches, as well as painful and corrosive ulcers like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of lancing those (the guiding veins) is that the patient holds their necks firmly with both hands, and the artisan stands over the head of the patient, who should be seated on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And proceed with lancing the long vein (vena longa) using a large thin lancet and make small punctures gradually; extract blood according to a measured quantity or as necessary; and make it look like the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then release the bandage and compress both veins with a moderate pressure to prevent the patient from becoming overheated, and leave it until morning because the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The help of lancing the small veins (venae algericae) is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and painful and corrosive ulcers, as well as ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of lancing those (the small veins) is that you should seize the patient before you, hold their neck with a bandage, roll back their lips and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more so because in the area around those veins are small dark veins; and then make an incision for each one with an incisional incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt which one it is, and do not know which of them, then you should incise the larger of those, and make an incision that is most obvious from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Then make it seem like two veins that are above the lips. (It appears this line might be referring to making a cut in a shape resembling two veins, possibly for bloodletting or surgery of some sort)
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more common to incise the two veins that are on the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below the tongue, it is more advantageous for the carotid artery in the neck to be near the larynx, for throat diseases, illnesses of the uvula, and oral diseases. (It seems this line suggests that there is a specific location to perform a certain procedure due to proximity to certain organs or areas)
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing that procedure is that the patient lies on their back with the head slightly raised, and the tongue is lifted from below, looking down at it, and from one side of it to the other, and the color of each vein is gradually darkening. (It appears this line provides instructions for a specific positioning of the patient for a procedure)
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then perform the incision on each one; and be careful not to injure your hand during the incision of those, because they are arteries below. (It seems this line is providing a caution regarding the risk of injury or harm during the procedure)
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are incised in the elbow are the ones that it is common for all men to have, and the incision of them is done according to two methods, either by using a mirtilat or olive oil diluted; or by cutting with a sharp knife and calling it "alnessil," and this is the method: (It appears this line is discussing multiple ways to perform a specific procedure on the veins in the elbow)
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this "alnessil" is one that cuts and of those specific narrow and subtle incisions according to the width of the veins and the tightness of them. (It seems this line is continuing to describe the method of performing a procedure on the veins in the elbow)
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of mirtilat incision:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	the veins are thus as often seen, and it is necessary to open the concave veins filled with apparent large blood, and those that contain thick clotted blood. (It seems this passage continues to describe the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive oil incision:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this incision is smaller and more subtle in extent, and it is necessary to make an incision of fine veins containing thin clotted citrus juice. (It seems this passage continues to describe the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the advantage of incising the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it drains blood from diseases in the neck and the throat, as well as from legs and stomach. (It seems this passage explains the benefits of a specific procedure involving incision of one of the three main veins)
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the person performing the incision to be cautious when making the incision, because below it there is an artery, and if it is missed or misaligned during the incision, it will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is not appropriate to incise it with a sharp knife, but rather cut it using "alnessil". (It seems this passage continues to provide cautions regarding the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilic vein does not appear in a clear manner, you should look for another one or seek its branches; or incise it at the end of the arm, because that is apparent; and cut it using "alnessil" as previously stated. (It seems this passage provides an alternative method for locating the basilic vein)
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to incise the arm, then you should move your hand before the bend of the arm, touch the location between where you know the wrist is and find a suitable place; and place your hand on it with a cloth; and press the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using "alnessil" as previously stated; and be careful that the blow does not hit the area of the artery. (It seems this passage provides further instructions for incising the veins in the elbow)
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press it as you strain it, the swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it. (It seems this passage provides a caution regarding the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood flowing during the incision like that of a child, and the blood is thin red, then you know it is arterial blood; and you should be aware and wait for a long time with your hand on it; and remove your hand, and if the blood is separated, which can take several observations, then you should strain the arm and release it. (It seems this passage provides further instructions regarding the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Keep the patient dry from urine, and be vigilant over them, lest they worsen for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the wound is not drained, and there are times when you cannot be present for the treatment, then incise the artery if it appears to you; since the extremity will contract and the blood will drain from it; or take a probe, and open that, and take a ligature and tighten it around the area of the vein with narrowing, and apply leeches into the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is drained, it is good; and if not, care for it with water that follows the location of the powders absorbing blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The draining of the blood from it (the wound) is difficult due to small size of the wound location and the possibility of tying the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But venesection (bleeding) from the dark vein is beneficial in extracting blood from the subclavian part of the neck and the part below the chest; because it is composed of branches from the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The venesectionist must be careful in the venesection of it (the vein), because afterwards there is a nerve; and so if you adjust during the puncture for venesection and pinch the nerve, this will cause paralysis, and healing will be difficult, and the limb may not heal completely. And this nerve should be carefully observed, and if it is hidden in some people and subtle and not visible, then one must pause the venesection with the same venesection tool and cut through the artery instead, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, you must make an incision along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of venesection of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves headaches in patients.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this manner, if you want the venesectionist to puncture the olive oil vein or the myrtle vein, since it is safe for all veins as there is neither an artery nor a nerve nearby.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But nonetheless, you must be careful during venesection that the tip of the needle does not puncture the tendon, and seek a more suitable location, and do not notice it if it is not pinched by the initial percussion that occurs at the site of venesection several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But nonetheless, abscesses (pus-filled areas) may appear in some people when they are not venesectioned at the first percussion, but do not notice this abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the venesection and the complications that may arise from it are numerous, for which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that venesection is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope for recovery and caution against disease, and that venesection is made in one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, dark (blue), and basilic; and that it is done at the beginning of spring, during the day in spring and autumn, and in winter near the time of eating, when signs of accumulation appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Venesection should be made on the third day or the next day if at least three hours have passed since the meal.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Venesection that is administered, but only when it is necessary or convenient, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that children under the age of twelve are not venesectioned, and pregnant women should not be venesectioned except from the fourth month to the seventh, and old people (viels) should not be venesectioned who have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be venesectioned in some way, it is necessary that they clean their intestines before venesection with a lion's clisterium (an ancient medical instrument for cleaning the rectum), if there is a large wound retained in them, so that the veins do not become congested with superfluidities during venesection of the intestines, which are pure, and so as not to harm the main organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And venesection should not be done for those with sacred dysentery and leprosy, nor for those suffering from illness or drunkenness before it has subsided, nor for those with dropsy; but venesection should be feared during colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, and multiplication of the genitals and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then consider in subtle analysis of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medications if it is within reach to him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Then bathe if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise through some exercises in order that the blood be made subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of him on the day's feet during third hour, as it has been said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And make sure the feet of that person are guarded on that day from all harmful animal accidents, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, excessive pain, cough, and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his chamber, make the causes be present with the use of which the custom of men with aromatization and scenting, balms, and similar to them according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is placed above or under the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then draw out the patient's arm, and apply it with your hand to the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the ligature or tourniquet, and compress it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The ligature should be tightened carefully, because if the ligature is too loose, or the ligature is excessive, it then prohibits the flow of blood; or if it is moistening, and then you prohibit the heart from expelling blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then the ligature, cover the person who is to be bled with your hands between their entry where the veins are inflamed and declared by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Then the phlebotomist anoint his phlebotomy with a little bit of antique oil specifically; and then pause your left hand's index finger over that vein, at the location where the phlebotomy is to be made, so that the vein leaks a little, and the percussion is stopped because some veins are like cords fleeing, and from those it is necessary to phlebotomize, and from them it is full of ventosity, and when you pause the phlebotomy over that one it contracts, and the phlebotomy is discovered; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be firm and vigilant in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is punctured in one attempt, that is good; and if not, you try again after a little while, or hastily, if the location is not punctured.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is punctured, or the patient cries out, you leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the ligature, because great pain will cause an abscess to break or not enter into bathing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then try the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then you try the phlebotomy in that place according to rule and adjust the opening a little, and do it hastily before the location is punctured, because the location is punctured in many people with little opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it has already punctured, then you do not try again on that spot, because there is no excuse for you; and pause on some part of the oil opening, because it helps the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place to use oil and not other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, the oil opening is administered in every phlebotomy in which the prohibition of heart blood is used for phlebotomizing the veins, and it is made with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on one of those over the spot, because the blood is made subtle and turned when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated in the location of the phlebotomy, which often happens, and more so with one who has not been bled for that day, or in the opening of the vein little, and you catch it, and pause on the spot sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It is necessary to do this with the completion of the blood from that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or green stain remains in that place for several days, do not notice it; and if you wish, pause on some cause of alloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calmative or similar to them.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Often abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy from the basilica (artery).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore, pause your hand over it, and if you feel softness, then your compression on that one, it is a bad swelling; and therefore be careful to pause on something of what has been said, because great pain will flow from the artery blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Make an embrocation with what is astringent, so that the spot becomes hardened, and take care of it with other treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to draw blood from every man according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color that comes out over the blood, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the blood is black, you should let it flow out until it stops; and if you see it thick, you should let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you should let it flow out until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	For the person who is full and strong and needs bloodletting on a certain day, you should widen the incision of the vein and make the veinlet large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	For the weak person, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him in small amounts, and the cuts should be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method for bloodletting from a vein is to make a transverse incision, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of bloodletting prevents the flow of blood and damage to nerves, and is more effective and safer than bloodletting according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	When fainting is common during bloodletting, you must take care of the person after bloodletting with a piece of bread soaked in milk-grain wine or plain oxymel, heated; and let the bleeding stop in three or four days.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is a complexion problem, you should take after bloodletting a drink infused with myrrh syrup or scented honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or scented and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs during bloodletting due to a large amount of blood loss, you must drink water from meat and scented, subtle syrup, and use fragrances with something, and bind the patient's legs with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use other causes mentioned in the division on fainting by evacuation for the treatment of these conditions.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wants to emaciate their arm and dissolve their blood gradually by bloodletting each day, must do it for the person who has bloodletting as a means of evacuation, and the virtue is mild, which slowly eliminates blood according to the strength of the virtue in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if someone wants to emaciate their arm and expel blood intermittently, and their body is strong, you should do it approximately seven or eight hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But if someone wants to drain blood from the body in the opposite direction of where it flows naturally, you should do it on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in a body with excessive blood that is heated and sharp and causes fever, you should expel the blood in one day and drain a large amount of it, making the opening larger until fainting occurs, since you will have observed all the conditions for bloodletting; and you must place your hand on the pulse of the blood to prevent death from occurring due to fainting. Since many days are dangerous when the bloodletter is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary to drain the arm and expel blood daily, as the orifices of the veins are closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, that you should press strongly on it and bend it slightly, since that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it to be bloodletted again later; or wait for the coagulated blood in the vein openings to dissolve; or place a plaster of turmeric or sage on it, and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the swelling subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If the need arises to expel blood again, and there is no excuse, you should make an incision on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "the brachial artery" is bloodletted in the area of the elbow or wrist, when it is not constricted or hidden, since it consists of those areas.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of bloodletting is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the cannula becomes blocked and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Hold it tightly with a moderate constriction; and make the bloodletting transverse, not longitudinal or according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Make the opening wide and your bloodletting shall be at the joint of the hand with a small incision.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is forbidden, you should wash your hand in cold water and let the blood flow into the water until you meet your needs.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, you are excused from washing your hand in cold water, and the body is kept cool in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins, since there is neither a pulse nor nerves here.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	Bloodletting of the radial artery in the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of bloodletting is that you tighten the hand slightly or with your other hand, since it has been placed in cold water, until the vein becomes inflamed and clearly visible to the touch; and make the bloodletting transverse; and if it cannot be seen from any angle, you will not know where to cut.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Keep your hand carefully during the lancet operation, as the nerves of the affected area are now exposed without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Dip your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow from there, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will clot in the vein opening and prevent further bleeding.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you pause on oil and salt over the vein, so that it does not coagulate quickly; and similarly, it is necessary to do in all narrow places.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The advantage of this lancet operation on the left hand is that it benefits patients with liver diseases.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Perform similarly in the lancet operation on the other side as you have done before.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the saphenous vein lancet operation is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, retention of menstruation, lung diseases and ulcers or old sores, and their similarities with other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the lancet operation is that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction over it until the veins appear; then on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein should be pointed out, and from there it branches towards the face of the foot, forming multiple paths.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, lancet the bladder by making an incision wide or towards the side of the cavity should be done, as it is better and less painful.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you lancet the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the foot surface, and perform your lancet operation with the one you used transversely, as if you want to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let the lancets be sharp.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, the withdrawal of blood is forbidden; then immerse the foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow from there until it is drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the lancet operator errs in the first viewing, then immerse it again with the lancet in a little more, as the location is safe; and do not fear the trickery, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Similarly, perform on the saphenous vein of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, the location should be pointed out below the wild thigh bone.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The advantage of the lancet operation is for sciatica pain when it is caused by bleeding.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the lancet operation is that the patient bathes, and hastily and strongly massages their buttocks from the lower part of the back to the area above the heel for four fingers with a thin long bandage, which is not visible except for that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, then you lancet it according to any method that is possible for you and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise it with an incision or sever it with a section, as the location is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in more men than women; and if it thickens and does not appear to the sensation of everything, then lancet some branch of it, and it is the one that appears at the foot's heel towards the ear and the ankle.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Loosen the constriction and place your hand over the location of the lancet incision carefully, as it heals easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventosection and the qualities of using those [instruments].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventosections are for corns, or warts, or verrucae.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventosection is performed in two ways: one of them is with incision and bloodletting, and the other is ventosection without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This ventosection without incision can be performed in two ways: one with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The locations where ventosections with incision and bloodletting are administered are twelve parts of the body, among which one is the location where ventosections are applied, which is the back of the neck; and the middle part of the collarbone; ventosections on the chin below the lower jaw; ventosections in both palms; ventosections on the heel of the foot; ventosections on two fingers; ventosections on both thigh bones; and ventosections on both buttocks.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventosection does not draw blood from the veins but from small scattered vessels in the flesh, and therefore it does not capture its virtue as with lancetation; nor is it necessary to perform ventosection with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body is drained.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If the disease causes ventose (an abscess or boil) either by illness or continuously, administer it at the beginning and end of every month, as well as in the middle and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Those who have a multiplication of pus in their bodies require extraction due to ventose (abscess or boil) and swelling of the head, severe pain and fever; those whose abscess ruptures and inflammation occurs on their face and head, and neck; those whose abscess bursts open on the face and forehead, with darkness and dullness in the eyes; those who spill the location of their ventose; those whose nose is congested; those who have a taste of pus in their mouth or whose tongue is coated and spits pus; those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who vomit blood during sleep, fever, plagues, and other similar symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when ventose (abscess or boil) occurs in any of those cases, and especially if it is in the third week, then command that it be drained within two or three hours after its occurrence.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	In addition to ventose (abscess or boil) of the neck, when it causes heaviness in the head and leads to collapse of the eyes, it is necessary for evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventose (abscess or boil) is in the location of cephalic puncture.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not appropriate to use one who has complete purge or one with a catarr, because it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Nor should the elderly be used, and those with cold illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	However, the one who has been standing over it continuously should be given forgetfulness; and for this reason, you must command the lancer to rest his hand slightly away from the ventose at the edges.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Ventose (abscess or boil) of the axilla is in the location of puncture of the dark vein and basilica: and this causes asthma, constriction of the chest and scissuring of the stomach stump, coughing, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	It is necessary to shave the ventose (abscess or boil) in the axilla slightly, because if it is left alone, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Ventose (abscess or boil) of the armpit causes accidental pain in the head and otitis (ear infection), emigranea (migraines), prefocacio (feverish headache), and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of puncture of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	It is necessary that you command the lancer not to press his hand for incision, so as not to pierce the artery and cause blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Ventose (abscess or boil) under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similarity to illnesses that are in the mouth, and they are in the location of puncture of the alveolar artery which is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventose (abscess or boil) made between the two fingers causes caphatan, which is caused by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Additionally, the ventose (abscess or boil) between the two creases of the palms is related to the puncture of three veins, namely the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all these veins in the skin, and the small veins from other large veins are attracted to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the lancer not to proceed with incision, because the location is exposed flesh, and there are nerves and arteries there.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a ventose (abscess or boil) that is lanced on the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	It is necessary to command the lancer that the ventose (abscess or boil) be large and hard, because the location requires strong incision; thin, subtle ventoses should be cut out with a knife, and it should be incised with incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	However, small ventoses (abscesses or boils) in the legs show manifest minor symptoms, as they drain blood from the entire body, cause chronic cough and abdominal pain, bladder problems; cause bothyng (swelling of the testicles), and are found at the puncture of two veins: the saphenous and the hepatic.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the ventoses that are found near the anus, the additional symptoms are similar to those of the ventoses in two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the ventose is that you press the ventose at first and suck it out with early suction, and do not prolong the position of the ventoses; rather, press them lightly, allow them to stay slightly, and let the humors come to the location by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the location redden, swell, and the inflammation of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you incise and repeat suction little by little, and pay attention to the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Whoever the man is who has rare and tender flesh, you should incise him once and not let it be closed, to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the leech to enlarge the incision and make a small opening, and apply the juice easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the blood is thickened, then you must incise it twice, as in the first incision the passage of subtle liquids and moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, obtain the pressure for the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the blood is very mucilaginous, then make a third incision to achieve the purge.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we want to draw out little by little or in small amounts of blood, it is sufficient for us with one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract a large amount of blood, incise with many incisions; and if it is known that the blood is thick, then you must incise with deep incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "incision" refers only to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the wound is deep, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, you should apply oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of marigold, or oil of cumin in the summer; and if it is wintertime, apply oil of garlic, oil of iris, oil of camomile, or bloodroot oil to similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If there is excessive thickening, apply oil of amaranth, oil of balm of Gilead, oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the leech has large pores of tender flesh, then oil must be prohibited, and you should apply water or boiling water with salt to their open wounds, or water from cumin, or water from bordeaux, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood has excessive moisture, wash their wounds with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one with excessive thickening, wash their wounds with old vinegar, or water of savory, which is thyme, or decoction of anise, or camomile, and similar ones.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	It must be ensured that the wound is protected from bathing; having it bathed immediately before or after bathing for an hour or two, and sleeping near the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done is that the leech should wash his hands before bloodletting.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	First, consider: if the leech or the person to be bled is choleric and has sharp blood and inflammation, then you must take cooling remedies such as milgranes acidic, endive in vinegar and lettuces, and dandelion, and similar ones.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, and acidic foods, and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose complexion is dry, you should administer almond syrup or anise syrup of seeds and sumac, and a moderately odorous drink between winter and spring; and it should be recommended that he drink and eat in moderation, and avoid poultry, game birds, rabbit, and partridge.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary on the day of bloodletting and lancing that he drink more than eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be administered to drink in certain hours to some men with tarragon alum, or medicines of mastic, such as mace, or peppercorns before bloodletting or after lancing or near, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and they should not take that scalding.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the wounds that are not incised are wounds that are stopped on the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, in the joints, and the anus, as these members cannot withstand incision over them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	But it is not desired for them, but rather the attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a wound on the nipple in anemia of the blood of the nose; and it is used to dissolve dry and viscous swelling of a member, such as stopping on the abdomen and umbilicus; as it thins the member and scalds it, relieving pain by resolving swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it has already been stopped on the throat when it occurs in their suffocation or hoarseness, as by strong attraction it overcomes hoarseness and eliminates hoarseness from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is stopped on the liver and spleen, it overcomes swelling in those trapped places.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These wounds are administered with juice only; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of hot water in diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is to make the wound filled and large, which is hot water alone or water in which are cut herbs suitable for it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma of ventouse applied with fire: the width of the orifices of two fingers, as we have formed it; and the size of the prick should be the size of a palm; and it should be in its length, in the location that is in the circumference, the size of the circumference, the trauck (tool) should be small according to the quantity that fits in it an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of lard or citron rind, thick edges, lion's mouth, smooth and clean to avoid injuring the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be placed at the bottom of it (the affected area) across a lard or iron rod where the candle is held with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this ventouse be much larger than the one that we have recommended; and let it be as little reduced in size as possible according to the illnesses and the state of the one using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventouses for children and weakened ones should be others than the ventouses for strong and robust ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of placing this ventouse on fire over the member is that it extends the opening with a suitable amount of wood before a little amount of wax candle, and place it on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle of the ventouse, so that the fire is ignited around the edges to avoid burning the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And let it be placed over the member of the patient, and the said ventouse should be placed on the trauck that has been mentioned until we have ventouses and do not need the aforementioned and steam comes out over that trauck, then the ventouse will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And ignite the opening according to its method, and repeat if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	However, in a ventouse used for the illness of pleurisy, with water (not a transverse rod or trauck), and it is not applied by placing it but rather filling it with water and placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger this ventouse, the better it is because it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisuggas are not administered in motz members (joints) but in the members where it is not possible to place ventouses due to their small size, such as fingers, gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of skin, such as the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have been found sanguisuggas in muddy water pools.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be laid in muddy water every day and night until they become ripe, and no cause remains in their stomachs; and let the body be evacuated at first with phlebotomy and ventouses; and let the member of the patient be cleaned until it becomes red, and let it be placed over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and cased (sealed).
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the juice of the location with the ventouse can be extracted, it is more helpful as a remedy.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, wash the location with vinegar and coarse water, scrub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bleeding of the body continues for a long time after applying sanguisuggas, and it becomes resolidified, immerse a cloth in cold water and place it over it until the resolidification is released.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the bleeding multiplies, sprinkle it with vitriol trissate powder or similar stiptic causes until the bleeding is suppressed; or place over the location the largest size of cooked fava beans and leave them until they adhere to the location, and the bleeding will be stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, repeat application of sanguisuggas when they can be changed.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the use of sanguisuggas is prohibited, clean the location with fresh blood or insert an awl into the locations until bleeding occurs; and let it be placed, for they immediately draw close to it when they feel any blood.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall (from the location), sprinkle a little of allium tristate powder, salt or ash over it and wait a short while.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Just as the process of the third part begins (with removal), so it is with restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is more closely observed in the art of medicine; and it is restoration for fractures and accidents in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, understand that the foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who disregard the books of the Ancients or read nothing of them take pride in this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the wise in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it for a long time, but have only applied what follows after lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And let us devote ourselves to experiment and study during the course of our lives.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And you have already described in this chapter everything that concerns the highest science and upon which has been experienced the best; since here I abridge it for you others and deliver it from the occupation of elaboration; and abridge it at the end of the abridgement; and show it at the end of the demonstration; and form new forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition to the demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The Sum of Fractures and Collections from those which are necessary for the premise, before I begin the remembrance of fractured bones and various types of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I shall speak in the prologue of this chapter the sums of speech; and the chapters at the beginning of which the craftsmen and those who study this noble art are satisfied and stand still on the truth of those, namely you and others like you who know or can learn this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or break occurs, you must first seek for leeching or ligature of it, or whichever one is appropriate, except in cases prohibited by some reason, such as debility of virtue, or the patient who has fainted, or old age, or a time of violent heat, or of excessive cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And it is content with food consisting of cool herbs and the flesh of birds and hares; and we forbid thick meat and filling with any food or all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of cauterized abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his original regimen with which he usually takes care of himself.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient is fed with nourishing foods of thick and heavy and rich consistency in which there is viscosity, such as food made from cooked wheat flour and water, rice, cabbages, beans, veal, hog's flesh, large fish and similar foods, and with this regimen is made the coagulation of the fracture more quickly and easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones splintered in men who are in the first age of life and in the old ones, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying up of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are continued and consolidated according to their nature all the time by the drying up of those members, and those which are in old age at the end of their tenderness, such as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and binds any cause similar to glue in the case of a broken bone on every side, where there is swelling that adheres to it until it is consolidated and held together, until the end of the thickening and firmness comes, such as heat at the beginning, until some reason does not prohibit that from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, foods with gravity and thickness and viscosity, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Variety of fracture according to the variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of members, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the hand bone, and similarly all others are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	I shall come with the remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separately.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Variety of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture in their meteyssas are diversified; for it is called a curved fracture another which occurs in the star-shaped bones; and some are called fractures according to the length of the bone: and those which are in the shaft or crossbars, whether proceeding or not proceeding, such as the fracture that is made during penance when preparing to write, and is a fissured fracture in the head, and a fracture with cleft or disruption.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has its own pain or torment in the restoration of it, as will be remembered later separately in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Symbol for the fracture of a bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that the fracture of a bone is known: it is twistedness of it, and the prominence and sensation of it in feeling, and is that which compresses it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when it is not in a twisted location nor does it appear to be broken, you must gently probe the bone with movement and if the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It may be a twisting or a small crack, therefore it is not necessary that you press on it with your hand and compression; pause over the location of the medicines of which memory comes to mind at this moment, which is suitable for the area; and tighten it by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the location which is arched and not split in two or something else that does not happen in the stomach, as it remains completely intact, then it is necessary to begin with your time the correction of it, having applied cauterization to the area.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if cauterization has caused an abscess, leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and tie it according to any method that you can with delicacy and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of the location and the piercing of it is easier than surgery on bones where this occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen it according to what comes to mind regarding the location.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there is a fracture, then it is necessary to perform an extension of this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Position yourself with the member to be tied according to its natural shape, while the parts are being extended from the broken limb; then proceed with making the addition return in an ingenious and any way possible in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care to not cause harm to the patient by your operation on it or injury; and proceed according to your ability with which you apply one bone to another in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	It is necessary at that time to take advantage of your ability to touch it with your hand, and if you find any other cause here, correct it and tie it according to the amount of your power.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Exercise forceful extension and compression, as foolish doctors often do by causing abscesses through their operation or causing contraction in the member, as we have seen through the operation of their foolish watchfulness.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect, correct, perform a decent operation and constriction of the member, rest and tranquility; admonish the patient about this and make him avoid moving it in the hours of his vigilance and sleep, and observe its movement and agitation, and you should provide for all his movements with all your power; and wait to see if the position of the limb is a position where pain is assured, which occurs when feeling in the position of the injured or painful member; then it is necessary to change that position to another position where no pain is felt; and be careful that the position of it is straight and bound, so that no twisting occurs in the limb when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of a limb in rest is the one I recommend; therefore, know that fractured limbs are varied in their smallness and size and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for small ones such as the arm and thigh and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be of thin wool.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for large ones such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a hard and thick wrapping, because the hard wrapping strengthens the limb in all parts with constriction binding, so that nothing enters into it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin with your careful alignment, pause appropriately in the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings according to the member; and strengthen your hand a little with the linen.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And approach that to the most superficial part of the location above the fracture, and strengthen more than necessary with your constriction on the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And approach the extension of the wrapping from the location of the fracture a little, and soften the small constriction gradually until you grasp a large piece of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And approach another band and wrap it over the damaged location with the wrapping, and approach the wrappings to the lower part of the fracture; and your operation should be in the constriction of the wrapping and in the softening of that according to what has been said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And approach the intervals between the layers of leather or wool that are binding the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and do not pause for any other cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And approach the other band, and approach over these properly made stitches as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location, and then pause on that where the abscess is located and that which oozes the inflammation; leave it for several days; and then strengthen over the stitches.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the stitches should be made of tough cane reed, or well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm branches; and they should be wide according to this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, but not too much, and the length of the pin according to the size of the member; and apply pressure on the splint with another bandage as per your initial binding; and apply cloth properly as mentioned in the binding instructions; and this binding should be as per the location of the fracture more, and as it is farther from the fracture, the binding becomes less.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The wires should be moderately thick and thin, and made of flax; if the wires are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some foolish people using ropes instead of wires in binding, it is a great error, when the binding is not even.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin wires are not appropriate, for you will not achieve the desired binding with them, and it is not necessary to have space of one finger between each splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient is injured by the ends of the splints near the binding at the location, then place a piece of felt or camel's wool padding over it to avoid injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by an abscess, and there is rupture in the ligament, and I will recall it in the following chapter according to its specificity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You should know that a completely broken member is not strengthened with splints on the first day; the reason being that the member, when large, does not require splints immediately but rather after about five or seven days according to your assurance of avoiding abscess formation.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of splints used by ancient physicians, which are applied over fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Common splint method for healing of fractures, suitable for complex injuries and more for women and children, since it is applied over that which does not require heat or cold: take powder from grinding wheat, and it is the marrow of the flour mill grinder handle that moves the wheel inside the mill walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And make it as such, but if it is not available, wrap it with egg white, and complete the construction without being too thin or delicate; and use that one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for treating fractures, dislocations and twisting: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, migrach (which is derived from wild millet), in total 1000 dragons; of myrrh and aloewood 500 dragons; alochil 2000 dragons; all are ground and sieved and mixed with either alchil water or albumen of egg if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and confers strength to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for treating fractures and twisting: recipe of migrach and meal of white alum in 100 dragons; myrrh and aloewood in 500 dragons; acacia in 600 dragons; Armenian pitch in 2000 dragons.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be ground together in a mortar with crushed grains, wrapped, and mixed with water or egg white, and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of splint for joints and bones separated from their places, relieving pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take wool yarn, immerse it in sour wine vinegar and olive oil, and apply it to the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This splint is not beneficial for healing, but rather for avoiding abscess formation and relieving pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of splint that heals fractured bones: take fig leaves and wild opium poppy leaves; combine everything to make a splint from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of splint for healing a fractured bone and resolution of abscess: obtain a recipe made from white alum, camomile, violet flowers, barley flour, and all the previously mentioned herbs. Number one. They should be immobilized and bound with cloth if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, you should cool it with water from a colander or water from that (source).
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a plaster with strong resolution when an abscess occurs, in order to restore the member: recipe of garlic juice and its root, balm, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, camomile, of all parts cut and ground; they should be immobilized and bound with water of savory or sweet water or water from that (source), all according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed on a broken member for its restoration except for a wax seal made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it should be neither too thick nor too thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, in Galen's book it is seen that they should be placed on a broken member for its restoration and the causes of which are excessive dryness with little heat such as myrrh, ambergris, and similar to those causes which we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Another method of plaster to treat injury and pain: recipe of marigold, of chamomile, of human skin shavings or feathers of a bird, and of garlic, cut and ground; they should be sieved, sifted and made into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the amount that remains as a wound and which should be loosened, is that you consider if there is pain or swelling or the bone is broken in its place, then you do not dislodge it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is strong pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, then you should cut or dislodge it in that hour and apply a plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take cloth from him and sea sponge soaked with lemon water, and immerse it in boiling water, then wash the area until the swelling and pain cease; and let the member rest for an hour; and place a linen cloth dipped in vinegar and oil or rose oil over it for a night until you are sure of the abscess being cauterized, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply a gentle and small compression to that narrowing and do not strengthen it with your initial constriction until it is healed. Be gentle with it until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess, inflammation, pain, and all the symptoms are healed completely and no longer need plasters or compression, then you loosen it as you did at the beginning of the swelling.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause in the member of those that we mentioned, then you do not dislodge it but let it rest for three or four or five or seven days. and after some weeks all of this is allowed for twenty days according to what appears to you in the dislocation of the member, as we said, until the fracture adheres and the skin comes together over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And you adjust the compression more than in your initial compression, and tighten the swelling of the patient's food supply according to what is remembered for him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	However, if you see the location of the fracture already drying out and becoming more swollen than necessary, then you know that nourishment should not reach it; therefore wrap it with boiling water throughout its entirety every day to dry it up; and this should be for three days; and gradually loosen the compression, and by this operation let nourishment reach the member, and it will heal easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Those who improperly restore a fractured member after another week when it was not healed initially, according to what is necessary, and heal it improperly by tortuous means, their action is an error and great fear, and if they had followed the Ancients in their books and done this, they would have enlarged the error.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are multiple and the figures of them are various and the causes are different, because some fractures occur from the blow of a weapon, which breaks all the bone into pieces, which is called sciatic; or the weapon cuts off a part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh without passing through the end of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two types of fractures is deep or shallow, and the type of fracture that is contractive or adhesive is caused by a blow with a hammer or blunt instrument.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this type of fracture is penetrating and it approaches the panniculus which is adjacent to the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures can be deep or shallow.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this type of fracture is weakened in the bone, at the subtlety of the hair tip, and for that reason this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	It is a fracture caused either by falling or by impact of stones, which forces some bone layer to enter the joints from within, occurring in a concave manner similar to how it happens with the balls of a pear when they break and their inner layers come out through the fissures.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	It is also made in human bone cores, such as those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	These types of fractures are treated with splints like separated needles.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The patient should be kept in complete rest.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We should know all these types of fractures by detection and investigation, and by testing and examination of any corrupted tissue that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special type of fracture is known by its appearance on the bone and is abscessed, it becomes limited when probed because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one should consider the condition of the patient at first, and then if you see signs that indicate fear such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, eyesight problems or redness of those areas, similar to their signs in more severe cases, one should doubt that it will heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you see no abnormal signs, you hope for good health and then you begin the treatment of the problem.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has been infected from the beginning as in the winter days, you must study the bone tissue for the next 13 days in accordance with all precautions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, you must remove the bone within the seventh day, since the tissue around the bone may be rotten due to the panniculus, and the aforementioned signs should occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has spread to the panniculus covering the brain and is in small pieces and adhered, you must incise the fractured and adhered area according to my instructions.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	You should shave the head of the patient with the infection, and cut into the bone according to your usual practice and ability, following the shape of the wound, and do it gently on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If it is necessary to detect the bone, find blood flow or an abscess, then you should use what is required and is that you moisten the wound area with infused cloth soaked in wine and olive oil, let the wound rest until the abscess subsides, make sure there is no bleeding; and start by circumnavigating the bone and removing it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is one of two possible surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method is to incise the bone with a straight incisor and this is its form: Place another incisor next to it, slightly narrower than the previous one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Use the wider incisor more than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	It is necessary that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them should be shorter than the others and at the end of their sharpness, and they may be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them with ease when striking the incisors to avoid hurting the head and damaging it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, you must pierce its circumference before administering the incisors with retractors, which are called non-penetrating retractors.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called this because they do not reach the end of the bone from the other side, so that at the retractor is rounded extremity or edge on the opposite side to the sharp head of it, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone thickness.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is appropriate that you take many of these retractors, as many as are suitable for the thickness of each bone, provided that at all times during the operation on the brain, the extremity of which is sharp, the length and width should be according to the thickness of that bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of trepanels: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you press the trepanel onto the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then, move the trepanel to another location and press down on what is between all the way through to the thickness of the skull.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then insert scissors into what is between each hole in the bone, and make a hollow that you can fill with a thin layer on top, as we have said, until you pierce the bone or with your hand, or with another means through certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch any nerve.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	When you have perforated the bone and it is separated from the nerve if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted it, be careful to smooth and round off the edge of it on both sides with a tool similar to scissors, but be sure that it is thinner and more delicate than other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there remains any small piece of bone and jagged parts, take it with ease with what you must use of the tools; then care for the wound with linseed oil and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is easy and far from fear, which is called Gualla and the loosening by great praise; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part of the bone and have pressed down on it gently with a slow and light scissor, the following shape is taken:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the concave fracture is lion-shaped and does not cut any nerve, and the acute fracture is from one side to two sides in length, as often happens; that the concave fracture should be aligned with the nerve and the sharp fracture on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then press down on one part of the scissors with a small hammer until you have cut through all the bone with ease as it is turned, and you should be sure that no accident happens in any way, and if the patient were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there remains any cause attached to the bone of the fracture in certain places of the bone, you will cut it out with the concave part of the scissors and deliver it gently, because it is delivered without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the flesh, and what has been cut off or left from the bone is the surface, and remains rough and jagged in places, then you must smooth that roughness and round off those jagged places with fine razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places according to the most convenient time and the correct way of the razor based on where you lost your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer your razor with which you smooth the bone at first using the finest of those razors, and then use it in a gentle manner without stopping until you reach the point of administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small hairline fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you lost in correcting it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is not diminished for all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And rest on what we have written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the flesh is rectangular when you cut the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it over the opening of the wound; and take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first one lightly so as not to harm the nerve; and apply a thin layer of lint, but do not press it except as much as the wound requires.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that with this care for one day or two until you are sure of a clean wound; and then remove it and apply medicines such as lye of linseed and flour of chaff, and powder of cinnamon and allspice, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And that you make a powder of these medicines which is pulverized on the wound, as it is dry; and in general, administer all medicine with the property that it cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware that the wound in your care remains clean; and do not use any grease or other oil, nor add virulence to it; because when it is placed on the brain's flesh, it corrodes it and poisons it, and harms the patient with a malignant illness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And consider whether the nerve of the head is darkened on the surface when the bone is cleaned and especially when the care of it is being given, because this can cause harm to the patient as we have said, so that you know that it is harmful without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not happen due to blackness, but rather from the medicine that is applied, and because of that medicine it causes blackness, then you must take one part honey and three parts of red oil. And cover that area with a cloth and place it there to heal; use the appropriate healing spices before it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the repair of the nose when broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken, but rather two parts fractured together with one of those being visible, because in it there are two bones, where the break is cartilaginous and not actually broken; instead, it becomes thickened, twisted, and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is actually broken, then you must insert a splint into it, hold the fracture in place with your finger tip inside, and press on it from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for ease, but be careful not to hurt the patient during your treatment.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the break is in the upper part of the nose and the tip is not affected, then it should be set with a splint at the end of the finger where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the break is in both parts, then you must do as follows.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Collect the treatment materials on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then prepare the cauterizing agent for the abscess by the seventh or tenth day.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Place a piece of cloth in the end of the nose if the break is in one part, or two pieces of gauze, if the break is in both parts, and make sure the swelling is as thick as it fills the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	As the old restorers say, the gauze should be impregnated with wax and kept closed all day, but I have not seen this; nevertheless, the cloth must be soaked in honeycombs mixed with ground powder; and hold it there until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes insert cotton in the nose instead of gauze, because it is covered with a piece of lion cloth; and whether the break is severe or not, if the patient is not forbidden from breathing through the nose.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use gauze.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If another abscess occurs, stuff the nose with pitch or a pot filled with vinegar and oil, or alum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no abscess occurs, then you must fill it from the outside with sizam flour and powder of crushed cedar wood mixed with honeycombs; and cover it with a piece of lion cloth, but do not insert anything into the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you must cut them apart, remove them with instruments suitable for the task; and sew up the opening, heal it with what strengthens and consolidates, and use appropriate plaster.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a wound inside the nose, you must heal it with gauze and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the repair of the lower jaw when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken on one side and the break is not caused by a wound, pay attention to whether the break is only outside and not broken in two and curved towards the inside; in this case, its recognition is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the break is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the break is on the left lower jaw, insert your right index finger; and press firmly on the swelling of the fracture inside with one hand while pulling the broken bone apart from outside with the other hand; and do this carefully.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the break in the lower jaw has already separated into two, then you must administer extension of both parts according to right angles until it is possible for them to align properly.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is a displacement of teeth to dislocation, then you must stabilize those that you hope will remain with gold or silver or cedar wires; and cover the broken jaw with pitch, and cover it again with two layers of cloth and one large piece of felt made properly or a sole-sole cushion of the length of the lower jaw; and hold it in place as needed depending on your ability to tie it up and appropriate application until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Tell the patient to rest and remain calm, and stop the salty food from the lion.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then you must examine and untie it on the third day; and correct any alterations made to it and fill it with powder of milled grain, honeycombs, or sizam flour, because you will have removed the pitch from it, and cover it again with wool cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when this plaster is attached and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it alone, because you should not untie it until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for most often this fracture will be strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess arises that requires cautery, then administer what was said previously for its treatment until it heals, and the abscess remains.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If it is a fracture that is an ulcer, consider whether it is a bone separation or a dislocation, be cautious with the tools needed for the removal of those bone fragments from the wound.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the openings in the ulcer are narrow, enlarge them with a lancet according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed those fragments and they do not reabsorb, close the openings of the ulcer if they are large; and if they are not, place a dressing over it and bandage it until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of a dislocated collarbone.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The broken collarbone is divided by breaking the muscles, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	It is broken, separated or split into two pieces that do not dislocate; and it is easier to restore; or it is such that it splits into pieces, making it difficult to restore; or the fracture occurs with an ulcer.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure for that, when the fracture has an ulcer, is to have two assistants present, one to hold the broken collarbone and follow its direction, and the other to extend the neck on the side of the fracture.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with the teeth until its shape is appropriate and it is not in a hollow or concave area.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If more extension is needed, you should have the patient spread their shoulder on a piece of cloth or wool of the appropriate size according to your need; stretch and lift the collarbone and bend the arm with your hand until the fracture is aligned as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the collarbone to the outer edges because it is blocked by the neck, you should have the patient lie on their back and place a cushion under one side of the shoulder muscles of the appropriate size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistant presses the muscle on the side of the shoulder downwards until the collarbone is raised at the neck and you can correct the fracture and align it with the teeth.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel dislocation of the collarbone and it is painful, you should split it open and remove those fragments with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, you should make an incision in it using one of the instruments you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the knife that serves as a chisel under the collarbone; and it is a rod or iron with this shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And its convexity is similar to that of a mortar; and let the width be according to your need for it, depending on the size or depth of the bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length should be as much as you can manage during the operation; it should have two ends in such a way that one end is wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the wound that you have incised and removed bone fragments is wide, and it is certain that there is an abscess, you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, fill the wound with cloths and powder according to the size of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If there is an abscess, you should fill it with a cloth dipped in vinegar and rose oil and leave it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But if the bone is broken and has no ulcer or wound, you should place a plaster made of flour and egg white on it, and leave it covered with linen cloth; then take a thin wooden stick whose width is three fingers and length similar to that; wrap this in cloth and wrap this cloth around the wooden stick in the location over the fracture; apply a warm humid substance such as vinegar, rotating it over the bone and the wound of the patient, and move it up and down over the entire area; when the tightness of the broken bone and that of the ligament descends, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all this should be done without pain to the bone; and so it is necessary that you observe the patient every day, for when the ligament softens or the stick has healed, you correct this and strengthen the healing.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And have the patient sleep on their side with their head turned slightly to one side; so that the assistants can be at the lower end of the bed, and thus raise the collarbone through lifting the chest muscles; or hold the arm up against the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not disturb the ligament unless there is an abscess in that location within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the plaster if you see its face with the required ingredients, and adjust it in the tightness and restore it until it is healed and the collarbone fracture is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It is to be fastened and comforted according to the month for twenty-eight days, and in some men it is done within the time of that month.
Capitol .vi.	Here I set forth the sixth chapter.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Here I set forth the treatise on the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken at its lateral end, not through it, but along its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore, when the end of it is broken — and if it is indeed broken in the middle — and not known through imaging, then prepare yourself according to the type of fracture and reduce it naturally in all ways that are possible for you according to your skill.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a plaster made of powdered milled alum and beeswax on the site, apply crushed leeches; then apply double-layered cloth; then apply the sharp-tipped steel rod from a fine table according to the size of the shoulder blade or slightly more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the steel rod is concave in any of the parts of the shoulder blade, then you fill that concavity with beeswax and apply the rod evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then, apply warm human fat on top, and wrap the rod with linens until it is not protruding from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the linens each day and when it is softened, replace it with another one and straighten and align the rod if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The shoulder blade will be restored in twenty days or thirty.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you remove the linens and ensure that it is certain that the bones from which the injury began are not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If the bone protrudes from its place and presses on the skin, then you must cut it off, remove it, and proceed as I have said in the treatment for furculum of sacral abscess with caution if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Here begins the seventh chapter.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Treatise on the restoration of a broken bone in the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	In some cases, the bone in the foot is broken in the middle and the ends are displaced; but the extremities of it move and grind against each other.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Among the signs of such an injury are that it tends towards the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and chills; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration is that the patient is placed on their back, a pillow is placed between their shoulders; you must press on the muscles of it and adjust the costal bones to the ribs of two sides, be subtle in the operation and alignment according to all possible means and what is appropriate for this purpose until the figure of the bone returns as necessary.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then you apply the plaster and beeswax on top of it, and place a fine steel rod from the table made of willow or yew beneath it in elevation, as you wrap that around with cloth; and be subtle in applying that to the broken bone to ensure it is not damaged; and walk along the ridge at the back for several days, then straighten that with proper traction; and always consider the position, and when it is softened, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If there is an infection or pain or abscess that occurs at the site, you must cut and remove that and eliminate the plaster and correct any damage caused by that with methods of healing it; and if possible, remove the plaster, and align it with proper traction until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Here begins the eighth chapter.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Restoration of fractured ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur in large areas, but rather near the joints; and it is not contracture that occurs at the ends of the fractured part, but rather due to cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And it is not hidden from the feeling when the investigation of it is with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it brings the fracture together with the fingers in accordance with the possible method, until it is healed as needed, and apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bones with steel if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the interior, then the patient will have vehement pain and puncture, such as puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason the bones should be covered with gauze; and there will be difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were ingenious in that matter with many ingenious methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And it was said by them: it is necessary to place food for the patient that induces inflammation and wind so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is forced outwards at the joints.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should beware of it, lest it cause an easy abscess to form, if not avoided; and if it does occur, then help with it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Some of them said that it should be avoided above wind and that juice should be applied with force; and this is reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will attract superfluous matter to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Some of them said: it is necessary that the area be covered with wool that has been immersed in hot oil, and powder placed between the ribs until it is filled; it should be applied as a plaster when covering that, following the curvature; and care for the patient with pleurisy treatment and medication.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if there is vehement constriction of the patient that it cannot bear, and the bones are punctured with the lancet, fear for the patient is warranted, so it is necessary to make an incision over the area, expose the broken rib, and place a purgative instrument over it, as remembered earlier, and cut through the bones with ease, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And place the two lips of the wound together if it is large with suturing, and care for it with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should make a puncture and apply powder in rose oil over the area, and care for the patient with whatever is needed for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And place it on a bed above the planks that it sleeps on until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fracture of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and then it follows its tendency, and similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it occurs to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, for if you see its masses already softened and stupefied and dead, and they cannot be healed nor strengthened by any means, and when constriction is applied to them with hands or punctured with a needle and no pain is felt, then you know that it will not heal, and in the month of dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if there is constriction and pain in them with hands and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bones is saved, and the patient will heal with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resemble that and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the weight of it.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that it has already softened, then go to those who have occurred in the masses, and when it lies on its back, there is windiness and excrement without its will, and sometimes it is placed on its back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and do not trouble with the care of it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and less serious.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The care for it is to perform the suturing of the abscess with a lancet that you apply over the compressed vertebra, oil rose or myrrh mixed with honey; place over it for some days until the abscess is sutured.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And place one of the comforting and existing ointments on it, and strengthen it with linen; and command the patient to use rest and calm and not sleep over the area where pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if there is the need for compression of the bone that has sagged or any other cause already known to it, then you must dry over the affected area and break the bone; and place the two lips of the wound together with suturing if it is large; and care for it with some healing ointment from the entrails, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the tailbone of the bone in the hip is broken at the end of the coccyx, it is necessary that you insert your left hand into the anus and hold the broken bone with the right hand as much as possible according to the second equation; and place a plaster and splint on it if needed, and tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If a wound appears in the area, cover it and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the Repair of the Anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, the fracture is not only in the ends but also runs along their length and declines into the inner parts; pain occurs in the patient at the location and a cushion becomes stunned when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The repair of it is to stretch your hand over the location of the fracture which is the shape of its outline.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it, you should hold it as much as possible according to the second equation and in a manner similar to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or declines to the inner parts from below, then you make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the repair of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have grasped it, place it on a plaster and hold it with a splint of wood or bone, and tighten it firmly without fear of re-fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Grasp the concavity with a cushion that fills it up to the point where it takes on the shape of the fracture, and tell the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess cauterized, you stop the extension and repair of it until the abscess is healed, place it with the cushion that holds it as directed; and then return to the repair of it, and tighten it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If there is a fracture in the bones or they are crushed, treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the Repair of the Fracture of the Adductor.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor is what is between the thigh and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the repair of it is done in one of two ways, of which one is to take a wooden stick of medium thickness and shape it like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And attach them at both ends with laces, and hang it from a raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the patient on a sled; and make sure their broken arm is hanging off the stick until it reaches the handle of the stick in the middle location where its curve is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Suspend it from some heavy cause or the servant extends it to the inner parts below; and have the doctor and his assistant hold the fracture with their hands until the fracture returns as needed.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The second method is that the patient lies down on their neck and suspends their arm with a rope from the top of it, and have two servants hold one of them above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds the foot below it; each extends to his side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be stronger, tighten it with a rope and on both sides of the fracture, and each servant extends their side.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it is necessary to stop the middle part of the rope on the handle and the other side below the fracture towards the thigh.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, it is necessary to stop the rope at that location and on the hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Grasp it with ease and convenience, and once grasped as required and properly applied, tighten it if there is no abscess cauterized.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is an abscess cauterized, you should wait for the seventh day and place the wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess heals, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method to strengthen it (the fracture) is by placing plaster over the break, and then covering the plaster with new linen fabric; and then adjust the arm on this support, and place your open hand over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And cover the linen and strengthen the arm on the support to keep it in place without moving, unless there is a reason for the broken bone not to be held in this way.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place a splint on the break that is wider and stronger than the others; and place a finger between each splint, with the length of the splints according to the fracture, adding three fingers from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then strengthen the splints as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your bandage on the location of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, the bandage should be less tight.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore, if you find that the position of the splints and bandage is appropriate as mentioned when you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an abscess, then leave the bandage and splints in place for seven days as mentioned.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent pus or inflammation; or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive bandaging; and therefore correct everything as mentioned.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that there will be no cause of this, then do not remove the bandage until at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Let the patient's head be on their chest and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Cover the cooked coconut shell filled with wool bandage, and consider at all times of day or night that the figure of the broken member should not be removed or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened; therefore correct everything according to your ability.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Let the patient's food be as ordered before, in such a way that the food is soft at first until it begins to strengthen; and then you must thicken their food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because it is customary for the support and the bed of the patient to be strengthened for forty days, you must then remove them and administer baths and medications that will correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture has been set, do not remove the bandage and splints for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones that are called the two forearm bones; one is small and it is called the distal bone, and the other is large and it is called the proximal bone, from the lower side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the large forearm bone is broken, or if both bones are fractured together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	If only the small forearm bone is broken above, the restoration of it is easier and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	If the large forearm bone is broken below, the fracture is bad, and healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Worse still if both bones are fractured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the small forearm bone above, it is appropriate for the doctor to perform a small extension incision with ease before setting it.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if it is the large forearm bone that is fractured, then a more forceful extension incision must be made.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both forearm bones are fractured, then you should make the excision not too strong.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	You must make the shape of the hand, perform the restoration and extension of it on a cushion, with the thumb at the upper part, as previously mentioned, and the wrist below the other digits, and the patient is seated on a low chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	There should be a cushion in front of him at his height or incline, so that the patient does not exert himself.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant should extend the arm from below with their hand or bandage, and another assistant should extend it from above in the same manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The doctor should set the bone within its correct position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there is a protrusion, you must forcefully reduce everything to its original location with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there is a displaced protrusion of the bone that punctures the skin and you are not hopeful about its restoration, then perform cauterization over it using the method mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with an open wound, we have already treated that in a separate chapter, so take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth with a suture made of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin; strengthen the cloth on that with a loose bandage until the abscess subsides; then remove the suture and apply plaster prepared from powdered poppy seed and clay of huou, and place splints; and the splint that is placed over the fracture should be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You should know that the name of the stars in the arm is found in major configurations, or it may be a fracture in one joint or two at the same time.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then pause your compression over the location of the fracture firmly and vigorously, and when the compression is at the joints above or below the fracture, pause it slightly moist as required by the beginning of the chapter's reminder.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or harsh, and the one who is strengthened with it should be of a strength suitable between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and let it rest for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as pressure on the limb, and you find that it must be removed, then you must tie up the limb with water tail until that pressure ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Release the limb before it becomes constricted, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the compression has been softened and the bone has healed, and it seems like that, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider more if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of compression, for then it must be softened slightly and left for some days until the nourishment reaches it, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not have any cause of those mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove it for approximately twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Place the hand of the patient suspended by its ability for agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty days, or it heals quickly in twenty-eight days, and everything depends on the complexity of the case and the nature of the treatment.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the repair of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the knuckle of the thumb and joints of the fingers, fractures occur more often, but do not treat them unless they are observed to move abnormally.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the hand is fractured or dislocated, it must be necessary for the patient to remain lying down with his arm hanging over the side of the bed, and then compress the hand on that side.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then, the physician should gently extend the broken bones and align them until they are properly aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then it is necessary to compress plaster and gauze, unless an abscess occurs; and then place a splint over it according to the size of the area, and you have already covered it with cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the parts deep within (it), push the belly against the palm, and then make an appearance similar to a ball of fabric, command the patient to press that area with their injured hand; have it held firmly by fabric.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The steel (splint) for the cure with fabric, let there be lifting so that the wound is applied to the palm and press it as much as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outside parts, it is necessary to place a splint over the fractured area and another splint on the opposite side of the palm so that the hand is open and straight; then hold the splint tight as if rotating the hand in a screw-like motion with a ligament.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If the fracture occurs in one of the knuckles (joints) of the fingers, if the wound is deep, it should be sutured as necessary and then held with the palm; and if you wish, a small straight splint may be placed on top to raise the fracture without causing harm.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture occurs in any of the other fingers (such as middle finger, index finger, thumb or ring finger), it should be sutured and left to heal naturally without further manipulation; or all should be tied together continuously, which is better; or a small splint may be placed on top, as previously mentioned for a deep wound.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And in your treatment, consider the arrangement of cauterized wounds and their opposite - with the usual operation - for any causes of them as the narrative of it (the condition) repeats.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fracture in the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thighbone, when observed, is broken and becomes obvious by the sensation that transforms into the fracture in front (the anterolateral area) and the superficial abscess.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the bone is done by tying a ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, while the patient lies on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And have the assistant extend all the ligament to the fracture site according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if the thighbone is to be shortened, the ligament should be placed on top of the patella at the end of the femur, so that its extension falls in the upper part and another ligament is below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is to be shortened at the lower end (lower leg), it should be tied with a ligament at the knee and the extension should fall towards the other side of the bone.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor should suture the bone with both hands inside so that it is reduced to its natural shape and the bone is joined well by good suturing; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding if there is no abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there is an abscess in the member, leave it for several days until the cauterized wound heals, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding of the bone should be done in this way: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times and remove excess material; then wrap the limb to reach the ankle and shortening of the thighbone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long pin between the thigh and the limb near the lower end of the bone, and let both ends of the pin protrude from the upper part of the fracture on both sides; then rotate the pin around the limb and thigh so that the excess bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Place a cushion on the thigh at the site of the fracture and place a splint over the bone of the limb.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the void between the limb and thigh with thick cloth to coagulate the blood flow.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And start with a strong binding in the middle of the fracture site with three or four layers, and as you move away from the ligament at the fracture site, your binding should be less tight, lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the pin to both ends of the fracture site up to the ankle of the foot, and tie both ends of the splints from the other side so that the ligament is not displaced from its location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And loosen the binding on that part so as not to cause corrosion, abscess or swelling in the member; and if any of these conditions occur, immediately inform yourself about it, and correct everything properly, as previously mentioned.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is pus in the bone that protrudes, it is necessary to suture it as possible; and if not, let it break and remove it, and treat it with what was previously mentioned until healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some weeks are stronger than this thighbone fracture and should be bound as stated in the assistant and arm sections.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of this bone in such a way, no limp should occur in the patient; and if only one limb is restored, it is necessary that the other limb is also immobilized immediately.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is immobilized for 40 days or a short time or a few months, depending on the complexity and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the broken collarbone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the breaking of the collarbone is more common in older people.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it occurs in the breaking, then it is not but a fracture or tear in its divisions, and that is called a wound or multiple wounds, and over all of this feeling is established.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of it is such that what is broken from the divisions of it must be brought together to where it should be, adjusted and united as much as possible by means of a device, ease and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Place a plaster and cover over that round stone if necessary; and tighten it above with appropriate binding.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the measures that were recommended in other fractures, such as applying an ointment and similar to those which confront any accident with what is appropriate to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large and is called femur; and the other is slender and is named patella.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It occurs in some of the species of fracture that affects both bones of the arm, and by this is done the restoration of it as the restoration of the arm sewed up, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its divisions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the slender bone is broken, the leg is converted into the divisions in front of it.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the large bone is broken, separate it from below, and it is of those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And apply extension, tension and ligamentation as in the sewing up.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the fracture of the leg is shallow and has few complications, extend it less and more gently, and relieve with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you sew up the stones (or studs) and complete the entire operation, then you will take pieces of poplar wood that are placed under the causes that are placed in soles, and they are made exactly from branches of palm; relieve from those with small thickness, and do not be too hard, and the length of them according to the length of the leg, and of the collarbone down to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And apply a covering over each cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one on the division of the leg from one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the collarbone down to the foot base location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And apply the two studs in three locations of each end and at the middle location, for this structure prevents the leg from bending to the right and left sides, and it is for good positioning.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace of wood is applied according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed under it so that it maintains its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And moreover, you should do this in a fracture, and when that is an actual wound.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Also, every day examine the wound and study it carefully, and keep it from abscesses and inflammations or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the ankle fracture and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A fracture of the ankle does not occur every time; but in the bones of the foot it may sometimes occur; and in the toes, a fracture occurs only rarely, and then only in cases of improper positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones sometimes become elevated above each other, then have the patient rest his foot on the ground in such a way as when walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on the elevated bones and walk on them, press them, and hold them in place until they return to their original position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and cover it with a cloth, and place a small table under the abdomen of the foot on which there are two flat ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that with the foot and its proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other necessary means.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, you will be able to remove the bandages, because you will find the bones fixed, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on those will be as described.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of the toes are broken, then you should restore them and fix them in place as I and recommend to you in the restoration of fingers.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the broken digit on a splint in accordance with its length, and let it be slightly wider than the digit itself; and under the foot, place this table that I have recommended to you, and strengthen it with proper structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the fracture involves two or three or more bones, then you should place a splint on each digit in accordance with its size, wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table under the heel of the foot, and let it stand on one of the table's legs away from the abdomen of the foot to ensure proper retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you to remember not to ignore all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and other accidents that I have described; and oppose yourself to any accident as necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the neck of the femur and the pelvic bone and the coccyx in males.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the femur is broken, have it lie in a sling hung from a yoke, and incline it slightly to the side, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And have the midwife pack the neck of the cervix with cotton, and make sure it is packed in such a way that there is no air left inside until it is in front of the cervix and the fractured bone returns to its normal position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place pillows under the buttocks and when it is necessary to urinate, have the patient remove the cotton with ease and then return it in the same manner as you placed it initially, and then return the pillows first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or more until the fracture has healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take an ostrich egg and strengthen it with a cannula of cane; and insert the entire egg into the cervix, and inflate the cannula with air until the egg is filled with air inside the cervix, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And leave it packed with cotton and keep it for as many days as I have recommended until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the pelvic bone is broken in males or females, administer to its restoration and fixation what I have recommended for the iliac bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	What is right should not be concealed in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, especially to the one who has studied this subject and understands my book; because such a fracture indicates to you in the most important decisions regarding its restoration and fixation, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the coccyx of males when it is broken, take a cow's bladder, and place the coccyx inside it; then wrap it with cloth and bandage it, and leave it to rest for three days or more until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of a bone fracture when it is an actual wound.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate to treat the person who suffers from a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the thigh bone or elbow bone, or resembles one of them. You should cut and probe it as soon as possible if the conditions for trepanation are present as described earlier.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the wound discharges blood, then you must take measures to stop it, using powdered chalk or another suitable substance if there is no other reason.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin the process of healing the fracture on that day, and do not delay, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if the abscess heals quickly, you should wait to resume healing for up to nine days, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, because you will cause harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, you must take measures to reduce and compress it with your hands with ease and as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and the situation with your hands, you reduce it using this instrument; the instrument that is made of iron, the length of which is 7 or 8 fingers or as appropriate for the size of the wound, and it is necessary for the doctor to take one or two seconds depending on the amount required in treating each type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be round and as little irregular as possible in order to have clear understanding of the area during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And have a sharp point at the edges, with a thicker base and a gradual decrease in size towards the divisions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," which means a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	This means: And that the extremity of it should be raised slightly above the end of the bone protruding.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Apply pressure on it to push the bone back into its place with some form of constraint.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, exert pressure on the fracture ends and if the fractured part is thin, do not use a tool for good reason, but rather insert the fractured bone end where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone by any means that we have recommended, then cut it with an instrument suitable for cutting bones, or use one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And smooth out the uneven part and any small roughness remaining in the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone has been reduced and the patient experiences intense pain returning, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position, then do what will greatly benefit the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your treatment of the bone is complete, immerse a piece of black mustard-seed cloth in strong vinegar and apply it directly if it is summer, and do not place cotton or any oil on the wound to prevent purulence and corruption from occurring there.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And provide sterilized needles at the time of your completion of bone treatment, leaving the wound uncovered so that you can insert the probe with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done such a thing before, resulting in death or serious illness of their patients, which is sinful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the ligature is loose, soft, different from other fracture ligatures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or a bad one, and you fear the possibility of complications as we have warned about, and pain occurs in that place, then do not apply needles, but instead use a bandage of hard cloth in place of needles and tighten it there.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to heal after a day or two, take off the cloth that you had placed on it with vinegar, and apply warm compresses with medicinal ointments as our custom is, such as four-drug salve and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is your duty to remove the bandage and inspect the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and the limb must be prepared in such a way that pus can easily drain from it to the surrounding areas.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes more than a few days without consolidating or draining from the arm, then you should know that it is a sign of infection and you must investigate the wound with caution.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And in the case of infections that are separated and drained, those that are not separated but swell the limb and cause pain, then you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound becomes pus-filled or gangrenous, that is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you should stop whatever treatment was being used in its preceding chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	If it is necessary to break a large bone, such as the thigh or shoulder bones and similar major bones, and you do not attempt to attract or extract it because many times this leads to death; leave it in place for as long as possible because rapid healing can occur without intervention within twenty to thirty days. And heal the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodules that occur at the site of some fractures.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Swollen occurrences often happen at the site of healing from a fracture, especially near joints, and this is caused by the shape of the limb; it strongly forbids the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	If the swelling is recent, administer medicines that have the property of stopping this, such as aloes, elm, and similar ones; take a few or all of them, and bind them to the affected area with linen, or albumen of egg, or vinegar, and place it on top of the swelling in a poultice, and bind it tightly around it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the poultice in place without removing it for several days; then remove it and apply another one, until the swelling subsides; or strongly hold a plate of lead over it, because lead has the property of holding everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already hardened and is tight, and it becomes necessary to release it frequently, then cut it along the most superior part of the limb, and remove the excess and pus, or pierce it with sharp surgical instruments until it subsides; and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they have been restored and the limb remains thin, take care not to overlay it against its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has been restored and the limb remains thin, this is not done except for several reasons: one of which is excessive dissolution of the ligament and improper healing of the broken part; or excess constriction of the ligaments before nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or excessive embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique); or superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or poor blood flow in the patient's chest and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Treatment of this consists of feeding the patient and making their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in the body; administer baths; and give them rest and joy over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Place a plaster on the limb to draw the pus towards it, so that the pus attracts more nutrition; or continue embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique) of the limb with warm water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones that have been restored incorrectly and the operation on them that must be avoided.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a limb that has already been restored for straightening and the healing of the broken bone with swelling and nodules occurs, and it is deformed in shape due to the fracture, nevertheless, the limb should not be prohibited from its natural operation; however, you must take into account the opinion of someone who knows whether the limb was recently fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly condemned as leading to great fear, which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limpness and swelling are recent, then it must be embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique) with warm water in which soft herbs are placed, such as althea leaves and radishes, mellilot, and similar ones; it should be made into a plaster with a plaster that is well-made; or that a mucilage of althea root is prepared and mixed with glycerin or olive oil, and applied to it; or that figs are mashed with pigeon feathers, and similar ones of the medicines that are called consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	It is sometimes dissolved with frequent light rubbing using the most moist substances, and it is administered movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already advanced and is severe and hardened, it becomes necessary to cure it with iron, then the pus over the affected area must be cut off and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved; and incise what is excessive of the nodule on the bone using fine surgical instruments, and administer ease to it with solicitude and care.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the treatment for dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is essentially a dislocation of one of the joints, which causes it to be immobilized and distorts the shape of the limb, bringing great pain and injuries upon the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it must be reduced immediately and not delayed, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes infected and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it should not be moved nor stretched at the time of the infection, for many times it causes spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this occurs, it is necessary that you prepare the patient for lancing (the process of draining pus), and let it rest until the infection subsides; and the limb should be embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique) with hot water and oil, and it should be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members must be healed by what will return to its place in its location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now and order the chapters on dislocation as it is preceded in fractures; from the most superior part of the body to the most inferior part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated, it can happen in one of two ways: either they are pushed back to their places with little movement and become slightly swollen; or they are completely dislocated and the patient is unable to open his mouth, and the tongue is wrapped around its word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place with minimal effort.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and serious, it requires gentle reduction, without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The attendant must hold the head of the patient and enter his hand into the mouth to find the dislocation of the jaw, if it is on one side; or he should enter both hands together, if it is on both sides, and tell the others to stay outside with them; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and allow them to go from each side; and the doctor should push the jaw back and cover it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction (of the dislocated jaw) is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer warm water and oil as an emulsion, until the reduction of both becomes easy and do not delay the reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and closed (the dislocated jaws), and the mouth of the patient is not clamped shut or softened, place on top of those cotton wool pieces covered with wax, make it from wax and rose oil; and let it be applied gently to ease the movement.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The patient should sleep on their back and their head should be between two pillows to prevent it from turning either right or left; do not force the patient to turn towards any side; let their provisions be forbidden until lions (meat), until the pain subsides and the jaws are no longer dislocated, then you may do as you wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	Let this be administered with ease, and do not labor in opening the mouth; forbide food and drink and speech until the jaw is dislocated and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they are not converted to their original position, then watch closely for fever and sodium intake, and it is strongly advised to purge the stomach of the patient, and vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see this, know that it is a disaster; and watch closely for the death of the patient within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Reduction of dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula should not be dislocated from its joint with the bones; and sometimes it is dislocated outside at the junction, and that is discerned by palpation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then compress the area with your palm using firm pressure, for it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And press firmly on that plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that bone (furcula) that is connected to it is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and splinted as stated earlier and as you are equipped to do.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And press firmly on that plaster, powder, and splint, and command the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the separation of the muscle's extremity from its place is reduced.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that a muscle is dislocated in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the junction with the tendon or below it.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle (in the chest), but this is rare, and it is not dislocated at the back by the shoulder, nor at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Moreover, it is dislocated and protrudes from the junction at the bottom of the tendon, and this occurs more frequently in those with thin muscles; however, in those with thick muscles, it protrudes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a strong blow or fall can cause it to occur in some people, and the affected muscle is treated with cautery and excised when it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you must be careful about this and proceed in its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known that dislocation occurs at the junction with the tendon at the bottom of the muscle; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact one, for there are several differences among them. You will find a hollow in the head of the muscle, and at the tendon's junction below it, you should touch the head of the muscle like the curve of a hoe, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the auricle nor move it completely.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated on the foot or ankle, you should touch it directly without hiding it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of it above the junction with the tendon; and then presses down on the tendon below it, raising the junction with force to its place, and the minister raises the hand of it and extends it; and then presses down on it below where it easily returns.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return with the method described earlier, and at the beginning of the dislocation, several days later, the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a poultice made of burdock root, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on their back and the tendon of it should be held with a moderate amount of pressure, and the physician should place their heel on the shoulder, lift the head of the muscle using force, and pull the patient's hand towards the bottom so that it is not dislocated further. Another servant should hold the patient's head so that it is not dislocated below, for it will easily return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to reduce it in this manner: make a person who is taller than the patient present and stand on that side, enter their muscle below the patient's tendon and lift the tendon of the affected limb upwards to the junction above where the patient is suspended in the air. Another servant should pull the patient's hand from below their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, it is necessary to hang something heavy, as this will make the dislocation return quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Another method of reduction: fasten a pole with its head round in shape (similar to the end of a mortar pestle) on the ground that is neither thick nor thin. Then place the patient below it, and rest the patient's shoulders on top of the pole. The patient should stand according to the length of the pole, and extend their hand from the other side with force, while extending the opposite limb strongly towards the affected area, as the junction will return to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned earlier, use this cure: take a pole with a length of two forearms and a width of four fingers. Reduce its thickness at the end of the tendon in the following manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Place the rounded head on top with lions' fur to prevent the pole from hurting the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Approach the patient's thigh gently and extend your hand or arm within it, tie the thigh with support straps, and bind the thigh, arm, and hand to the affected limb.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Place the arm on a ladder at the appropriate height according to the length of the patient's body, extend the other hand towards the affected side, and secure it by suspending it from the other side, as the joint will soon join.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Once the intestine inside is completed in any way possible for you, then you must gently press down on the suspected hernia with linen cloth of appropriate size; and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered molasses and egg whites over the entire muscle, in such a way that it is turned under, and then tighten the hernia with an appropriate bandage; let the wound be wrapped over the plaster, and the patient's hand should be connected to their neck, relaxed, and the hand should not be moved for 7 days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It is necessary to restrict the patient's food intake until the affected member is comfortable, as it facilitates the healing process.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And approaching food, let it be given more in smaller portions or exercise less activity; therefore, if it is stopped and not softened, then it has been healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	However, if the joint is dislocated due to excessive moisture that happens there or for another reason, then in that case, it is necessary to administer cauterization with three cuts, as was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and the bandage is removed after 7 days and the joint remains unhealed, and the plaster and bandage are reduced slightly but it still does not heal and the arm cannot be raised above the side, then you know that the nerves of the affected area, which are at the end of the muscle, have been severed or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never fit properly in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done, you should press and squeeze the feet and the breasts or the sides, the reduction is done with pressure and extension until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another bandage should be applied to that area, and heal it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If there is gravity or delay in the healing of the member and difficulty with its movement, then you should use baths multiple times until the gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and it returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, especially in front of the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it is displaced either to the left or to the right according to some figure, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder joint correctly, this is clearly declared to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch the muscle with it.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you must catch it, and reduce the dislocation immediately when it comes out as an abscess cauterized, for if it comes out as a cauterized abscess, the reduction is difficult, and it heals poorly; and especially when it is on the back side, for all other types of dislocations are worse in that regard, and it causes more pain, and multiple days can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when possible, is to extend the hand on both sides, expand the arm, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the flat part of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	However, if the dislocation is on the front side, then it should return in such a way that the hand bends with its palm, until it strikes the shoulder with the flat part of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then you administer violent extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It is that two ministers extend the arm, and they should have another two ministers to prevent the extension from being too strong.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then turn the arm all around, as it is wrapped with long cloth folded over the hand or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it is those causes that aid in lubricating the joint and facilitating movement; then push the joint vigorously until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And in the reduction of it, it is necessary to rest on that plaster with adhesive and elastic properties made with egg whites, and tighten it with an appropriate bandage; then the arm should be suspended from the neck and relaxed for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is possible to dislocate it, then you should remove the bandage and let it be in its place.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see that the joint does not become stronger, then you should apply more plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it becomes tighter; then dislocate it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	However, if there is gravity in the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer humidity in baths and subtle friction, and observe until it improves; or place a lubricant on the joint, such as oil; and tie it up, and leave it on the bones for a day and a night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and place it in water; and when it has softened, you shall heat the joint with a quick friction, and then apply it to the affected area three times, once, and again, and the third time,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has reached the anus, internally until it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you want to, place it over the wet and scalded cowhide wound, and hold it there for some time, because that is moist and helps reduce it to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder joint is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation from the hand is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints, however, it is necessary to have speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, before the location becomes abscessed or a cauterization is applied.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and provide an extension of their arm, and place your hand or palm over the edge of the joint, and push it back into its place until it returns to its position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered whether the palm has already been left in the patient's abdomen, in that case, the extension and reduction of the hand should be performed, and if the dislocation is preceded by this, the position of the patient's hand should be brought inside the table, so that the doctor's hand can rest on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If it returns immediately, that is good; if not, then you should apply a compress to it, allowing the abscess to come out, and do not repeat it, because otherwise, it will not endure or suffer more than a few days with the reduction of it.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may remain twisted; and do not inquire of the patient about any cause, but rather that their hand is softened and cannot withstand any pressure; in this case, you should know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and you should not intervene except to compress it with a hot iron cauterizer to prevent any further damage.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Once the shoulder joint has returned, you should apply a compress to it which we have recommended, and leave it for ten days to heal and strengthen; then it should be released, left open, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is stopped and there occurs any gravity in it, then you should apply warm water and gentle friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes fingers are dislocated all over.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When one of those fingers is dislocated at the base or in the palm, you should squeeze the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the finger at its base and suspend the part where it is dislocated for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that and extend it until it becomes straight on the same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When it is night, follow the advice given earlier, and do not stop unbinding it during the day or exercising its movement, and bind it at night, and do this for several days until it becomes strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If the wrist is dislocated, do the same as above, and bind it to that location and perform the first operation on it until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Similarly, do the same as above when it is dislocated in other locations.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the spine or neck occurs, and it is not possible to move any of the nearby vertebrae, in that case, there is no cure for it because death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of this is that the patient's digestion is outside their control and they cannot retain it; and many times muscles or two hips or two arms, or one of them, are softened or a vertebra is moved from its location, which many times is moved and many times its removal is performed in four places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has already drained into the crevices behind and is known as gangrene.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure of it is that you should consider whether gangrene occurs from purity, for in that case there is neither cure nor healing of it all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in those where it occurs by chance or by injury or something similar to them, the ancients said the methods of cure with a long discourse, from which the most returns; but I have abbreviated it from that one of which the few excuses for the abundance of it, closer to the true intention, which I have expanded and formed from instruments diverse of that one, with which I will show it and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in gangrene that occurs in the front of the foot, there is neither cure nor healing of it; and similarly in that which is made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is cured only that one which occurs directly on both sides, with what I will recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should be extended on his back near a wall, and it should be supported underneath him to keep his feet from being hit.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight staff there, fixed in the ground at the foot end around his head, and another staff at the other end of the foot to raise it.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the staff, and not be locked in a ditch; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Cover the head of the patient with a cloth and firmly hold his hair with a leather strap; extend the end of the leather strap to the staff, which should be at the head of it, and tie it there; and strongly tighten the other leather strap around his buttocks, at the waist, and over his chest; and adjust all the straps and tie them to the other staff that is at the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend his strap to the divide of the staff, and neither should the two staffs and their straps at their locations where they are fixed be drained, but rather not as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his hands on the spinal column with strength until it returns, or he may place it on a table, and close to that, adjust his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose latitude or length is above three spans, and carve in the wall near the patient a hole in which the end of the table fits.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the weight of the table on the spinal column, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pulls it tightly until the spinal column is dislocated and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, turn the roll that is turned with your hand; it is that you put yourself on the ground behind the patient's head at the end of two staffs, whose length should be one span each, and you should also have the head of him in the end of two staffs in the same way; and the distance between each staff should be one palm, and already it is made in each staff with a hole through which it can pass, and each should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not slip.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And it is a round staff where the hole is, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two staffs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole in which the staff is formed, whose length is one palm that rotates; and in the other two staffs there is something similar to it.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And strongly tighten the straps that you have tied around the feet of the patient in the hole that is at his head, and the straps that you have tied around his chest in the ring that is at his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And you should place each roll and have a minister who turns the roll with his hand, and the doctor will adjust the spinal column as we said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the ring:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spinal column is returned and closed, you must apply a plaster made with dry powder and albumen of eggs, and stopper; and place a plank of wood on it whose width should be three fingers or around that, and the length that takes the location of the gangrene, and above the division of the spinal column.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And apply a dietary strap that we said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any obstruction in the location at the end of healing, you must administer medicines that soften and clean it with the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already the lead sheet has been applied in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes it happens that an obstruction occurs in the rear of the two spinal columns, and it is caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which already protrudes due to which you should not make any attempt on it with this medicine, for strong heat will cause your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not move but only dislocation, and it does not happen to them what happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inside the socket, outside the socket, in front, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is also dislocated at the socket-side, but rarely in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the hip dislocation at the socket-side is that when you align the healthy leg with the diseased one, the healthy thigh appears longer and the diseased one more prominent, and the diseased leg cannot bend as it should be straightened, and it's the area that swelling should appear, which can be cauterized with a cautery to stop the swelling.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of hip dislocation at the outside is that the symptoms are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of hip dislocation at the front is that the thigh expands according to the complaint, but it does not bend without pain in the groin, and if it is forced to move forward and cannot be moved at the front; and the urine is retained, and the swelling is cauterized, and you should walk on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of hip dislocation at the back is that it does not expand the groin, nor can the front thigh bend when bending the swelling, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the hernia is to be found there.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider if the dislocation is old and long-standing, which has already become chronic, then you must administer reduction of it and leave it in its position, but this is not a complete cure; therefore, it does not necessarily mean that there should be hope for recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must try to restore the joint and extend it on both sides, inside and outside, left and right, for it easily returns and does not need any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare strong medicine and stretch the thigh of the lower part, or around the hernia, or with a bandage that is tied over the thigh; and another person should extend their hand above the hernia so that they place their hands deeper inside it; and hold a strong cord around the neck of the hernia, and have another person tighten the end of the cord.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension should be of the thigh or of the socket-side to the groin at the neck of the bone, or of the back to the area of the backbone.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension should be done in one go so that the patient is raised off the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; but if not, then it is necessary for all types of dislocation to do what I have said about self-treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In self-reduction of the dislocation, when it is at the socket-side, it is necessary that the patient lies on their side; and place the bands over the neck of the hernia in the area between the head of the hernia and the lower groin; and extend the band above the area of the groin to the upper part of the bone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And have another strong person grasp the patient's arms, and firmly hold the large part of the diseased hernia and extend it outward by forceful extension, for it will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This type of treatment is easier to cure than other treatments for this limb.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused for you and not allowed to enter with this type of treatment for the entire limb, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong and light bandage around both ankles and groins.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	The length of each should be four fingers, and the diseased thigh should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The patient should be suspended over the head of the bed and raised as high as possible; and the length of the suspension should be two arms' lengths from the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Command a strong young man to press the head of the hernia, and he should be suspended with another young man, and the other young man should press down on the hernia with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in self-reduction, when the dislocation is at the outside, it is necessary that the patient rest on a bench according to what has been recommended previously; and tighten the bandage strongly around the diseased thigh and feet of it.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two beds should be placed, one under the feet and the other under the head; and two more beds should be adjusted to meet in the middle of the beam on which damp cloths are wrapped around it, so that the patient is not injured by the bed being between his legs, thus ensuring that the extension at the lower part is not impeded.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each person should extend to their side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you turn it back, it will be very good; otherwise, press carefully on that area and similarly as we said in the swelling due to that entrapment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Therefore, the patient must lie on their back for treatment.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the hip joint, it should be extended slightly, and according to this account in the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected leg, and with the other hand he presses that one together, and with that compression holds the extended hip away from the opposite hip.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the hip joint behind, it should not be extended away from the hips and raised off the ground; instead, it should be pressed down on a hard surface, as it would also be done if an ankle were dislocated outside the foot, according to what was said about its treatment on two feet; and it should be on its back with the limbs extended, as we said, this has no benefit.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And compression must be applied to the joint using a table.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, the reduction is difficult as you know, and the sign of the reduction will not be hidden from you. You extend two pillows for the patient, when you see that entrapments appear and the patient extends their leg and expands the area with excuses, then you will know which member needs to be returned. Then, adjust two cushions and apply a plaster or bandage in such a way that the ankle is not injured in any of the joints; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare the swollen limb with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see that the swelling has subsided, then you will know that the dislocation has been fixed, and leave the patient to walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any signs of swelling or inflammation, then return and plaster that area and compress it according to the first method, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then unbind that limb and make it walk slowly for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of hip dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The hip can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outside, inside, more commonly behind, but not in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of hip dislocation is to command the patient to apply their leg to the side, and then you will know that the hip is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all ways (of hip dislocation) is to put the patient in the correct position, so that they extend their leg as much as possible. Then, hold their body with your hands, support their foot between yours, and make them hold their hip with their hands while you hold it from behind with strength, and another person extends their leg until the hip returns to its original position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The thigh of the patient must remain attached to the pelvis without it dislocating.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Place and fix the thigh in its place against the pelvis, bind it with bandages for three or four days, then unbind it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of it is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with liniments which are used in the treatment of hernia.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of a dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to some injury, and the dislocation of it may occur either on the inner or outer side.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that the ankle becomes swollen on the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure for reduction is gentle reduction, and it should be extended with ease and then bandaged until it returns to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the case of dislocation due to some injury, care should be taken that the patient does not move and has a strong and powerful assistant on the side behind his back in the correct position for it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	You stand to the right of the patient's head and your left hand on the lower part of his thigh at the level of the hip.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	You hold the foot with your right hand and your left hand for two movements, pull on it, extend it, and push the leg of the foot against the thigh without laboring.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this movement as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And push the leg of the foot against the thigh on the third movement and remain at the hip.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one movement or two according to this method, and if the foot is bandaged, that is good; otherwise, repeat the operation as it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction of it is forbidden by what has been recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, spread out a small mat in a firm place, and have them lay on it with their legs apart, and you should already have wrapped them up in cloth so that they do not feel discomfort.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the assistant should hold the patient's legs and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or with a splint that it lies on the neck of the foot; and each assistant should extend one side against the extension of his own part, and the mat should be placed between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being forced at the sides opposite its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor bandages the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy side at the opposite side, because the dislocation will return easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to you, stop plastering and strongly extend it with liniments, and bandage the foot to the thigh.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you should be cautious or careful of the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the liniment on it is not violent and does not hurt it too much.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Leave it like that for two or three days; and if the liniment softens, extend it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Remove it on the third or fourth day and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go in front of that space, it should not be done with the certainty that the dislocation has not been dissolved and destroyed, nor should any treatment be given for it.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms cauterized, you should administer the treatment described in the previous paragraph on another occasion for healing and dressing it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the cure of dislocation of fingers on the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It should be bandaged with little extension without difficulty, and if not difficult, advance is easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some of the joints of the foot, you should make the patient lie on a flat surface such as the ground or table and remain as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And you stand on one foot, and place your other foot on the joints that have been injured, and press on it with your foot with force until it returns, and observe it to see if it is bandaged and does not appear in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And you place the foot of it on a table that takes up the whole foot, which has two ends, and press it with structure suitable and firm for three days; then unbind it and make it rest without walking for several days until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation caused by a blow, fracture or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur and you try to treat it and restore it, many times death occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And so it is not necessary to presume on the cure of it, but one who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, slow, neither rash nor presumptuous; and one who uses medicines that produce abscesses cauterized only in the beginning, leaves the patient in the judgment of God, not to the one to whom salvation from destruction is hoped, but to the one whom hope for healing appears with some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then immediately make an effort for reduction at the start of the cause, before it becomes an abscess by cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	If the limb returns as we desire, then administer the treatment that will cause the abscess to subside by cautery and heal the wound with what is suitable for dry ulcers.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation occurs together with a fracture and the bone is separated, then you must perform the treatment on them, and do as was said in simple diseases that are preceded in their locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Be careful and avoid that the instrument enters into the paths of fear, according to your discretion; for what is better for you, you should serve your Creator, and it is more permanent for your glory, and more healthy for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasim, blessed be God.
Amen.	Amen. This phrase was added as a conclusion to religious texts or prayers during the medieval period. It signifies agreement, assent, or confirmation and serves as a closing statement for many written works.
