Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucius.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	As Albucius begins his words, since he has compiled this book for you as the final work of medicine, by completing it I see that it will be an end to it, and through its explanations and clarifications, it seems fitting for me to complete this treatise on surgery for you.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery is entirely destroyed in our region and in our time, so that the science of it suffers great danger and its tools are lost; except for a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have been misinterpreted and led to error and uncertainty until the meanings of them are closed and the strength and art prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen by me that I will bring this treatise to life according to the method of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and for the forms of the instruments of cautery and the other tools of work as well, with the addition of description, and for the preparation of them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Moreover, the reason why a good craftsman cannot be found in this time is because medicine is long, and that its practitioner must first be experienced in the science of anatomy which includes knowing the joints and shapes of the members; and having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, and their numbers and origins; and recognizing the arteries pulsating and quiet ones, and the locations for bleeding them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said with his name "art," but in small work, and even more so in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Moreover, we have already said about that in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not knowledgeable about what I have said concerning anatomy, cannot avoid falling into error, so that many men have died in this way as I have seen often, for some are unskilled in this science and take themselves to be without it and its experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophilus on a woman's neck, and cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out, until the woman died among those present.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who thought he could extract a stone from a man's body, which was in its state, and the stone was large, and it came out and cut through the bladder with it, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for him to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient he would die as a result.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery and approached a negro slave who had a broken thigh; and with his ignorance he prepared the doctor, extracted the fracture through the wound, using pulley devices and strong rods, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he tied it up according to his desires, and bandaged it, and left it unventilated for several days and commanded that we keep it bound; and thus it became an abscess and led to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to it, and prepared to remove the bandage, and achieved calmness and relief from his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption had already set in the member, so that it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread through the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess cancerous and it became ulcerated near some days, until the malignancy of it grew in the lord of it.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is because the cancer grows without humor melancholic, so it does not require any special care, but rather that it affects a member which is hostile to everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that surgery be divided into two categories: one associated with health, and the other associated with danger in its greatest preparations.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already tested this in every place of this book where there is danger and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against it and allow yourself to be misled by the foolish, so that they do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus take your weapons with caution and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method for salvation and praiseworthy success by the grace of God, and leave the terrible diseases that are difficult to cure, and lay aside your fears for that deception in your faith and in your name will not mislead you: for it remains for your glory, and thus in the world and forever among your sanctifications.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galenus already said in some of his teachings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat an evil illness, so that bad doctors do not call themselves doctors."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you shall have read this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the feet, their forms of instruments and the ironwork of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with abscesses and perforations, boils, sores, extraction of pus-filled sacs and similar conditions, all collected and arranged in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twists and similar conditions; a chapter arranged in forms of instruments for the feet.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauteries with fire and sharp medicine and the reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to say the qualities of the juveniles of that cautery and its disadvantages, as well as in what situations the cautery should be forbidden.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discussion of the quality of the juveniles of cautery and its disadvantages is a long and detailed one, subtle due to knowledge, and hidden secrets; many wise men have spoken about it, and there is disagreement among them, and I will only touch upon a small part of their discussions, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that the use of cautery applies universally to any matter or materials, except for two situations, which are cases without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of dry matter without material, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease characterized by quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is appropriate that diseases that are dry and hard should be treated with something that is wet.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite, that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hard diseases that occur in human bodies, when you compare the human body and its moisture with the nature of fire, you find that the human body burns.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say on the basis of this discussion, that I have experienced this myself on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not necessary that I come back over what has already been expounded and practiced in the chapter on cautery by previous exercise, and to know the diversity of human cases and the disposition of diseases in their circumstances, as well as the causes of these, the accidents of them, and the time period for these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other situations, there is no need for fear, especially in the case of cold and moist diseases, because all doctors are already in agreement about these, and there is no disagreement over the use of cautery in these cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And sons, understand that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it is due to the cautery as burning medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which does not spread beyond the member being cauterized but only causes a slight harm to the adjacent member.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of burning medicine reaches not only the member being cauterized but also the adjacent member and can bring difficult-to-heal disease and prolonged suffering to that member.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything unnecessary; and it is already known through experiment and prolonged study in the art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason, I am excused from the length of my discussion, and if it were not for the fact that it is not suitable for my book at this point to reveal secret hidden aspects about fire and the quality of the operation on bodies and its expulsion of diseases, I would demonstrate a philosophical argumentative explanation, which could help alleviate your suffering.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Sons, understand that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the disadvantage due to time is submerged in the benefit of what is achieved by cauterization, especially if cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that evil will come sooner than a slight harm caused by the passage of time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	Do not listen to your suffering, or sons, they do not consider this except the common people and foolish doctors, for that disease which is cured by cauterization is not always successful and they await a bad outcome.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they believe for that, because cauterization is not in a place of medicine which alters complexion and dries up the humidity that is the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But the cauterization is unnecessary in medicine, because of its willfulness to fulfill the virtue and effectiveness of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some time in the future, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their illness, as well as its nature, and what has been prepared in their body from excesses, and what has been acquired by them in food and similar causes; otherwise, the illness that receives cauterization is a subtle illness in a few organs with few excesses and humidity, such as cauterization of teeth for pain and similar cases. It is possible that in this case, the pain will not return, but it will be small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But it is common speech that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is right-thinking speech, not according to what I understand in this matter, because I believe it is not healing that benefits with medicine or any other reason for cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is contrary to this; the belief that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is not when we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses and those medicines do not work, but rather at the end of the illness, they administer cauterization and it improves the situation.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Therefore, from here on, it is clear that cauterization is not the last remedy of medicine, not according to the belief which I understand in the common people and the phrases of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	They said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	They said that the location of cauterization does not harm, because this is not absolutely true, since I have already proven and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron as they said; however, when you cauterize with fire made from gold, it is not up to you, because it depends on the quantity you want for the color of gold, and it prepares to be used; if you adjust it above the fire, the gold melts due to the heat of the fire, and in the fire some layers are produced so that the artisan can carve it with the tool of the occasion.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, for this reason, caution must be taken when using iron for cauterization; we should do it gently and as accurately as possible in operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head within the feet, so that I lighten the question for those who seek it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On Cauterization of Head Pain Due to Coldness and Humidity.
Le capitol primier.	Chapter One.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization treats the coldness and humidity that cause the secondary symptom of which there are two causes, one is a sign of scrofula and many rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the hairline and eyelashes flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and gout, and generally of any illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, sclerosis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in these illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: First, the patient must be evacuated with medicines for purging the head for three or four nights, according to the nature of the illness, the age and habits of the person.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then, command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a stool and hold his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Approach the patient's thumb and place it against the root of the nose between their nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the location you are referring to is reached, mark it with a probe, and approach the olive-shaped cautery iron.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Approach that location with your thumb in the manner it descends, and gradually tighten your grip until it is securely held, and then rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Lift your hand gently and look at the location. If you see some part of the bone protruding, such as the grains of sand, then raise your hand. If not, return your hand to that tool or another one if it is cooled down until you can see the bone I mentioned to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Approach the wound edge with your thumb and leave it there until the scar from the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Cure the location with a strong four-drug ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	They said that when the wound remains open, it is better to get a splint, because it is more beneficial and helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They said that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone and the cautery kept in place until some portion of the spongy bone is charred.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Approach it so that it touches the bone, and heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They said that the cautery should reach the bone in the end, until it penetrates deeply into the bone so much that the bone collapses, and this is the form of the small mortar:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They believe that the vapors from that location will escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	The wound should remain open for a long time and be healed until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauteries in all cases, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, for it is better for your health, because the head is more exposed to the solution of continuity from the body as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a cruel nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The primary type of cautery is safer and better for you; and that method and the work with it are for your health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head's cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When a chronic and long-lasting pain in the head occurs in the patient, who has prolonged it with gears, cochias, capirpurges, emplaustres, guatzes, cades, gualinas and similar things, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that did not help in any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong nature; and it is not cruel and there is no great inflammation, then cauterize it with another cautery slightly later.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Approach the corn of his head with a cautery until the coccyx is separated.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the coccyx and expose the bone's portion that we have estimated and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the location called "was," which is the place where air pockets are found.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	Leave your hand in this position, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will have a great deal of pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will tell you the location of this cautery, because the cautery used for the corn of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one used in the other locations on the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the non-ancient migraine cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is deep pain in the part of the head or it is a dull pain that extends to the ear, treat the head with medications that modify it and administer the other treatment I have mentioned for diseases; and if neither one helps, cauterize it in two ways: either by using acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Hot coals or medicine to burn are the ones you should take a pair of tongs made of iron, and pick up that one and sharpen its ends on both sides with the tips.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then make an incision in the place of pain on the temple with a thin blade that is only deep enough to expose the bone, hidden once it is done.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply strong pressure to the area with a compress, and leave it like that for three hours; then remove the herb and let the wound heal for two or three days, and place a plaster on the area submerged in oil until the pain subsides completely.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it heals completely.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medications that I have written in the second treatise on burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterization is done in this manner by fire, and the form of the fire for cauterization is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a clawed iron, because its head resembles the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Place your hand over the pain area and hold it there - so that the archer's arm does not shake - and slowly rotate the small iron back and forth.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of tissue burned by the scalpel is large and intense, lift your hand to avoid shaking the artery that is nearby - so as not to cause bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immerse the wound in salt water and let it soak for three days; then apply ointment to the wound with oil, and take care of it until it heals completely.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, perform cauterization on the end of the cutlery in the manner of cauterization, and be careful to avoid cutting an artery during this modern procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the ancient cauterization of hernia.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an emigranea as was said in the previous treatment and the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, and sometimes because the disease is not addressed by what was said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery knife until it glows, because this means to draw a line on the place of pain, whose length is the maximum size of the finger, or whatever that is; and then pause your hand for a moment and strengthen it, and then make an incision with the arc-shaped blade and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary that you watch over the jawbone, which is swollen, you should make it move again so the ligament is not adhered and the nerves that are affected by it, and to prevent convulsions.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of a cut artery's bleeding, for in the cutting of it there is fear, especially to those who do not know what they are doing and are not trained or experienced; leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come to remember the regulation of bleeding from an accident in the artery according to its method, in that book of this treatise.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if this disease is not helped by this cautery and the body of the patient can tolerate it, cauterize it in a more suitable place on the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if it is necessary to administer the cautery that was said in the chapter on constriction of the artery with a cautery having two knives, this is a better and more appropriate cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is cured with medicinal causes and the other cure mentioned in the division, but the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, which is called puncta, and this is its shape:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the puncta near the ignition and direct it around the entire ear as if a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of each sample if the pain is in each.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Draw the puncta cautery of the ear's edge slowly, little by little, since you know the place with certainty.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the puncta cautery is applied all over the ear, then cure each spot until it heals.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of turtur.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtur which is cured with cauterization is not anything but the spices that come through a flegma, as was said in the division of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterizing the spice that enters by drying or by convulsion of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that spice of turtur with herbs and capupurgis and guarguarisms, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one should be the edge of the ear, the second a small one on the temple, and the third the connection of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery opposite to the diseased part, for softening does not appear except in the healthy part that appears healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery along the edge of the ear tip and slightly above the hair on the crown of the head, in the temple whose length should be equal to the length of a finger, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the wound has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, it is the type of the knife, and the shape of which is like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more delicate than that, and it is necessary to have a knife with minimal roughness in that place.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And cure the area where the process has not yet healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Chapter 8.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what was said and your medicine does not help and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first of all on all the hair on his head; secondly in the middle of the head as we have said; thirdly in the neck; and fourthly in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done as was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and this is the last one; and take care to cure it with what processes you have.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterizing forgetfulness caused by fever.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover the patient with warm blankets and administer large pills to purify him.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the head of the patient and apply a plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Place the patient on several watch for a while, as this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the procedure you have already stated.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if this treatment proves beneficial, then do not proceed with further cauteries. However, if it does not, make three cauterizations in the lower division of the head, starting from the most sovereign part of the head to the most inferior part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Wait between each cauterization for the thickness of the finger, and care for the cautery with what is appropriate.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if the patient is tolerable of it, make another cauterization in the best location; and if you wish for more addition, then cauterize it over both cornices (corners).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for it until it is healed; and make the cauterizations olive-shaped as previously described.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterizing for relief and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover the head with warm blankets and administer pills as previously described; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it in the best location on the head, on all the corners of the head, on the lower division, and three cauteries on the spondyles of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the treatment of softening the body, and the patient is tolerable with the treatment and the illness is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the spondyles of the back, and later cauterize it until the cordage is completely burned off, and raise the patient's leg.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Care for it until it is healed, and make the cauteries olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterizing epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Do not cauterize the epileptic person, but rather that epilepsy caused by fever.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, you must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with yarrow and with other treatments as previously described in the section when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medications, administer gargle and masticating remedies that purify, before that with the passage of several days, with purification of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient and cauterize it with one cautery in the best location on the head as previously described, and another cauterization on the back of the head, and cauterize each corner of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerable, make cauterizations as previously described with a paralyzing and softening effect on the spinal column and spine.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And make the cauteries olive-shaped as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, pause with subtle cauterization as described in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterizing melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and large fever, make cauterizations with the cauteries as previously described with paralyzing effects.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, administer to him what purifies the brain as previously described in the section.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a pigeon-shaped poultice made from the proper ingredients on top of the circle, and leave it in the best location on the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be placed in a sitting position, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply the linen; it is more appropriate for an old sheep to be bound.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that part over the fire, warming it gradually by measure; this is what they call suffering when placed there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place that in the appropriate place at the head of the bed, and let it enter until it is immersed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Do this with the patient every week once, and follow the appropriate regimen for him until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points as much as possible, without having a hand with such a prepared cautery: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that swollen area in bandages or in linen cloth.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water flowing in the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have been declared the beginning of water in the vein by the signs I told you in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink that which purifies his head, and keep him from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Let him bathe in warm water for three days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize that in the appropriate place on the head; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of water in a single vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are covered by the skin with a cautery; and place the cauteries in that length in the region of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Keep yourself from bleeding when you are cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop it with some medicine that is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the abscessing of that, as well as taking care to prevent bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes it is cauterized in the cerebellum between two bones with two cauteries properly produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears in the veins are old, and through the veins and arteries that are manifest in the head's location outside, it is shown that this is excessive fluid, then cauterize it with a cautery that was mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing in the veins, and with a cautery in the appropriate place on the head and two cauteries in the cerebellum between the temples, and two cauteries in the cerebellum between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to add, then cauterize it along the entire length of the vein on the forehead above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nose smell.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with what I have said in the division and your medicine does not improve, then prepare yourself and give the patient three nights of colocynth, and shave his head, and cauterize it with a moderate cautery and an olive-oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize it with a camomile cautery and two cauteries on the two eyebrows, just below the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Keep yourself from cutting that artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The form of camomile cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the moistening cautery for the eyelids of the veins.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the vein is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery and with this moon-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if it is you who cauterize, do so on both eyebrows with a small one and two in all directions, and elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the third part of the eyelid that is being cauterized.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cauterization of the eyelid of the vein when the hair turns into the divisions within and pierces the vein.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the vein turns into the divisions within and pierces it, there are two methods of cauterizing them: one is by fire or is by medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cauterization is by fire, order the patient to shave his hair in this way as those who wash them do, until they are elongated and curled; and if it penetrates, you should press the veins of him with a bandage to prevent harm until the hair grows back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are grown back and curled, place the patient's head in your lap, and put your hand over the eyelid of his veins with a sign, with the sign being like a sea urchin, and the beginning of the sign near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place warm oil or egg white on the ulcer.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And heat the cautery of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize the area with a small, rounded tool, gradually making dots over it until the surface of the wart is burnt, just like a leaf of myrtle, completely apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the treatment's success is that you see the wart's eyelid contract and its hairs raised due to the puncture on the wart.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and keep it there for three days, and apply a dressing over the area until the scar is raised.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Apply ointment to it until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the hair grows back for some reason and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another cauterization of it just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it returns to its original position and is healed so that the hairs do not pierce the wart.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery with medicine burns the hair, command the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and healed, and apply a piece of paper or cloth in the shape of myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known and living worms for the cure. The Latin abbreviation "i.e." means "that is" or "in other words". It's used to clarify a term or phrase that may be unclear or confusing. In this context, it would not be needed as the sentence is already clear in English. And what is this, mix those causes well, and do it with haste so that it is not spoiled; then expand the mixture on a paper in the shape of myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both warts; then place warm oil or egg white on the ulcer, and have the head of the patient be near you.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Place the medicine on the wound and press it gently without moving it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, as a bite is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore, when you perceive that the herb has bitten, remove the medicine and apply it again with your fingers; therefore, when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; then consider if the eyelid has risen like it should be washed by fire or incision, as this is good; and if not, place the medicine back on the area where it was not pressed, but do not let it spoil until your operation is complete and the ulcer is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the area with a bandage until the verruca is removed, and treat it with castor oil or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to ensure that your treatment guards with careful vigilance that the medicine does not fall off the ulcer; if the eyelid becomes soft within a few days and some cause of the hairs pierce the wart, then you should repeat your medicine over the area where the eyelid has become soft, just as you did initially, and turn it over until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that warts in men are diverse according to their size and smallness, so accordingly you should perform your treatment.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not hide the path of rectitude for the one who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to hold his head in your presence, and have another servant near him in such a way that he is neither harmed nor agitated by his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place warm oil or egg white on the ulcer of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And heat the cautery, which is in the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The shape should be concave, like that of a reed or a pen with a turning point, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it penetrates into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you want it to come out in this way.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the concave one is better for the operation.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out pus and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not open, then open it and remove the scabs from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Place your hand over the cautery which should be well ignited, and keep the other a little away from the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery on the vein of the nose and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	If at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, you should repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; leave it like that for three days, and place a bandage over the area with a dry dressing inside until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has passed ten days and is not healed, place a strong corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and scraped as necessary in its section.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method of cauterizing a fistula which some have said: insert into the location of the fistula and close it, then place a thin substance in that fissure, the shape of which is like that: And it was the quantity of one ounce of lead melted; and keep your hand with good grip, and let the lead not harm the patient because the melted lead does not reach the vein of that one; and cover the vein of the patient with a linen or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by what has been said about cauterization and cure, that is good; and if not, it is necessary to administer trauch from the nose and reduce the fistula to the center of the nose according to its location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the anus fissure.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Fissures often occur in the labia, and particularly in the labia of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if your treatment of these fissures does not help, you should burn them with a small cautery knife in this shape that we teach you:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The concavity of it should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place that instrument carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the opening of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms under the uvula or on the palate or between the teeth and you apply a bandage, it breaks, becomes purulent, and a fistula is formed, and if your treatment does not help, you should burn cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place the burning iron in the fistula opening, keep your hand until the hot iron reaches the abscess opening, and at the end do it again once or twice; and cure it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the pus is separated and healed, that is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the location and drill the rotten bone according to its location.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicines but it does not improve, place the patient's head in your lap, and hold the cautery tool of the shape that will come to this purpose, so that you can quickly press the instrument handle on the tooth and insert the burning cautery into the cavity, keep your hand a little away from the patient until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and move the cautery several times according to your desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then stop it, because a damaged tooth is closed, a softened gum is strengthened and excess moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation, or there is an abscess or worm, or treatment with medicine does not help, you should perform cauterization in two ways: cauterize with a cowhide bandage, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with a cowhide bandage is that you take a cowhide bandage and heat it in an iron pot, then take a piece of the heated bandage and wrap it around the end of the probe, immerse it in boiling water, and place it quickly on the painful tooth until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Approach that area several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the boil mentioned above, place it on the painful tooth, and place the hot iron on top of that until the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire should be done carefully, and there must be some caution when it comes to the ear or iron, for there may be some large growth and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And approach the hot iron in the desired shape, place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cauterization is cooled; do this several times until the pain subsides or on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to press the patient's mouth with good cloth so that they hold it for an hour and spit, and this is the shape of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize as desired, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII. (This seems to be a chapter number in the document)
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization for hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by cold and humors infiltrate them but do not respond to medicines and you wish to promote digestion slightly, then heat the iron in the shape as shown below, having two handles attached so that the smoke escapes through one handle, and place the hot iron on the apostema once, or if necessary, repeat until it reaches the edge of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the apostema is small, place the cauterization according to the size of the apostema and leave it for three days and apply the cloth soaked in oil on top until what the fire has burned is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with mouthwash, tents, and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the cannula or hot iron should be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII. (This seems to be another chapter number in the document)
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization for ulcers of the throat and constriction of the veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes over the windpipe, especially when it is accompanied by cold, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and you should cauterize the root of the trachea in the compressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the trachea with the cauterization or burn the cartilage of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that area with another cauterization at the junction of the neck at the lower vertebrae.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cauterization should be made as shown before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with what has been described before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV. (This seems to be another chapter number in the document)
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold moisture, the patient does not have fever or shortness of breath, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauterizations on the furcula in the compressed areas on the left and right sides; and another cauterization in the middle part of the foot between two breasts; and let the cauterizations be made as shown before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, make your cauterization with the pointed cautery that is called "puncta," as shown in the treatment for earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Place points at those places, and care for it with what has been described before until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauterization should have three arms, for cauterization is with this: you can do three cauterizations in one go according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV. (This seems to be another chapter number in the document)
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization for scrotal itch, which is the head of the testicle.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the testicle is displaced due to lubricating moisture and does not return to its place in the usual time, then you must reduce its displacement before it returns, and place your hand on one side or the other of the patient, and lift the cartilage that is inside the scrotum towards the scrotal walls with the fingers of your left hand if the junction is displaced internally.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And heat the iron with two heads; and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And place the cauterization on the cartilage and let it penetrate into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when you have made four cauterizations with the pointed cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and be careful to make it as thin as the thickness of the tent, and this is its shape:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And after some time, it will be adjusted according to this count and because the cauteries are eight. (This seems to be a reference to the number of cauterizations needed for a certain treatment)
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place the cautery on pause with salt, and place the patient in comfort, and let the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the displacement is above and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a flat or pointed cautery, because the junction is confirmed and the moisture is subsided, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Title (capitol). xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterizing the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When phlegm and mucus enter the stomach and it becomes enlarged due to this disorder and multiplies, and if you continue with treatment and do not help it, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, extends his arms and legs, and cauterizes it with three cauteries: one cautery under the feet about a finger's width from the heel, and two cauteries under the costal arch of the feet until the triangular figure of the cautery is formed; and elongate between those not in line to avoid blistering.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is twice the size of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be in this form without addition. If you want, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle of the stomach in this manner; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	Cauterize the stomach at the place that is frightened by this cautery: and you should place a point on the stomach according to the amount you want with a trial, and cauterize there with the cautery at the points; and care for it with the treatment that follows until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Title (capitol). xxvii.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterizing the hernia in the groin.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the groin is painful due to heat, moisture or excessive wind that causes it to go beyond its normal condition by egression, and the patient is treated as previously stated without improvement, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, and three cauteries should be placed according to this form and quantity on the groin below the hip bones, i.e., in a man's lower abdomen.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let the space between each cautery be according to the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight ahead.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press down on the cauterized area.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of what is applied matches the thickness of the skin and it is not too tight, and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, make him lie down, who has already extended his legs, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you can cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you are skilled and careful in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and ensure that the skin is carefully punctured in order to pierce the entire body and reach the hernias, because the skin here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Title (capitol). xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On lancing an abscess in the groin with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess or boil occurs in the groin and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the groin or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the groin, the patient will feel heavy and painful without increased pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the membrane of the groin, then the pain is greatly increased and often doctors become tired in its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back; and show the location of the abscess with your finger; and heat the cautery that resembles thread, whose shape was previously described on another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Cauterize the abscess with that and the cautery until the skin is completely burned through to the pus, until it bursts and drains pus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	It is not necessary to use this type of cautery indefinitely, but rather the one studied in the art of medicine for a longer period and in which many diseases have been known; however, it should be noted that sometimes this operation can be dangerous, but still, it should be done if needed.
Capitol .xxix.	Title (capitol). xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterizing scrofula.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries for the sores of arthritis were applied to scrofula in this manner by a skilled practitioner, and it is this one that you should take from the long, dry razors found, and it should be about the size of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire, then cauterize at the location that is between the continuation of the neck and the collar; and two small cauteries placed under guidance, one slightly declining near the part of the beard, and two cauteries on that which is declining between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly declining towards the backside; and another on the mid-foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizes at the lower backside; and one on the location between the shoulders, and two cauterizes on each foot, under the one that is between the shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is necessary that you compress your hand on the cautery, not in its hollow, but rather on the open wound.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it was said by some ancients that some men use a cautery similar to iron and hot like it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs until we reach that abscess and the pus is drained out, as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, because the person may die immediately at that fistula to which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating spleen disease as previously described and your treatment is ineffective, you cauterize it in three ways, all of which are suitable, one of which is to make three or four stitches according to the length of the spleen following the shape of the cauteries in the foot, the shapes of which have been previously shown.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the distance between each cauterization should be about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as that previously described in the foot cautery.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand on the cautery; rather, the patient should be placed on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, as we have mentioned in the dislocation of muscles chapter, and lift the skin which is near the spleen so that the patient's left side is revealed without obstruction.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Your lifting should be such that you lift the skin according to the length of the body so that the cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And insert the two prongs, heat them up, in the area where they pierce the skin of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And withdraw the cautery; thus four cauteries will be made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want to cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And return your treatment of the cautery that has been soaking for several days, because it is more effective than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in dropsy, but only in a bladder specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating dropsy with the methods of treatment previously described and your treatment is ineffective, you must then cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one over the stomach, another over the foot, another over the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one at the heel, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be appropriate for the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And let the cautery be released after it has been soaking for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cauterization with what is necessary for two intentions, and it should be hastened to him with the help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to treat the abdomen should be like a nail, according to its previous form, and it is that one which is used to treat the feet, following their previous shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Section .32
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and the genitals.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by edema and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize them on the back of the foot near the ankle, elevate your hand with the cautery without twisting it; raise your hand, but do not let go of the cautery, for the stagnant water drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be made in this manner: Place two cauteries on both sides, and in each side make a cautery with the tip of the cutting edge.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the side of the affected area: The first one goes below and the other above the same location on the opposite side; and on each side, two cauteries are placed.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And take care of those causes which were mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Section .33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal organs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When an abdominal organ becomes weakened and moistened to the point of becoming soft, this affects its digestive and retentive functions, which are located in the stomach and intestines, and it can be treated with various methods of treatment without consequences, and sometimes the patient may require cauterization to show the effect, so cauterize that area with a large cautery over the stomach as described in the procedure for cauterizing the stomach, with the circular cautery and four small cauterizations around the umbilicus, with a fine needle-like cautery; and with cauterization on the alkatin (small intestine) over large areas, or with two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if there are excessive moisture and the patient is able to tolerate it, cauterize that area on the pudendum (genital region) and intestines, and strongly place two cauterizations over the stomach and close to the inguinal regions, for this is a perfect cure for which you will not go wrong.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Section .34
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When ancient hemorrhoids occur naturally or one becomes weakened due to cold humors or corrupted moisture, they can be treated as mentioned in the previous section and their cure is not to be doubted; cauterize that area with three cauterizations on the base of the anus, a triangle shape, and with a caution over the umbilicus.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is weakened and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes the opening of the stomach becomes an ulcer, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as described previously; place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the gallbladder with a fine needle-like cautery; leave the cauterizations open for some time until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Section .35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cautery for athlete's foot, near the abscess of theirs.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove athlete's foot, then heat the cautery which is like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Approach that opening with the heated cautery, and place its tip into the vein from which blood flows out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do it once or twice, for if there are many abscesses, cauterize each of them according to what you have counted, and apply ointment to those with open wounds until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more helpful afterwards.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally made in the divisions of it.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, cure it with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when a fistula appears naturally in someone and is old, corrupted by pus and humidity, it is more suitable that this be treated with fine thread, and bring the amount of the depth of it together with the previously mentioned thread.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approach with the heated cautery which is like a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And bring that heated cautery to this fistula, and according to the amount in which it intersects with the thread.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat over that area until the rotten tissue is burned off quickly once or twice or three times, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or in the body of the intestine, be careful at those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you consider that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the area is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you should know that it is healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not removed, then you should know that it is penetrating or in the bone and is corrupting, or be careful of these causes which will come to mind in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of sores.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in sores due to cold or thick swelling, and the patient's body is weakened by it, then it is necessary to cauterize them on each sore with a cautery over each sore using a heated iron that recalls its memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	Hold the cautery with a small gap between them, so that three cauterizations will be made in a line, and thus they will be more helpful afterwards.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When weakness and softening of the bladder occur due to cold and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part below the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the number of holes in the bladder; and cauterize it in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Let the cautery iron be as previously prepared.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Treatise on Cauterization of the Meatus (Urethra)
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the meatus (urethra) becomes inflamed and humidified, it is prohibited to engage in intercourse, and menstruation is corrupted due to this, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs during their discharge, then it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery should also be applied above the location or two cauteries, and they should be cauterizing iron.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL (40)
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Treatise on Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Ankle
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humidity spreads and penetrates the ankle joint, causing its dislocation, a sign of this is that the limb is longer on one side when compared to the other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is felt in the bulging area.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, as you will have a sign by probing in the circle around the joint, and thus causing the joint to fall into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery for this procedure should be shaped like the one used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using an olive oil-shaped large cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the size of the dislocation throughout the entire limb, and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI (41)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Treatise on Cauterization of Sciatic Vein
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint due to inflammation and humidity, the patient is treated with the remedies mentioned earlier and no other, which is an ancient method; then it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors with pills made of purgative herbs or artificial pills similar to them, and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with medicines that burn, or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	If you are following the first method learned (cauterization with three triangular-shaped cauteries), then do so over the ankle joint, making sure to achieve good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the size of the finger (thickness of the cautery, whether olive oil-shaped or large).\]   E aprop fay al malaute la man que es dita de la partida de l’ancha, e le manteneys en aquel loc per molt temprat.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	When the cautery is placed over the middle of the ankle joint, there should be four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize around the circle whose shape is preceded by the cauterization of ankle dislocation, and that which is a circle containing and burning the blister of the whole socket.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cauterization in fracture when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended into the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the joint, then you cauterize it with two cauteries on the joint at the place where the pain occurs; and with one cautery on the shin, four fingers distanced from the skin.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is a lancet cauterization, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the size of the blister.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient's pain is extended to the location near the ankles, then you cauterize it here where the pain occurs, with a cautery at three or four points, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient's pain is under the buttock, then you cauterize it here with a lancet cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Be aware in every cauterization that you do not burn nerves or major arteries, and thus harm the patient or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the shin and overburned in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed up to the foot, and the burn penetrated and rotted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And approach very carefully with caution from the abdomen, and thus death will be avoided.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise say in the ankle cauterization of this type, make a circle of iron the size of a palm, and place it so that its holes are according to the thickness of a date or almond stone.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle is another third; and the space between them should be equal to the width of a finger; and these circles should be open in two parts; and the length of those keys one or two fingers, and make the margins of iron on the circles decoratively arranged; and this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approach the fire and let it burn until it becomes red-hot and sparks, and then place it on the division of the ankle, with the patient lying down on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus, cauterize it with three concentric circles at a time.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And leave it alone for three days; apply ointment to it with bandages and let the wound heal for several days; and care for it with salves until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Al-Zahrawi says: My son, we have used this type of cauterization sparingly due to the fear of its consequences, and because few people have observed it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But among the best cauteries for it, there is one that is suitable for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the cauterization with medicinal substances should be done with two circles pierced with a perforated armlet, having a length of the walls equal to the width of their fingers, or however it may be.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And the space between them should be equal to the thickness of the finger; and they should open upwards and downwards, and contain each other in this way:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place your hand on the division of the ankle, with the patient lying down on their side and press the affected area firmly; and take boiling water in a container, and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be gradually hotter, and hold it for about an hour, and the patient must endure the burning and squeezing of it—for this is similar to fire—until the pain stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand with the tool and wash the affected ankle area with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Leave it alone for three days and place ointment on it until the blackness of the burn subsides, and leave it like that for some days, and it will produce scabs, which is a good sign.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with salves until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the joint or thigh, make it stationary in such a way that it contains water as in the case of the ankle immobilization.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and crushed charcoal on both sides of one part, and stir and let it rest in a new wave in which the lower side is pierced with a small hole, according to the amount that fits inside it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Let it rest on the bottom of the wave again in another boiling water, and pour the alkali and live charcoal over it with warm water, which will rise up to one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good compression, let the hole that is in the water on the lower side of the boiling water open in the lower wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour another living substance and other alkaline reagent over it, because at that point it will be of great strength and sharp acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, since the operation acts like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the remedies are those which involve cauterization such as honey and vinegar mixed with sulfur.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	The method of an ancient Greek physician, and the cure for joint pain and sciatica pain, is very great indeed, and it is said that no other treatment is needed, since it heals in one go as recommended, because the remedy is strong and effective in a bath and application as advised.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It is to be prepared with a green mustard seed, and if it is not available, a fresh fig should be taken; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the joint where the pain is, or in the cavity, or in the leg, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Let it sit for three hours, or for as long as the patient decides according to their comfort.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse it in hot water and when the body of the patient has become warm, apply it to the affected area, since the pain will disappear and be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these remedies, but rather the cleansing of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	However, Hippocrates himself said that when the vein is stretched with a sheepskin incision, cauterization will be more beneficial; and the cautery should be used in this manner: wool should be taken and soaked in ancient oil, and placed between the toes and the cleft.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry sheepskin and inflate it with fire until it becomes charred; then place it over the wool and let it rest on what is stretched out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Repeat this process and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called the "cauterization of cows."
Capitol .xlii.	Title: LXII
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Joint Pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Joint pain can occur for various reasons such as injury, impact or excessive bleeding, and for similar causes, by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization should not be used except in this particular case caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, the evacuation of the patient should be performed using pills infused with herbs similar to them, which are placed on the affected joint at three fingers' widths from its location, followed by cauterization or more cauterizations as needed, according to the tolerance level of the patient and the potency of the herbs.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform cauterization using a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using a medium-sized claw-shaped cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Title: LXIII
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Jaundice frequently affects infants; and the first sign of it in infants is that their eyes become sunken and their movements are restricted.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it appears in the lower end of the spine and the joints that begin to protrude above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when you see this condition and wish to prevent it, cauterize the area using a circular cautery in this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery be applied to all parts of the spine affected.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, cauterize around the spine using a pointed cautery two or three fingers' widths.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The punctures should be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And heal the affected area using the remedy described earlier.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cauterization should not be administered in jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Title: LXIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Treatise on Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout is cured by cold means of treatment and the pain is not relieved, apply cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is that you cauterize in close proximity to the joint of the foot with heated objects (cautery).
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The form of the olive oil cautery is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if points must be made on the surface of the foot, then use a sharp cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain moves into the nails or other joints and it is uncertain, then cauterize that spot with three or four cauteries all around using this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If more cauteries are required, then cauterize the spot and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, only approach the wound with the cautery.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain moves into the nail and the toe, then administer cauterization as described in its own chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the toes and it is called sciatica, then pierce the skin around the nails as described in the rotation, piercing along these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain remains in the toes, then pierce the skin around the nails over each toe and at the bend of the fingers.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain moves towards the joints or muscles after several days, then cauterize all of them with the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient with good management and reception of medications, for if it is done properly with this cautery, they will be healed (God help).
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Treatise on Cauterization for Ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the hernia and the intestine protrudes through the genital area, begin by having the patient abstain from food on their day and use softening substances to ease the fissure of their stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient closely on their bed and command them to keep their lower abdomen covered until it is ready to be exposed or the hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return to the area and try to identify the rupture on the pelvis bone, marking the end that resembles the circumference of a circle at the uppermost part of the abdomen.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The form of the heated cautery is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Heat it until it begins to sparkle.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Place the cautery over the marked spot with your hand holding the cautery steady, and insert it into the pelvis bone until you find the middle of the pubic bone; repeat this procedure if you did not reach the bone in the first examination.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the location of the intestine during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn the intestine so that the patient does not come to death or other serious harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	You should know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, do not consider your operation a success.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The cauterization of children should be subtle according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Take care of the cautery site for three days with bandages until the scar from the burn has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Care for that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain in bed for 40 days until the site and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	Ensure that the patient's food is adjusted according to the duration of their recovery and that the intestine does not come out under the pressure of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time to move the patient after forty days, administer suitable food and medicine, and continue this for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let him be given rest and nourishment in food and drink, with strong remedies, for if this treatment of healing is followed completely, he will recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and to begin with, let it not be neglected: cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, so that it is completely closed as the third part of it; and then care for it with what has been said, and not leave it untreated.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Some people have said in the past that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner, for it is proven by experience.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is drawn across the width of the tear, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery on top of the tear, but the first cauterization should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When an injury or blow causes pain in any part of the body and this pain persists for a long time without improving with medication, it is necessary to cauterize it using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery should be applied to every part of the body according to its size, nature, and location of twisting or pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the injury is healed by the first cauterization, that's good; if not, continue to apply the cautery on it; because it is customary for those pains to be points of one member near another, so you must achieve that with cauterization before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47. (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leprosies of some kinds are treated with cauterization to great advantage, and mostly if the type of leprosy is caused by rottenness or melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you wish to cauterize it (the leprosy), consider whether the leprosy is common and curable as mentioned in the division and not incurable, or present, and fear that corruption will affect the entire body of the person and their limbs; in such a case, cauterize it on the head with two cauterizations: one in the middle of the head, the second farther away from it, bring the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on top of two horns (corners of the skull); and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, hold your hand on the cautery a short distance before it touches the bone to produce a slight indentation and move away the scabs so that the expulsion of large vapors is alleviated; and cauterize over the skin as previously described.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread on the patient and is manifest, it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauterizations described in the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations over the eyes, and two cauterizations over the spines of the neck, and six cauterizations over the spine of the back, one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two over the ankles, one on each ankle, and two over the joints and one on each joint of the fingers, and two over the elbows, and two over the muscles, and hold the tendons of his feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over the soles of his feet, and over the phalanges of the toes.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the sole when cauterizing.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	It is sometimes cauterized with one cautery over the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You should know that the closer you place the cauterizations, the more beneficial it is and more effective; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as happens with sores, because the body of the person is already anesthetized.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It is necessary that the cauterizations be large or few according to the members and joints as previously described in the tools (instrumentation).
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply the cauterization with flour of roasted barley, honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48 (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters but does not heal, you should then cauterize that numb member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Let your cautery penetrate slightly into the skin (epidermis).
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Treat that member with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes numbness in the hands and feet, in the spine of the back, and in the eyes (optic nerves) is cauterized, and it is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume this, but rather one who knows the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire body moving them.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49 (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of tumors that are swollen.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a tumor is old and does not improve with any of the ointments of medicine, you should then cauterize it over that area with a pointed cautery a short distance according to the size of the swelling until the whiteness and color disappear and the color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Treat that member with flour of roasted barley and lentils, olive oil, leaves of arnica, and the blood of pigeons or hens; each should have an equal part, and all are mixed; and let a cloth be placed over it until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50 (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of crabs (scabies).
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a crust is forming and you wish to remove it, cauterize that area with a circular cautery as it is rolled (or rotated).
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; however, I do not see this, as I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more appropriate to cauterize [the affected area] in the circle around it as we have said, or with the word 'cautery'.
Capitol .li.	If there is a stone or something foreign body in the bladder, and you cannot remove it by means of the hand or the instrument which you use, then you should cut open the bladder along its length.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	If an ulcer is delayed in maturation, due to superfluity or the patient's state being old and weak with little blood, or due to the season, and you want to hasten the maturation of the ulcer; then cauterize around it with small cauterizing points; and apply a soft cloth over that which will cause it to mature faster.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	However, if you want to perform perforation with the cautery, then heat the cautery, and immerse it in the proper place of the ulcer until it penetrates through it.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in the place that is more distant, to relieve the body of the arm; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Of the wounds of the head and face.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization of corrosive agents.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive agents are corruption that travels through the limbs, which corrodes in the same way as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see a corrosive agent in a location that suffers cauterization by fire, heat the cautery with iron nails small and large, as is appropriate in the location where the corrosive agent is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Approximate the cauterization of that entire area until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause remains.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Approximate the bandaging of that for three days, and place it on the cauterized areas, soaking them with oil mixed together until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Approximate the care of that with warm flesh-generating cure.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if the flesh heals well within three days without corruption, that is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization over what has been corrupted in those areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosive is treated with some medications occasionally, for it is a substitute for cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But in truth, cauterizing with fire is somewhat beneficial with pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment of it with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of nails and similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often found in the regions below the feet, illness called nail, which is large and closed, that pierces the foot; and cauterization in those places is performed according to two methods, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is that you heat the cauterizer shaped like a pen of a bird's tail, made of iron according to the size required to treat the entire nail, and it should be thin-edged.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Approximate the bandage of that which is heated over the nail, and turn your hand with the cauterizer around the circumference of the nail until the cauterizer reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Bandage that for three days until it starts to weep pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Approximate the plaster of that with a mixture of wild mallow leaves steeped in salt, and bandage the plaster over it for one night, for this will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Approximate the care of that area with warm flesh-generating cure until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and often happens on the surface of the body, particularly in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauterization with water, namely take a cup made of horn or iron or bird's tail pen, place it over the nail; and get a little amount of boiling water into the cup, hold your hand, and turn the cup around the circumference of the nail with pressure on the edge of the cup in the root of the nail, and let the boiling water pass through the root of the hole; and make the patient wait for about an hour for the pain caused by the boiling water to subside, then remove it, for the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do this to those and that in turn until you have treated all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Approximate the care of those pus that come from the roots of the nails which generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a tremor arises due to cold in the nerve or fever caused by cold, or for other similar reasons, it is necessary that you cauterize that with four cauterizations or more on the spondylus of the back, between each spondylus with one cauterization; and on the feet, and on the stomach, cauterize olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The tremor of that subsides and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of abscesses occurring in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When abscesses and pus-filled holes occur in the body which are formed from corrupted gross materials, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized over the entire abscess with a subtle cautery made of mirt or fine razor, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with an egestological long lancet; or with a slow-burning cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of its eruption according to this method; and it is not believed that it should be done, and the superfluous matter is drained out, making it heal from there.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary to make an appropriate evacuation with leech therapy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of blood blisters caused by arrows using an incision with a bowstring.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes blood blisters caused by arrows that are incised should be left unattended in the wound or an incision of abscesses or cauterization of the affected limb is done, and it is difficult for it to heal afterwards.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it happens to someone, you must press with your hand on the wound of the arrow, and wait until the blood blister heals from there, and does not break open.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place the olive oil-based cauteries few and large, by name many, and blow on them until they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take either a small or large one depending on the location and wound where the artery is broken, quickly place it over the vein, and cauterize it until the bleeding has stopped and the area is contracted and constricted to prevent further bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the blood flows out of the wound in the artery when you remove your hand and pull out the cautery, then take another one from among the prepared cauteries in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the bleeding has stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are present there, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in such cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or using cauterization as previously described; or extraction where it has not been extracted, because when the extremities are burned and the bleeding is stopped, or by tying with thread or a ligament for strong construction, or by applying medications whose virtue is to stop the bleeding; and they should be tightened with pulvinar or compression as appropriate.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	However, those who administer appropriate compression with thread and strong bandages or by causing burns and similar things should not be trusted.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor any medication, then place a compress over the wound of the vein as previously described, and understand the great pressure needed there until the bleeding has stopped from the upper part of the wound, and do not remove the arrow; and over the arrow, spray cold water with great coolness until the blood clots and thickens; and in any case where cauterization or medication is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions, punctures and wounds, and on leech therapy and sores and their equivalents.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Alhazen.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have already said in the first capital that cauterization with fire is appropriate and medication that burns, as well as the occasions and causes for this, and the necessary instruments and forms of cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this chapter I will proceed according to that method so that the seeker may find relief, therefore on that which he has asked for.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, it is necessary, my son, that you learn that in this chapter is the matter of the first capital on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary to be very careful, for in the operation that is in this chapter many times evacuation occurs which is with blood and in which there is life, the aspersio of the vein or an incision on the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the ulcer or extraction of arrowheads or puncturing of stones, etc.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these, there is fear and trembling and in the most of them death lurks.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I advise you not to let this happen to you in which there is doubt, for sometimes you must manage affairs of people with many types of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of these, some may go with their illness and death is easy for them, because of the severity of their illness, because of the length of their illness, and because of the illness that signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of these, the one who gives you his wealth and orders it, you hope for health from him, but his illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not necessary that you agree with the one who comes to you who has this method; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause concerning him unless you have certain knowledge that verifies what you should do, and whose succession brings praiseworthy results.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication for that to whom health is converted, because in him lies help for you in acquiring reputation, memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires his understanding in you and do not depart from His direction and protection, because that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you should divide this chapter into sections as described in the previous chapter on cautery, regarding the care of the head down to the feet, so that it is easier for you to understand and find what you need and what is necessary.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Treatment of water contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease, observed in infants, must be treated by delivering the infant and when the newborn is weak, the head of the infant should be lifted.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some cases are observed due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	However, I do not see this disease except in infants; and all those whom I have seen die are considered lost work, and thus it appears to me useless work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and the child's head remained so large that it could not stop increasing due to the size of the child's head, and moreover, increased moisture led to death by cold.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the skull and the bone, or it is added on top of the bones at the sutures.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that case, if moisture is between the skull and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in its length, and the length of the fissure should be two inches long until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is on top of the bones, this indicates that you see the joints of the head opened from all sides and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand in the middle and not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary for you to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and draw out all the moisture; and strengthen the incisions with bandages and feathers; and bring this to boil with oil within five days, and apply liniment and cure the wound with ointments and poultices, and keep the head straight; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it appears more in the occiput, or in the front, or on the left, or on the right; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the repletion of the water appear, and do as is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and allow blood flow and kill the patient by this flow of blood with drainage of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Second Chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of the arteries which are appropriately called auricles (hilasseysse).
Capitol segon.	Third Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a cataract or inflammation appears in the eyes or feet, and this is an ancient custom, and does not benefit from medication treatment, then you should perform the following incision on those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries in the patient's head, first cool the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also keep the neck of the patient straight with a cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press on each side on the sides where the auricles are located, and they become hidden only in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And press on the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with the sharp spatula entering into the bone at the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the probe below the artery and break it by making an incision on the sides above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when a vein is incised, the blood flows out with pulsatile exudation, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	However, if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary for you to measure from the auricle the size of the space of three fingers and press with the probe and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that should be let out is one pint (unc.). and be careful not to let out more or less than the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the filling of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Approach the wound, and if any cause of death remains on the bone, then incise it to prevent the formation of a cauterized abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Wrap the wound with linen and bandages, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old illness or catarrh occurs, due to acrid humidity and the quality in the temples (eyes), or a sudden intense and similar illness, and is treated with the methods of medical care but does not improve, we have resorted to treating these diseases by extracting the arteries in the eyes or cauterizing them as shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those (the arteries) is that the patient shaves his eyebrows which are in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple as it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few men due to the intensity of frost.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden, then you should tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and heat the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then, take the probe of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Then bring the probe with ease into contact with the artery; and be careful in the place where it is thicker and extract that at the superior parts until you extract it from the sheath and uncover that of the tunics which are below it, all around.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the end of the index finger, and carefully incise a part according to the length of the extremities and their contraction, and there will not be bleeding, because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise from all over.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate the blood with the cup. In three places.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with strong thread or cord and not cut it before puttingrefaction occurs ahead of the healing of the wound and there will be bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And cut off the excess which is between two ligaments, and do this in that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife until the extremities are incised, and it will remain in place for this operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a heated state, for cauterization helps to dissipate humidity, and therefore it is better for healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary to perform the extraction of the arteries in a clean place, and they should be covered with suitable powders, and it should be healed with dry medicines that make the flesh heal and with warm ones until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If during another examination bleeding of the artery occurs, then you must restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or fill the place with clean cotton, and press your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If for any reason it is not present, you place your finger on the place until the blood coagulates, and seal the place with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and press firmly as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery, since you have tested the two places and have stopped each one, as much as possible, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that the length between the extremities is extended, for it is not consolidated all over with this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades is similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the sharpness of one blade is less than two, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades near each other, they will not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in those [tools], it is necessary to heat the fire in those and the flesh is cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this operation is better than all other operations and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two blades should be the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of the heart with sharp and acid humors from the gall bladder.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors are present and they are in the heart of those veins that are over the skull of the head and do not improve with any cause of medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient turns yellow and it feels as if there is a crawling on his forehead like ants, and the gall bladder of these becomes extended, moistened so much that its skin becomes known, and its bile sacs are scaled by the acidity of the tears, the ancients treated this disease with this operation, and I name this treatment as spasm.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you order the patient to raise his eyebrows which are on his forehead and carefully incise three fissures equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure should be equally distant from the tip of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelashes which are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Observe the opening of the archways which are in two parts, and extend your hand from the continuation of both the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if each opening's space is measured by three fingers, then...
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge prepared or dry cotton cloth soaked with an extract that stops the bleeding, use it.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Place the spatula with two sharp ends, which has this shape of the incision's form:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	This refers to the space between the temples up to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue between the two incisions and the cuff that is on the bone, and place it from the first incision up to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then insert this spatula again into the first incision, but use another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Stop the edges of that sharp tool with the adjacent tissue, the cuff and the bone's edge, and cut them using the blunt side of the tool. Then insert it towards the middle incision until reaching the fissure. Excise all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure the incision is continuous and then extend it into the middle fissure up to the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when enough blood collects, squeeze the areas of the blood clots.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Place a piece of old cloth on each fissure and pause over those scabs that are covered with oil and vinegar and vinegar essence. Make sure it does not cause cautery ulcers.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the dressing and apply a strong infusion of warm water or tisane, and care for it with a basil infusion with rose oil and other substances until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the care of wounds by cauterization and ulcers descending from the incisions inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a cauterized wound that continues and sometimes the patient's ulcers become extended but weak, and the eyelids ulcerate and their eyelashes fall out, and in the front of the head there is sharp, acute pain accompanied by swelling, then you should know that these symptoms come from vessels coming from incisions inside the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for these is as follows: tell the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the middle of the forehead, small in width (starting from the left temple to the right temple; the incision should extend to the bone; and extend your hand from the temples which are uncomfortable due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Excise all the blood with a sponge or dry cotton cloth and then fill the space between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or cotton cloth from it.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Place a poultice made with oil and vinegar over them to prevent cauterized ulcers.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the abscess is opened and it appears that the apostema has decreased in size, then it is necessary to cauterize the bone from where the new flesh starts growing, and apply the drying regimen to cure it, which causes the flesh to dry out, as if you were taking flour of wheat two parts and colophony four parts and mix them to make a plaster, and administer it in these conditions on the affected area of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	In this section, the author discusses the treatment of gout, which is described as pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, particularly the feet. The recommended course of action when joint pain occurs is to make small incisions on the surface of the affected area using a pointed cautery (cauteri de punt). It is also advised to return any protruding intestines or hernias to their proper cavity and place a hand over the affected area to prevent further complications. The author then goes on to discuss the treatment for an abscess, advising that if the abscess has decreased in size, one should cauterize the bone from where new flesh is growing and apply a drying regimen made from flour of wheat and colophony to help the flesh dry out. This plaster is to be administered on the affected area of the native flesh.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	In the next section, the author discusses the treatment for what is referred to as "the thing that attacks in the ears." The recommended course of action is to make an opening in the affected area using a cautery (cauteri), and then cleanse it with vinegar or wine. Following this, a plaster made from the root of the plant called "oropendola" is applied. The author provides instructions on how to prepare the plaster, specifying that one should take the root of the plant and boil it in water until it softens, at which point it can be formed into a plaster and applied to the affected area.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause that attacks in the ears can be one of four types: mineral, similar to stone (such as iron and glass), plant-based (such as garlic or beans), fluid (like water, vinegar and similar liquids), or an animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when stone or other similar causes that do not fit properly in the ear are present, the ear should be left open to the air, and if one can see the stone, then distill some volatile oil or sizam in it, administer the extraction, and make the patient sneeze by applying a suitable condition, and apply drops of the solution to the nostrils to encourage sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Place some cotton or wool in the ear canal to block it, and gently pull the ear open at its edges, as this is often forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If not blocked, administer the extraction using the instrument called "gesti epicicarios," which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is blocked with the "gesti" (referring to a tool or instrument), that's fine; otherwise, administer the extraction using a thin probe of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if not blocked by the substance mentioned earlier, make a canal from wire and insert the tip of the canal into the ear canal and close the opening of the canal with wax and oil softened so that it is not open except for the canal itself.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Extract it with your breath and strong attraction, as it has often been noted that this can be helpful in removing the substance from the ear.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	However, if not blocked in this manner, take some alum or beeswax prepared with the tool used to catch birds, which holds a small quantity of powder, and place it at the end of a stick, then wrap it around that area carefully.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert the alum or beeswax into the ear canal with ease, and gently remove the moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if not blocked by all the causes mentioned earlier, you must be careful when cutting the affected area to avoid causing an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting the affected area is to first make the patient bleed from the saphenous vein and then extract the blood using the method of its virtue, and place your hand between the patient's teeth and turn their head to the side, making a small incision in the ear canal at the point where the bleeding will come out.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The incision should be in the shape of a crescent moon to allow access to the stone, and once the stone is exposed, remove it using appropriate tools; then close the incision at that time with speed, and cure it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that grow and swell, administer the cure and extraction for it; but if it does not respond to your treatment, you should take thin sponge (spatum teune) according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the abscess of the fat that has formed in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not do this when you think that the substance is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and place it in several cotton balls or wool, and extract it with scissors or a thin probe (subtil) as described earlier, or by incision as mentioned above, as the extraction will be relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	When the water that enters into the ear of the patient, who suffers from sneezing, starts, it fills his ear with old fluid and rubs on the ear in which the water is located; if forgotten, it's good; otherwise, take soft pearls and leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly in the fire, make the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike another stone on the stone that is within the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not let this go on with the stone until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is forgotten, take paper or cloth. and place one end of it over the hole of the ear and stretch the other end into the fire until the edge of it is burned off.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then take another cloth and do this several times until all the water is forgotten, and pull it out with a tube as described above with the stone remover.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the removal of an animal that enters into that ear, if it is small, do as described above; but if it is large and causes pain in the head, administer its removal quickly and easily, and this should be done before all other causes of discomfort in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the removal of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what was said above and in the section on distillation and do not achieve success, then you must look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if any cause of worms appears, remove it quickly or gently, but if there is no cause, take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in the shape of an inverted cone.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and apply suction strongly with it, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if no improvement is observed in the patient, close the circuit of the tube with wax as described; administer distillation, which the ancients have used for the cure of worms, and consult the treatment of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Make your effusion with the tool that infuses the medicinal oils into the ear, which is shaped like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, with a small hole at the bottom.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus be sure that the tube of continuous infusion is in the concavity of the ear where it will be needed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the appropriate cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube – which is in the ear -, and place the ray with the wrapped end and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infused into the ear should be previously heated gently in the fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause to be distilled in the ear is not too hot, as medicines for the ear cannot tolerate heat.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of blockage of ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes young children suffer from obstruction in the womb of their mothers, and this can also occur in some men, blockage in the ear meat due to inflammation or rotten flesh in that area; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the prepuce of the auricle which does not heal, and sometimes it occurs in other parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the prepuce of the auricle, which does not heal, is among the most difficult cases for treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where healing occurs, you must place the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if obstruction appears, open it with a thin spatula, shaped like this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of the obstruction is narrow with one side sharp and the other not, make the spatula two lemons wide so as not to injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And thus if the obstruction is due to new flesh in the ear or its meat, remove it quickly and gently until all the flesh has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If an operation is required near the ear, then take thin, flexible iron and heat it slightly, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If there is a need for an operation due to the swelling of the ear, you should alleviate the pressure and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Place a bandage on the ear according to the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian balm; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound, or you take some other remedy and immerse it in oil and pulverize it on top of the bandage and use it; if the ear has already been dressed, then you must remove the dressing and replace it with another that you will wrap in beeswax that has been made with rose oil until the abscess hardens. Carefully nurse it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding from the ear, immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that restricts blood flow, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of athelia (cataracts) that affect the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Cataracts which extend to the eyelids of some people are sometimes moist and dry in others.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you should have them with tweezers or scissors, and cut them out with an instrument suitable for the purpose, and place a bandage over the area afterwards.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain accompanied by bleeding occurs, you should cauterize them with lancicular subtle cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is near the incisions and trophic veins that return when there remains any cause of their rupture; and when they are cauterized with fire, these ruptures are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of large swellings that occur on the eyelids of some people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swellings that extend to the eyelids of some people are caused by a condition similar in intensity and hardness to large swelling, which is why it is called "large swelling".
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	This is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation is to determine whether the swelling originates from the eyelid and spreads everywhere, in which case it is mild.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore cut it open along the length of the swelling and remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and then suspend it with tweezers and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not skilled at making the incision of the swelling, if you cannot pierce the eyelid with shallow incisions, then do not attempt it for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is large, you should adjust it with suture, and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the blood in it will restore and nourish it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the large swelling is declining inside the eyelid, you should expose the inner surface of the eyelid, remove the swelling with tweezers where necessary, and press it from all sides. If the incision of the eyelid is long, do not attempt it for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water and care for the area with nourishing treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Treatment of exophthalmos (protruding eyes) above the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Exophthalmos is an inflammation that occurs in the conjunctiva of the upper eyelid, particularly in children, who it aggravates and often leads to their cataracts. They cannot tolerate bright light due to tearing.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore they often lie on their faces all the time and sleep with their eyes closed; and under their lower eyelids there are swollen and inflamed areas that have already been covered by inflammation, and signs of imminent hernias appear in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, the hernia comes out through them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Another method of operation is to make the patient place their head on your lap, and place a cloth over them and apply heat, making a circle large enough to contain all the hernias from all sides, and then placing it on top and pressing it with your fingers to force the hernia into the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle with a scalpel, taking care that the incision is not larger than the one made during a lithotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the incision, it is necessary that you cut through the cord entirely until you reach the hernia, because in many cases the hernia can be removed by making an incision similar to a white cyst.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove it with bandages that you have wrapped between your fingers on the outside and roll it back and forth between your right and left hands until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to stitch up the incision because, with the scalpel, you may not reach the eye and injure it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If your artery does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust one small piece facilitating its procession (artery), then pull that out as we have said; immerse rags in warm water and vinegar, place them over the area, and press hard using powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	Also, they crush salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure to remove what remains of that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Cure what is inside to heal it.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs at the cauterized spot, then cure it with plasters made of cedarwood until healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods for touching the sick.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the sick is born due to the tightening of natural hairs and aging, then we touch the sick person and perform methods for illnesses such as constant tearing and softening of eyelids and gauze on it until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eyelid which is called touching the eyelid, and treatment is done in four ways: or by cauterizing with fire; or with sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or by touching with incision and suturing; or by cane as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore you must hold the head of the patient with one hand; turn the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into the one in which there is no split beyond the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the skin above, and it should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are found — near the roots, and pull the skin upward with the needle, and turn the eyelid to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then make an incision in the split of the eyelid beyond the hairs, and insert a spatula for the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor up to the lacrimal canal; then pull out the skin and place small pieces of cotton or cloth and powder on it, and press down on the eyelid like a fig leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is necessary that the figure should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, as it varies among men, as some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then make an incision with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, and start from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural hairs like that of a king (i.e., large).
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the uncus in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and excoriate it completely, and adjust the incision with scissors along both edges with gauze or fine wool, remove blood, and make superfluous skin adhere on both eyebrows with certain adhesive substances if you want to do so, otherwise, do not treat.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Approach the stitching of the wounds within three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, leave the wound unsutured and treat it with something that dries and contracts, as the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the wound and the addition of something on it; however, suturing is better, and therefore, the ancients preferred this.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in the patient, there should be solicitude, and it is a good action, and it is not to be feared.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method in treating is to draw on the eyelid with balsam of myrtle and then raise it with three needles separated and joined together as follows:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, hold the needles and do not let them touch one another, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and pierce the upper eyelid near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other eyelet near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the two needles evenly along your fingers, and lift the entire cord in this manner as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Lift the edges of the wound with stitching, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs, make an incision or an opening for it, and fill the abscess with sulphur and warm compresses.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Sometimes swelling occurs on the eyelid, so you must use what we mentioned about incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Treating canker (cancro) is done as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	You turn the eyelid inside out and cut the figure within as I have previously described; then, by art, you make two canals or two fine tubes, the length of which should be equal to that of the eyelid, and the width of them should be less than the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already made incisions at the ends of each division, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Apply a thin solution underneath the eyelid of the eyebrow, and tighten each canal of each division with strong binding, leaving it for some days, as the cord will die by constriction and be rejected, and it will eventually fall off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it takes too long, then you break the thread and treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when the eyelid is raised, the hairs do not penetrate.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of the two canals that you will make as follows:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And the size of the length and width should be neither too large nor too small.
Capitol .xii.	Title XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of penetrating hairs in the eyebrow with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard, sharp, and penetrating the eyebrows, the operation in this case is that you take a thin needle, place it on the soft part of the cedar or lion, and adjust the ends of it carefully so that each one moves subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needles should be equal to the size of a palm (approximately 5 inches).
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And prepare another thin needle nearby, and use its ends as needed.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Place the patient's head on your lap and position it near the sun so that your work is visible, as this is a delicate and minor operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And introduce the needle into the root of the hair with care and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And pull out the hair above and insert it into the incision made previously, ensuring that there are one or two or three hairs but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And pull your hand with the hair out of the incision in the eyelid above the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the incision is not wide enough and the hair has not been pulled out, pull the incision at the divisions below with the needle you have prepared earlier until the incision above is wider.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And watch the eyebrow to ensure that you pull out the incision and the needle, grind each hair with a pestle and leave the pestle for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows well over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is scant and short, you adjust a long hair from natural hairs, lift it up or let it be shorn so that it extends until there is some space, then lift that up.
Capitol .xiii.	The capital number refers to chapter 13 in the text. This is just a note for organization and context. If you'd like, I can include this in the translation as well:
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of echidna that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the echidna appears in the eyelid and it contracts when pulled towards either right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or scar or burn, and is called leporina, this is caused by consolidation of plague, scarring, wounds, or cauterization, or similar issues with improper treatment.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this case is that you make an incision through that consolidation and separate the lips there, place a piece of cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to use treatment for the causes that produce scabbing and constriction; because if you do this, the echidna will return worse than before and there will be no healing.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in the case of causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak it in water where alum and its seeds are boiled, or gum guaiacol, which is liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in this solution and heal with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The secret of your treatment is that you perform everything carefully without any consolidation, as originally intended.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not a correction of eyelid echidna that restores the shape of the area as it was originally.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capital number refers to chapter 14 in the text. This is just a note for organization and context. If you'd like, I can include this in the translation as well:
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of eyelid echidna found below (lower eyelid).
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This echidna that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is truly called echidna, can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental echidna occurs due to wounds, cuts, burns, or similar issues.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, and make the thread pass from the tear duct on the left side to the tear duct on the right side until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin at the upper edges with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and cut the area with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus, if the shape of the eyelid is restored as required, it is good; otherwise, take the root and hold it in the split figure, and with that turn the lower eyelid, and make two slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The extremities of the two slits should be made at the two angles of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and form an angle where they meet so that when they come together, the figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is the Greek letter "Λ" (Lambda).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the skin in that amount which is the width of the narrow part below (lower eyelid), so that the eyelid is visible.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread, and heal those areas with the remedies mentioned earlier and ointments until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to extract by incision, suture, or cautery, then you must make a clean incision on the skin of the eyelid as directed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the foreskin between two labia as directed.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of alxacrati (which is above or below), it must run in operation, according to its preparation for alxacrati, and that form is diverse in shape like grains.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The wise craftsman always prepares tools for every possible manner that can be entered to return the figure to its natural form or similar to it, and the patient according to the operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men whose eyelid is fused above the white part of the eye and is hindered by its movement and natural functions, then it must be removed from the edge of the eyelash below the eyelid, and lift it up or stretch it out with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And carefully cut the adhesion with a thin spatula that is not sharp, taking care to be gentle so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without touching the white part of the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such as to easily remove the adhesion and restore the eyelid to its natural form, and heal the entire adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And apply warm water or saltwater to the eye, and you can also distill oil of roses in it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Separate the space between the eyelid and the cornea with gauze soaked in wool oil infused with albumen of egg, and apply it to the eye for three days using consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of a nail and the removal of skin growths around the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail can be of two types: either it is nerve-like and hard like a small stone; or it is not nerve-like, resembling congealed white moisture, which when touched by a hot iron, or if it is pressed, it breaks off and no oil is inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both the spices do not start before the tear duct above, which is small and gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of air.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in the incision is that the patient holds their head in your lap, and opens their eyes wide, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with one finger and extend it to the sides above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into a hair of horse or ox or cow, or something similar, or strong skin, or bend the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the side of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and hold the nail with tweezers; and extend it to the sides above, and remove the hair from the side of the nail that covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you follow the hair to its root.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you incise the remnant in the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small forceps, and clean the natural tissue around the tear duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears during the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with the sole extended or held with tweezers, as has been said, and it should be cut out with a lion-shaped spatula, which is the shape of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the spatula and avoid causing rupture, and make sure that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision in the eye with a little saltwater or salty solution made of vinegar, and let it stay there for another day; and take care of it with water that covers what is inside until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nerve-wrapped and cannot be penetrated with the needle, then this type of nail should be treated with medications, and it will heal in the same way as other nails and is recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a thin lion-shaped spatula with sharp accuracy as follows:
am subtilitat.	With sharp accuracy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is rarefied and hardened and grows in that root, then distill your oil in the eye made of vinegar or rose water or saltwater, and apply it to the eye for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And be sure to perform the operation until all of that which is from it is removed, unless a counter-abscess forms in the eye, in which case you should remove that, and treat the abscess at the beginning until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And be sure to perform your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The evacuation of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed by a strong odor, should be suspended for an hour; then incise that part of it, and do not deepen the incision to prevent the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then apply steam to the lacrimal head and make it sweat until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The incision of ulcers and that which is born of flesh attached to the odor.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the ulcers of alcu, flesh grows red, and it becomes swollen before covering the pupil or pressing against the eyelids and strongly compressing the eyelids at their edges, forming a rosebud-like appearance similar to a balcony railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on him is that the patient lies still with their head on your lap; and then you open the ulcers of that area and collect all that flesh with scissors or tweezers, and then incise the flesh from the beginning to the end using the scissors, and be careful not to touch the wound during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And make the incision with which you shall incise that one or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forcops which are gathered according to the shape of it as this chapter may require.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, fill the wound with salt powder or distill into it red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and then wait until a cautery pus forms over the wound, covered by albumin of egg white.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there remains any cause of algares and is full of cauterized blood, and you fear a cauterized pus, then you should lance the wound and care for that cauterized pus with what will dissolve that pus, and then apply treatment to it until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh attached in this manner that occurs in the algares of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must be careful to avoid all care of the wound through natural or accidental means, perform with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered enough from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Collect samples from the urine
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Urine samples are requested which will be tested and the clothing around it should not be disturbed for several days. Uncover the urine container for as many days as needed.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	At the beginning, it is necessary to first determine if the urine in which the sample is located is strong and there is no other illness present in addition to gout, then you collect that sample.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	You command the patient to bend their head towards your chest and suspend those veins with an ounce or two depending on your judgment; this ounce should be of subtle doubling in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces gradually into one container according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then collect those veins carefully, using fine and delicate methods, while avoiding blood, until you see the veins becoming swollen from the urine and turning red.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Be careful not to damage the urine container or its stopper; if your operation is in the middle of the day, and you are firm in your actions, do not insert anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you are done, you then distill the urine in order to make it green or red for that acidity to dissolve what has been collected from the sample.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then you place everything with what relieves the pain of it and let it rest for several days until the pain is alleviated and an abscess or pus has formed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat the process as necessary until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the procedure for the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reduction of arteries to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat arteries with cautery or sharp medicine as per the previous narrative and it does not heal, do not delve into it, but instead make an incision over the abscess when it is mature, and extract all the moisture that is in it and allow the bone to be exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be round like an arrowhead, pierced by drilling or abrasive powder for a subtle piercing (as shown in the following image).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Stop it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Let it rest for some time, and then restore the area with drying and binding agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown back and it separates from the body and remains for 40 days without being renewed or forming an abscess or other complications, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, do not delve into it but rather reduce the opening to the shape of the nose, and follow this method: you dig around the bones or with sharp medicine until the bone is exposed, then you take a piece as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The handle should be extended towards the tip as shown in some cases.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And let it rest on the bone, and that piece should be from the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the urine, and rotate your hand with the piece until you penetrate the entire bone, and the patient will feel air coming out through their nose when they exhale.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with drying agents as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Once the flesh and area is hardened, return the material that flowed out from the wound to the nose, thus it is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reduction of the protrusion of the urine container.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the urine container protrudes completely without any inconvenience or diminution of the clothing, it is necessary to lax the patient, and then to have them follow their normal routine, and to pause for a while in the neck without scarification and with good suction; and then pause over the urine container with a liniment made of aloe, opium, myrrh, and frankincense, and strengthen the plug over the urine container without using too much powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of powders is to take cloths from the lion's wool, and each cloth should be folded into four layers; and make powder from these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place them one on top of another according to the quantity required for use.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Apply strength to the powders using tough, firm fabric and strong binding; repeat the plasters with juice without cutting; remove the plasters and let the wound rest day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament becomes softened, then it must be tightened firmly.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the ligament and rest day and night as mentioned before.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has been reduced (healed), that's good; but if not, then apply the plasters with powders and binding and bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the elevation of the uveal tunica.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes elevated, proceed outside the eyelids as with a small knife, and shape the incision like a crescent moon; and if you want to make an incision, perform the operation as follows: you insert the needle into the uvea from below at the limbus (the junction between the cornea and the white part of the eye), and then place another needle through the conjunctiva (the transparent mucous membrane that lines the inside of the eyelid) where the tear duct is located, and let it penetrate; then remove the first needle according to its position; and make an incision in the double fold and lift the uvea around the needle circuit, and tighten that area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and let the yarn sink into the egg white (albumen) of the eye, allowing the thread to be absorbed.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then take care of the eye with something that supports it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some weeks after the entire area around the eye is covered with a circle of fabric, it should be perforated with a thin spatula that reaches the edge of the eye, allowing moisture to penetrate the white part of the eye (sclera), and gently lower the eye and insert it as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of conjunctivitis (inflammation of the membrane covering the white part of the eye and the inside of the eyelid)
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called conjunctivitis is not just mucus discharge that accumulates in the eye, but something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the method of working on it (conjunctivitis) is to make the patient lie down with their head straight and supported by your two hands, so that you can see the discharge coming from the eyes towards the lower eyelid, and then dry it without letting it descend, and keep the light out, and the patient should be able to see the causes as they did before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend (to the lower parts), know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not prepared to descend into urine, then make the patient hold between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the surrounding panniculus, near the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea at the crown (inside the location), until the urine is excreted.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once the urine is excreted, you must distill it into water, adding honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment for other causes until it is cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of urine descending from the genitalia.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	I have already said the kinds of urine in their classification and which should be pierced with the needle, then perform that according to the patient's health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must make the patient lie down between your hands on a chair and let him urinate, holding it in tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your right hand near the eyelid of the left urine, if it is the left urine that contains water; or with your left hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take alum, if it is the left urine; or with your left hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the alum near the crown for the thickness of the root in the alum of the urine from the tear duct, and then rub alum with its power and roll your hand on it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And insert the alum into the urine and feel that alum has reached due to the heat.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	It is necessary that the measure of the path of alum to the puncture be equal to the measurement of the space, which is from the pupil to the end of the black spot (the corona of the urine); because you will see the pupil with the vision of the urine through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the alum into the location where the urine is, and then draw it down a little at a time, and if the urine descends quickly, you must have the patient quickly drink what he sees with his eyesight, and place alum in his urine.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest for a little while; therefore, if the urine has descended, you must wait a little longer until alum is not expelled.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and does not descend, you must remove the alum easily, rub it a little with your hand, dissolve a small amount of clear salt in gemma and use it to wash the inside of the urine; then wait outside the urine, stop or wool infused in rose oil and album of huou and liguidum with water for the urine.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	However, we and those of our time stop on that one with a compress soaked in albumen of huou (egg white).
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your alum in the inside of the urine due to its hardness (since some men have a very hard urine), then you must take the spatula, which is called albid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce that conjuncture with the albid, and do not hurt yourself in the process, and make sure to do it gently towards alum.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And insert the alum as previously stated.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must complete your work, prepare the patient's bed for sleep with a comfortable bed made in a dark room, and forbid any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And let nature take its course for the smoothness of the situation, and do not tilt his head to the right or left in any way.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Let him rest according to his disposition for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Approach that person in that darker place and uncover the wound, examine it carefully, show them some causes, then return the limb into the day seven [days later].
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	It is necessary to do this during the time of healing or as soon as possible, apply an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is necessary that you remove this because water can easily penetrate it due to its great and violent swelling.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs cauterized, you must remove the pus within seven days and treat it with a remedy that will help the abscess heal.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then clean the wound and place a plaster over its oral surface to control the swelling for several days, it exists in the darkest place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually lead them out of that darkness and talk about their causes with them.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that it is not excused for a disciple to miss the vision on any occasions, and then you should be bold in performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	We have now heard of one of those who are from the Artes, and one said that a fire was made in the Magdame's anus and the water is drawn out with it.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen this in our land who has perfected it, nor is it found in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medicines for the uterus, by means of which one can act on those who do not know them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of earth or iron specifically, and they are the extensions of them with this subtle triangular tip, the sharp end resembling that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of dead flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various dead fleshes are born, some of which have a cause similar to the scorpion of moving legs, or polyps of the feet; and this illness is called polyp because it resembles the foot represented by it.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there comes cancerous, ulcerated, dark-colored flesh; and from there is the lion's flesh, not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the one who is not fraudulent or cancerous among these fleshes, it is necessary to cauterize the patient with your hands and expose them to the sun, cut open their nostrils, and pick the wound on those fleshes.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And remove that from the sides of the wound, and make a clean cut in it with a sharp, fine spatula on the side where you know that all the flesh is already exposed; if some reason remains for which abscission is possible, then you remove it with one of the subtle instruments until there is no more cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is a lord with blood or an abscess occurs cauterized, you must stop the bleeding; or if it is malignant abscesses, you must tie it and cauterize it inside until it is abscised and all the cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And apply hot water or vinegar to the nose near the incision.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is opened and moisture passes into the palate, you must know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you must know that inside it is dead flesh in the puss on the bones of the nostrils, to which no abscission has been achieved.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must insert a needle of sufficient thickness into the one who is swollen and moisten it in nutmegs, pause between each nutmeg the amount of the finger or thumb, and anoint the patient and introduce the end of the needle into the nostril with the ray or another cause that is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw the patient's smell into it until it reaches the channels of the nostrils, and it will be exuded on his forehead, for many observations resemble this action to children in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And pause the two extensions of the needle, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply the serrated flesh with the needles that are in the needle, and do it until you know that the flesh is on the needles of the needle.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And remove the needle, and pause at the nose near the extraction of the blood with a cotton ball, and do it for three days or more until the pus has corrupted everything that remains of the fleshes.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the illness, pause at the nose with a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If the healing process lasts longer than expected, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument for the capillary purger maker, with which essential oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or earth, similar to a small uncovered lantern, such as a small bowl and lid, with a small hollow compartment underneath for the medicine.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a cane, and the cannula of the capillary purger maker should be flat, open; at its end, there should be a handle with which you will have it when you are sucking oil or whatever liquid or essential substances you want.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This capipurgi is precious: a recipe for strengthening the joints, made from beaver's castoreum, white balsam, ginger, styrax resin, long pepper, asafetida, epithymium of spike nut. Mix together the juice of celery and cabbage, make pills from this mixture, crush one pill with water and give it to the patient to swallow while lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the nostrils at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When a boil appears at the extremities of the nose, it is enlarged and noticeable on certain days within which the regulation of menses occurs.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Therefore, when it begins to appear, you should incise it at the start and drain it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place something over the area or apply burning cautery or medicine that burns in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	However, if its incision is delayed until it becomes noticeable, then consider whether it is hard, dark-colored, and with little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer, for a boil that incises this ulcer can cause great harm to the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the ulcer is soft and not dark-colored, and incision is possible in its entirety, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, cure the area with whatever evacuates and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is dissolved by ulceration or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when continuity is dissolved in one of these joints, there is little benefit in performing the operation except for certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you intend to treat any cause of this, consider whether it is a fresh ulcer with its own blood supply, and then you adjust the lips of the ulcer with suture and heal it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolved continuity are already separated and each part is healthy, it is necessary that you cauterize each divided edge of its margin until bleeding stops.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with suture and tie them, sprinkle dragon's blood powder on it and let it rest for two or three days, apply an emplastrum of diaphoretic herbs, or one of the consolidating plasters, and leave it there for two to three days, remove it and change the emplaustrum until the pus is expelled, and heal with linctus until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	However, the method of suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as in abdominal suturing, or add the dissolution of continuity with pus as you have been taught.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Extraction of the causes that appear in the two lips in their divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	When boils appear in the divided parts of a man's lips, they are hard ulcers resembling pustules, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you separate and cut each lip of the boil, fill the cavity with a solution made from fresh sage triturated until the blood stops flowing, wash it with warm water and heal the area with an ointment that has astringent properties, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Incision of the meat adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Gangrene sometimes occurs in the adjusted meat of the gums, which the ancients called albulus, so it is necessary that you hang it with hooks or keep it with a probe and incise it as needed, and allow blood to flow or drain the pus.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Place a cushion over the affected area (sore or wound), or apply styptic powder or cauterizing agents.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If the flesh returns (relapses), then incise it secondarily and cauterize it, for cautionery will not return again.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for tooth extraction:
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those in the root and those erupted, and between the gums, sharp protrusions, growths, or some ulcerated areas are blackened and become citric or greenish under the gum due to corruption, they are called "black teeth."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, it is necessary that you hold the patient firmly between your hands and keep his head on your side, extract the teeth in which such protrusions and causes appear like sand, until no further cause remains, and remove the blackness, citrinitas, and other substances until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If the reason for tooth extraction is still present at its onset, that is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning over them on another day and on the second and third until it reaches its final statement in what you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth require various types of resorbers (resorptive agents) in different shapes and forms according to your treatment plan.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Therefore, since the resorber for a tooth in the root is different from the resorber used between teeth, you should be prepared with the appropriate types of resorbers that you will soon see.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Extraction of Teeth
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all caution and delay in its complete extraction, because there is no reason to replace the ulcerated area when it is extracted, because it is a sublimate that is an excuse for its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	However, when the patient is to have that tooth extracted, you must absolutely be certain which tooth is causing the pain, because many ulcerated areas cause the patient discomfort and are in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have often seen in barber surgeries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you should be certain which tooth is causing the pain, and if you know this, it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with spittle in which there is some virtue, until it dissolves the tooth from the gum all around its perimeter, and then apply the forceps or fine-tipped forceps to the beginning, little by little, until it yields.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply oil or ointment with strong holders and a strong grip, keep the patient's head between your thumb and forefinger firmly so that he does not move too much, and extract the tooth correctly in manner that you do not break it or cause him further pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if the tooth is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it next to it with ease and apply force to its removal as at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	However, if the tooth is fractured or corroded, it is necessary that you wrap that fracture with fabric and tighten it at the tip of a thin rod so that it is not broken during your constriction on it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must work with extreme caution and incise the entire circumference of the gum and use your strength carefully to avoid breaking it and leaving a part detached from it, and return to the patient for his greater discomfort than the initial pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless approach to extraction, as they do not administer what we have recommended; because many times they cause great swellings on sick men which are difficult to treat, and all of its remedies remain ineffective or some of them, or that you extract it with bones from the jaw as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And before the extraction of it, wash the mouth with water or vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding flows from this area, such as many times ulcers do, then drizzle some vinegar and asperge it on the wound, and if the vinegar does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be slender with jaws that are narrow at the beginning and become longer, but short and thick, so that they are not bent when operating with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	They should be as thick as sometimes necessary, but not so narrow that when they are tightened, they are bent; they should be short and long.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	The forceps should be made of iron from India and the jaws of them should be straight but with teeth on the edges that interlock and tighten strongly; sometimes the jaws are shaped like a stork's beak (called ciconia), which is strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones broken in the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the removal of a tooth that is broken remains for some cause, you must wait over the area to soften it by bandaging for one or two days; then introduce forceps or pincers whose jaws are shaped like a stork's beak (called ciconia) or guanta, which is the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The jaws of them should be made hollow like a file or an almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not comply with these forceps or pincers, then you must be careful on the edge and carefully remove all the flesh and insert an instrument called atali, which is a small lever of this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should be of short length with a thick end, but not swollen so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, it is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which this is their shape: the first instrument is a triangle with some thickness on one side.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument is a triangle with a narrow tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are helped by this instrument, which has two arms of the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that I will mention for tooth removal; for it is helpful when using this instrument similar to a large pair of scissors, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular tip bent or short, which is somewhat thick but not swollen so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should also know that the instruments for teeth movement are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skillful and expert craftsman must find the right tools for himself according to what this signifies the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not know or mention their proper instruments, due to the shapes of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken or dislocated, then apply a warm poultice to that area with what is appropriate for it from the instruments and forceps that I have mentioned in the removal of incisions of teeth, and help yourself with gestures whose shape is this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	It should be somewhat thick but gradually, and held in the mouth to prevent it from escaping or fleeing until all the bone is forgotten; then restore the area with appropriate medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that fracture and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When a tooth is prominent not according to its natural form, and this occurs more often in women and especially venerable young girls; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible for suturing or liniment, then you should perform a root canal on that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument, which has the following shape, similar to a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel of very sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Make your incision with the shape you have chosen to incise that tooth into pieces over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and do not cut any other teeth in the process.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is suitable for filing, then file it with this Indian steel file, which has the following shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Let the file and the margin be made of Indian steel; let it have many small sharp points like a lima used to make needles, with which you can file the tooth gradually over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged in the process.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then straighten it at the end and cut off any remaining pieces with scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If the tooth has been broken and cut off part of the tongue, then you must file the remaining portion to ensure that the sharp edge is smoothed out and the tongue does not get injured or the speech is impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	If a tooth is lost due to a blow or extraction and the patient cannot chew food properly after medical treatment with styptic medicines, then you must fill in the gap with gold fillings instead of silver ones because silver turns green and may cause further problems in a few days, whereas gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The fillings should be thin and thick depending on the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is to take the gold or silver filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, allowing it to grow with two twists towards the affected teeth, or one twist if only one tooth is affected, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Place the dental cement into the gap where you started and press gently with ease until it is not affected anymore.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Your string should be thin enough to pass between the teeth without damaging them.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess filling with forceps or pliers and place it in each location as needed, folding and hiding it between the healthy tooth and the affected tooth to avoid damaging the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Tightly seal the filling with wax, like Romans do.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it falls out or breaks, replace it with another filling immediately in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the filling for two healthy teeth and two affected teeth, like this example:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or teeth are re-implanted in their original locations after extraction, and they grow back as recommended and remain healthy.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this can only be done by skillful and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes cow bones can be used as a replacement for teeth in certain cases, and they are shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is tightened as previously mentioned, and it remains useful for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the liniment that appears on the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This linament that appears on the tongue sometimes is either natural with which one is born or accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation involves opening the mouth of the patient while their head remains on yours; lift their tongue and bring the corresponding nerve ligaments accordingly, to a depth that is sufficient for the tongue to be freed from its recent binding.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or denseness, and this is caused by the consolidation of a wound, then you cast hot oil on it and cut through to the depth where the ligament was cut and the denseness is resolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	"Be careful not to make a clean incision in the flesh at the edge (of the wound) and cut through the arch and let blood flow out."
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	"Then wash the wound with vinegar or salt water or clean water, and place a linen cloth over the tongue; this is meant to keep the patient from biting their tongue every night in order for it not to become consolidated again."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	"If bleeding occurs, apply a solution of vitriol and water; if blood continues to flow, then cauterize the area with a light cautery that is suitable for this purpose."
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat the other causes until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter 35"
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	"On extracting a ranula from beneath the tongue."
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	"At times, an ulcer-like swelling appears under the tongue that inhibits its normal operation, and it is difficult to open the mouth."
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	"The operation involves opening the patient's mouth wide and examining the ulcer."
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	"If it appears dark or black and hard and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it because it is cancerous."
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"If it appears white with moisture, you should apply oil to it and use a fine spatula to scrape it off entirely. If blood flows during the procedure, apply the solution of vitriol (a strong acid) over it to stop the bleeding."
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"Then return to your work until you have treated the issue with appropriate measures, making sure it is washed with vinegar and salt, and treat it further with other remedies until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxvi.	"Chapter 36"
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	"On extracting ulcers in the ears and those located at the back of the ear and other ulcers."
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	"When there is swelling behind the ear that feels like a gland, which can appear outside and are called 'ear glands', if they do not heal with the remedies mentioned in the division, you should consider whether the ulcer is hard, dark in color, with little sensation, you should not touch it with iron."
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	"If the ulcer is red and has a thick root, do not touch it with iron because of bleeding; instead, allow it to mature before either pulling it out or letting it break on its own."
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"If the ulcer is white, smooth, and has a thin root, it should be scraped off."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"The operation involves determining whether the ulcer has healed with rest and complete recovery or if it has been reduced by some means. Then, you should position the patient in front of you, with their head on your lap, open their mouth wide, and a servant should hold down their tongue with a noble instrument that takes this form:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"It should be made of silver or iron, and be thin like a knife."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Therefore, as you press the tongue down and expose the ulcer, grab it with your tool and place oil on it. Then, pull the ulcer out at its edges as far as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Another thing you should pull is some cause of the membranes (linings), and then cut it with an instrument that takes this form:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It resembles forceps, but its extremities are bent, so that the orifice of each one is facing the other, sharp, it should be made of iron and handle it carefully.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not present to you, then make an incision with that spoon whose shape is like it: It should be sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Then, after making an incision, make another according to this method of incision and cover the incision of the patient with warm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is bleeding, cover it with water of scorzonera or myrtle root decotion or similar to stop the bleeding until the bleeding stops, and take care of it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes we need to apply ointments or other poultices on the abscesses or boils, and make incisions according to the method I described for two incisions in a cavity.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have been treating a woman with an abscess that was born in the groin of her body, which abscess turned dark and had little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her body, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have died soon if she had stayed like that for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had already grown so much that it erupted through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I should fistulate and insert myself into one of their orifices, and pull it out, and take a large piece of it, and I should incise the other opening where I can find the other end, and I should close its mouth, compress its tongue, and insert the orifice into the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I should remove a large piece of it, and there was not much blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the woman's groin is healed, and she should start drinking water immediately, and I should be careful about her food, so I will not continue to incise that abscess for a long time, and a new abscess will appear in its place, which I will incise until it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I should anoint and cauterize the woman's groin, so that it heals more quickly; and I should walk around and not know what God has planned for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of an abscess that is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarr of the vulva is abscessed and long, it is called pus-filled abscess; and if it is in the lower thick and round part, it is called boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed according to what has been said in the division and does not receive your treatment, and sometimes an abscess that has already cauterized and is thin remains subcutaneous, then you must incise the rounded one; and if it is long and blood-filled, dark or black in color, and not tender, then you should be careful when making the incision, because there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it as I have described its whiteness and length, you should seize the patient and press his tongue with an instrument that matches its shape and place the orifice in the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of the two instruments that are mentioned in the incision of two cavities.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it unless it is aligned with the natural boundary without addition, because if you incise it more, you will damage his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what I have recommended in the incision of two cavities, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is afraid of the incision, you should use ointment in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterization in him is only with sharp water, and you should hold his head in your lap, and press his tongue with the instrument that I have mentioned, and take some of the water that I have described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the live tissue, and hold back the thick or thin part, and fill the concavity of the tool whose shape this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed should be concave like the handle of a spoon, and the instrument with the medicine is placed on the vulva, and the patient should lie down so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows into the intrinsic medicine through the instrument, so that it does not cause any problem in his groin and that it cleanses him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine, and press it on the uvula for at least an hour until you see it darken and become numb from the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and cover it over the tip of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray into the cotton in a tube until the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as you want until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and remove it when it dries and falls off within three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If necessary to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and wipe away the cauterization in the vicinity of the grape with a damp cloth, clean with that water which is around the medicine, wash with warm water, heal from outside with plaster, and guard within with ointments until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This kind of healing is safe when inserted for a short time with fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is healed with a subtle substance that cauterizes and inserts, which is cured with subfumigation in this manner: carefully mix calamint, origanum, ruda, scicadus arabicus, camomile, broken herbs similar to those mentioned above, and prepare all these causes or some of them in water, and immerse; boil the water well and strain it through a clean cloth; let the water be heated properly, and place a tube made of silver or iron at the center of the ulcer, and place an instrument hollowed out with arsenic on top.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	Place a mouthpiece in the sick person's mouth to the point where the steam can reach the ulcer until it is covered by the swelling.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Apply the described methods until it is dry and be careful not to perform this healing at the beginning of an abscess formation, for it would worsen the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather make a lancing of the abscess after it has matured.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument, then take a tube and block the opening with wax in the patient's mouth to prevent the steam from burning it, for the wax closure prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This healing is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and adhesions in the throat, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Ulcers adhering in the throat or a thorn of the feet or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must extract what appears from those things, over which you place your sight, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that it is clear to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is hidden and is obscured in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the throat will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or bread crumbs or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of sea sponge and soak it thoroughly with water, then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the location where the thorns are extracted, they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	But if you do not have a sea sponge, take an eel and soak it in water, and when it is soft, extract it; or take a pot and place it and press the patient's throat through it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes are not forgotten as I said before, then use an instrument made of lead in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	It should be as large as a small finger and in the opening of it, there should be a concavity that you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Lift the patient's head upwards and be careful not to touch their throat bones, because it may cause pain or pierce the bone or thorn, or let the doctor handle it with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient can handle it better, because of their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and they press downwards on it, and lift their hand with the instrument upwards, all that in accordance with the quantity that was prepared until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood clot is medicated with the remedy mentioned in the division of healing with medicines and does not improve, consider placing your hand in the throat of the patient at the end, because you have prepared it as I recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see a blood clot, extract it gently with a thin or pointed instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the tube and do this several times (until the blood clot is dead and comes out of the throat) and keep the patient from drinking water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Approach and grasp a syringe filled with water, open its mouth in that place, and rinse it with that; and do not allow any cause to leak out from there, and change the water once an hour, for blood will soon clot when the water is felt.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if not forgotten what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the instrument that has been recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it may fall down.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation in fumigation of that is to take a bowl filled with burning charcoal and covered on the side with a cover having a hole, and the end of the instrument should be placed within that hole; and hold it over the fumigation; and make the patient hold their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape before you know that the fumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will soon fall down.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If it does not work, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and have them eat salted foods and almonds, and drink no water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument with which venous blood in the groin is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps in some ways, but is curved in another.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The handle should be placed in the groin, and the end of it is similar to a stork's beak, which has a notch on the side, sharpened with a file, so that when pressure is applied, that does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is contained the entire sermon on the opening of abscesses and their treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of many species and various types, as we shall remember from this book. Each type is described in detail herein.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	They are diverse in terms of the method of opening and treating them through two methods: one for abscesses that are located inside the body, and the other for those caused by moisture or fluid accumulation.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method is applicable for locations where accidents of the body occur, as an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttock; and an abscess in a soft tissue location is different from an abscess at a joint. Each of these types requires its own treatment methodology.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Some abscesses should not be opened, but rather allowed to mature and heal on their own or complete their course of action.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some abscesses should be drained when they are hard and do not mature on their own, such as those near joints, for an abscess located near a joint will prolong the pain in that area until it is lanced, and can cause damage to the ligaments or nerves of the joint, leading to stiffness of the affected member; or if an abscess is located on a limb, it should not be delayed in lancing it until it has matured, as this could lead to gangrene; or if it is located near the buttock, it should not be lanced before it has matured, since this could cause the spread of infection into the folds within the buttock and create a fistula, or an opening that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is important to know when to lance the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Know that it is matured when there is the yielding of pain and the ceasing of fever, and the decrease in redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know how to perform perforation at the place below the abscess and where pus is coming from healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforation should sometimes be through the length of flesh or body, if abscesses are in the parts of the neck or feet, and in places of ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and in the end, in all places that swell where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in fleshy places, it is better to perforate it sooner rather than later as long as digestion of the purulent matter is confirmed, thus as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, the pus's course is prolonged and there may be more putridity, and the abscess's lips are hardened and its depth increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	If an abscess is under the skin or subcutaneous tissue, you should perforate it when necessary according to the thickness of the flesh or body, or according to what that member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to make a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where it is necessary to make a surgical incision and open the wound, when this is done, it is said that the wound has been prepared, as with boils and carbuncles.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a wound having three angles; and of these is the one where it is incised like a fig leaf of myrrh, as with abscesses in the joints (gout).
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those where round and crescent-shaped incisions are administered, and similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But if it is not like the ones described above (superficial boils), you should perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected a lot of pus, you should perforate it and not take out all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, leave the abscess open for another day, and then extract a larger part, and perform daily observations until it heals.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Furthermore, if the patient is a young child or elderly person in poor health, for the animal spirit often resolves with the release of pus, and the patient may die from it, you should be cautious about these cases.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when performing the perforation of these abscesses, avoid pus-producing diseases and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat incision; if the abscess is large and the fissures of the perforation are numerous, you should wait for them to close on their own.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess a piece of the skin is separated or you have concaved it around its circumference, you should close that with old cloth or thread made from fabric, as when you tie bread or herbs, without moisture; and keep it for three days; and then process and care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during the operation, you should administer warm water and vinegar mixed in a cloth that can be placed on the area of the bleeding and observed for a while.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then you must administer the regimen and treatment and powder which I have recommended in several places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must pack powder made of vinegar and oil of caution on top of it.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are fleshy, then you must pack powder made of alum water and oil or vinegar and oil, and leave it for three days as I have said, and then you must drain the abscess and cleanse it, and administer the treatment to it that is appropriate until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	This is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the distinction I have already said about every abscess in a particular manner, this is the method of treating it by chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck, small abscesses occur that are of a special type containing tunics which are made from it; and the types are numerous.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they have blisters, and those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture similar to flour and resemble them; and those that are hard and stony.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the sectioning and removal of them, there is no fear, as excising them does not counteract archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the sectioning of them is that you should expose them with an instrument shaped like this, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it contains moisture, then you should cut it with sectioning along the length and sectioning along the surface according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Start the sectioning from line B to line G, so that when the moisture is evacuated, you excise it, and do not leave any cause of it at all, because too many watched return if there is any cause left.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, or if not, in water and salt; fill it with that mixture and leave it inside for another day, because with that acid it will rot everything remaining of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Approach that area with an Egyptian poultice secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you trust that there is no other cause of that skin layer; then treat the wound with the poultice until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it as follows:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Make an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut between the edges of the incision and remove it entirely from all sides, exert your effort in extracting the sac containing it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if you encounter resistance in your incision, do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Treat an opened abscess and its healing as you were told earlier; incising an opened abscess is easy because it contains little blood and moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Sometimes these abscesses are in the head in some men who have no humidity at all; this is caused because when I incised an abscess on an old woman's head, it turned out to be hard, rough, white, and could not be crushed, and if anyone were to strike it, it would cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other types of abscesses that occur in the head, this is not relevant to the topic at hand, such as abscesses that occur on the scalps of children and require the removal of the scabs; but the incision of these should always be a superficial incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Pause the puncture of those in the lower part of their body, as this will alleviate the pain in the lower parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is necessary for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On incision of scrofulas that occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Most often these abscesses occur in the neck and on the shoulders and in the joints; but sometimes they also occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	These abscesses that occur in the neck, and those that are caused by swelling, and all scrofula of this kind is divided into its own layer, just as in the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have mentioned before.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofulas are either swellings, some of which are hard, and those that contain moisture, and the malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see well-positioned in the incision, whose color is similar to that of parchment and extends throughout its entirety without being attached to the nerve of the neck, nor veins, nor arteries, and is not tumorous, it must be incised shallowly along the surface of one side of the body from line G to line B, and scrape it off in its entirety, then cut two edges of the parchment with scissors or a scalpel if needed, as mentioned in the abscesses on the head, and carefully remove it piece by piece.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is more careful not to be incised the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not press on you in incision or disturb the patient, and that incises what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause at the stitching of the plaster or other powders which stop bleeding, and let it dry, and leave it alone until its acuity subsides and the abscess becomes soft and turns into pus.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have finished it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And ask the patient if there are any other small scrofulas, therefore incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the great vein of the scrofula, then it must be ensured that it is not incised the scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Advance carefully so as to fold it strongly and let it fall on itself without harming it.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old linen which you have already smeared with Egyptian ointment and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire scrofula, then it must be ensured that you approximate the two edges of the wound and stitch it as soon as possible without leaving any superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluity due to the large size of the scrofula, it must be understood to incise the root of it, remove it and administer stitching and what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that scrofula which contains moisture, it must be perforated with a superficial perforation at the location of its maturation, and pause the perforation of what is causing the deepest pus in the body, as has been said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And apply perforation, warm with heat and similar to those, so that it destroys what has been removed from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, then take care of it with generative meat ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pit of the abscess in the guolary.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients made this incision on the pit of the abscess, and no one in our land has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the writing of the sermon of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men having scrotum, it must be avoided the extraction of the pit, for it is not helpful because all the veins and larger vessels of the patient are nearby.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or scrotum or both ears, when the disease is not in the neck, it must be ensured to perform incision of the pit to avoid the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to perform it, we must incise the pit of three or four circles of the scrotum, or a smaller one in the breadth in that which is between two circles according to quantity, and let the incision be in the cavity, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for incision because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are easily accessible.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is poor, it must be ensured that you extend the parchment of the scrotum with a scalpel, and cut the parchment to the canal, but avoid blood vessels if any reason for them occurs.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And it must be ensured that you incise the cavity according to what has been recommended; and it means over the incision of the canal for the flaccid member which is from that place with the area where it has been torn apart and the abscess of the throat.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound be kept open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, since the hour is extended in which perforation is feared, add two edges of the parchment of the wound, and stitch only with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And apply medications that make the flesh heal until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon which we have recommended is to open the scrotum of the patient who has one or more abscesses, and if the patient comes to death, and the anus of him is cut, then someone goes to incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the wound for some respiration, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason we command to keep the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and it is the evil for three days; and therefore we command to stitch the wound, and take care of it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	What I see has been witnessed by me is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into the patient's chest cavity and cut off a piece of the lung, and I was called for treatment. I then listened to the wound as one listens to the dying, exposed the wound, and stopped the bleeding which was coming out from the small hole in the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Furthermore, I verified that it had not pierced a vein or artery, and the wound was bleeding. I cured it until the wound healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	The servant did not speak unless he was ordered to, and return in several days for further treatment of her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now, I will tell you that there is no fear in the section of the epiploon.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	In this section, we discuss an abscess that occurs in the chest wall outside, which is called a hernia of the chest.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	The hernia of the chest abscess is a large abscess as indicated by the color of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the case of a natural hernia, there is no remedy for it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental hernia can be of two types, one of which resembles fatty nodes, and the other type resembles an abscess caused by thickening of an artery, in which case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	It is necessary to make a presumption about it only in the case of a small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should examine it and investigate it as described above, if it resembles fatty nodes but is not suspended in any veins, then you should cut it out the same way as you would with lipomas, and remove it with what contains it of skin and bursa; otherwise, you should thoroughly examine its entire existence, and apply a remedy to the area until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Title. Forty-fifth.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On cutting of the types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of knots of various kinds and I have already said all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I distinguish between a knot and an abscess as there may be doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pain that subsides the ebullition of excess fluid; it is a completed rotting that now ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a knot is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cystic lump which is in the bag of the bladder.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, and it begins like a boil, and is made in the same way as cheese, whether large or small, and there are two types, one fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are swollen, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, extract it and investigate it at its beginning for the stone that is called intromes, according to its shape which will appear in the chapter that is close to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	The method of investigation of abscesses and all knots is that you take this stone, introduce it into the moist part that you find in the abscess, and you roll your fingers over it little by little until you know that the stone has penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Approach the wound with your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the contents while considering what is issuing from its trace.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the moisture flowing out is forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should cut it with a surface incision as mentioned in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture coming out from the abscess's trace, then you should know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry over it with a section shaped like this cross:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as you have been taught, and suspend it with a thread, and cut off the skin from all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over it and extract the pus with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	However, if it is torn during the operation, it will not be possible to extract the healthy part, and therefore you should examine whether there is any cause, and then extract it in pieces before anything remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if something remains, either a little or a lot, return the node according to what is more appropriate.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen it, and place a cauterizing plaster over the abscess, and cure it with another healing method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If the node is large, then you should cut both lips of it and treat it with whatever causes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	However, if the pulsating vein is opposite or not pulsating, you should cut it and fill the area with boiling vinegar that is triturated and let it rest for two to three days until the plaster dries and the bleeding of the blood stops; then return to incise what was torn from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for cutting and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these, the abscesses are of three types, one is large, another is middling, and the other is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large abscess is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middling abscess is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small abscess is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them from iron, wood, and cut ends properly, so that the abscess is pierced in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the lancets, and they are called albeds, and one of them is called burd.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They are of three types, one large, middling, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large lancet is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the middling lancet is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small lancet is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems to be discussing medical conditions. Here's the translation for this sentence in English: "It is necessary that these are due to abscesses, eruptions, fistulas, and buboes because some of them are from bones and other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"Then, the boils, abscesses, and carbuncles are to be treated with large needles similar to great pins, which are sewn through the skin. They can be made using lime, iron, or silver. The best are those made with lime."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And the black plum juice is used to treat these, as experienced physicians agree that for such boils, the fistula should be opened in the concavity of which the reflection takes place, and this reflection should be reflected with its light onto those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And of three types, where some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"The experienced physician forms:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Form of the average physician using lead:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"Form of the small physician using lead:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The shapes of the nails are of several types, where some are simple, with only a curve, and there are three types: large, few, and medium-sized."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And from these come the uncurved ones, and they are of three types."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And of those uncurved ones, some have two curves, and there are three types."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And from these come those with three curves, and they are also of three types."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all these are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Form of the large simple nail:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form of the medium-sized simple nail:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"Form of the few simple nail:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"Form of the uncurved large nail:"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"Form of the uncurved medium-sized nail:"
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"Form of the uncurved few nail:"
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of the large nail with two curves:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"Form of the medium-sized nail with two curves:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of the few nail with two curves:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of the large nail with three curves:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of the medium-sized nail with three curves:"
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of the few nail with three curves:"
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the forms of scalpels with which knots and abscesses are cut, and they are of three types: large, medium-sized, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"Form of the large scalpel:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"Form of the medium-sized scalpel:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Form of the small scalpel:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The edges of those from which the incision is made are sharp, and the others are not sharp, and they are not stopped in this way, but rather they are made with caution during the excision of the knot to avoid injury to a vein or nerve, and for these the patient will heal and gain a small amount of peace due to the cauterization which is necessary after the incision of the abscess."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the forms of cauterizing agents (alum), and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see."
La forma de magda gran:	"The form of large magda:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Form of the medium-sized magda:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Form of the small magda:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of lime and resemble glass with which alcohol is made."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And the pointed edge is coated with a hidden spatula, and when you want to move it inward or outward, as you see."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The forms of spatulas (small instruments), which are hidden between the said ones during the incision of abscesses and not perceived by the patient, come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the forms of those:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The forms of forceps (instruments) with which the flow of blood is cut off, and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small. The forms:"
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of lemon rind, round in shape with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	It is necessary that these leeches of various sizes be prepared: large, medium, and small, so that with them you may quickly remove blood flow in necessity, and at first treatment there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to draw blood in every part of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as in the armpits of the shoulders and the groin, in the armpits of the chest, and in the breasts, abdomen, and genitals, and similar parts with fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some veins are made with such small instruments resembling fish-scoops shaped like this; through which blood is drawn when it is done by venipuncture, or incision of a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some veins are made round in shape like this:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On treating the male breasts, which resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veins are inflamed in the male breasts, and must be treated like scabies as they begin to appear, and inflame the breasts, resembling those of women, and we must apply remedies, leave them alone.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who suffers from this, it is necessary to incise them with a semi-lunar section as shown here, from line B to line G, and remove all the pus, apply a layer of carminative medicine, bring together the edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines towards the hips and is softened like in women, then it should be cut in two pieces, with two semi-lunar sections as shown here, each contained within the other, so that the end of one is inside the other according to this form, from line B to line G. Remove the coagulum, which is between the edges of the wound, clean it, and administer the treatment and powders mentioned above until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the incision that is necessary to incise, due to the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then you must clean the wound with a cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the ointment corrodes away what remains of the coagulum, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from the armpits.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The abscesses that come from the armpits are of the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a semi-lunar section as shown here: from line G to line B. When all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, you should completely cover it with a piece of cloth and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the cloth covering and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of lymph nodes or scrofula is, you should cut it as mentioned in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound is extended and exudes pus, you should apply cautery as mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On incision of abscesses that occur due to an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the coagulum that is above it is consolidated, abscesses occur and there are signs to distinguish whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long and located in the neck of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And one that is due to a vein is round in the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incising the abscess is an error, especially in the armpits, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is dangerous, so its treatment with iron must be avoided, and one that is near the edge, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on one that is due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut the coagulum section lengthwise; and separate the section with stitches and the artery, and open the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place that needle over the other incision and make it penetrate through, and tighten the ligature with a firm double knot at two places - which causes you to be an apprentice in the extraction of two ligatures that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then punch the place where there are two ligaments with a spatula until blood comes out completely and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to produce pus until the ligaments fall apart, and then cure it with appropriate care until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess caused by vein section, you must have your hand on the abscess with a ligature and administer treatment, then insert the needle at the place where you have your hand, and make it penetrate; and use double thread to pull it out from the other side, and tie the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the grape vine ligature of two parts and both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear pulling out the thread, insert the needle through the entire abscess first, and tighten your four fingers at the incision of the needle.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in a part of it until what is in it comes out, then you incise the excess of the ligature, and leave what is left connected.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place a poultice on the inflamed part that you have immersed in wine and oil, and administer treatment with warm and wet care until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter of the abscess that occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, as abscess occurs in the ligature and vein, so it occurs in nerves when it occurs due to excessive labor or injury, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The worst thing is in the locations of the joints or ankles, or in any location where the joints are injured.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe abscess, and its color is similar to that of the body, and it is in the larger areas of the body, and when it is narrowed with great force, the patient feels like they are stunned.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess in the front of the body, and therefore it should not be ligated, and it is harmful all over, and does not spread to the sides neither in front nor behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be sewn with iron, because a strong blow will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those who are in the head or forehead should be ligated with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, you can use forceps and excise it cautiously.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, you should suspend it with an uncini and excise it, then close the wound and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On abscess section that occurs due to the cheek that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In many men observed in the abdomens of those and in other parts of the bodies of those who are called worms due to their resemblance to fungi, whose heads are thin and caps are large; and the labia of these are turned inside out, and it is small and it is greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his abdomen were two things that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them white, small worms.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the labia of these were turned inward and split, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise them and turn one inward by eighteen inches. and the other by six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation of incising them is that you consider whether the patient is humid and the color of the abscess is white, moist, thin pus; then you make an incision with a spatula flat, and be careful to cauterize in fire because many observed should have the section of it expelled without much blood; and if it bleeds, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and afraid, avoid incising with iron; but take a new leaden thread and tie it as described before; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tighten the lead thread in the constriction of the thread; therefore, you must not tighten the large amount of lead in the worm too much until it is excised and falls out by itself without labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the worm is of large size, you should make an incision with some cause for fear and anxiety, especially if it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Possibly you can incise the size of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And care for it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Be careful to avoid incising a worm that is of dark color, with little sensation, with regular shape, because it is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will return to the memory of cancer regarding this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Treatment of the umbilicus in an emergency.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The navel is treated for various reasons: either due to a fissure of the navel which exposes the intestine or hernia as in other ruptures; or due to bleeding that flows from veins or arteries as previously mentioned, or due to constricted ventositas within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fissure of the navel and exposure of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; it is less painful, and different treatments may be applied.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the exit of the intestine, place that area with something that has been recounted earlier, with a greater degree of diversity, and as you press it with your fingers, it becomes hidden; then return it; and strong heat is applied to that area, and the wound should be cleansed with much effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, it is less painful and not hidden when pressed with the hand, neither constricted nor swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to bleeding, darken the abscess by applying these signs:
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to rotten flesh, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and should be packed according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind, the touch of that area is less painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in that area should be considered if the umbilicus is due to bleeding from an artery, vein, or wind; you must be cautious of treating it, for there is fear and danger as taught in the chapter where abscesses caused by arteries and veins were discussed.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the umbilicus is due to intestine or hernia, you should command the patient to empty their bowels and remain extended; then place your hand around the entire umbilicus, and command them to stay facing upwards between your hands; then circle the area of the umbilicus with a thin spatula; extend the size of the abscess towards the navel's edges with great force; and tie it in the circuit of the umbilicus with strong thread or cord, and use a proper technique for tying.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Tie the middle of the extended abscess to the ligament and introduce the pointed instrument into that area as indicated and try to push the intestine back into its place; if you cannot find or hold it with the ligament, then you must extract the hernia and forcefully push the intestine back into the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have found the hernia, take it with one hand; and incise any excess tissue from that area.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is against your artery or vein, then encircle that area and return to your operation; take two needles and tie them with strong thread and insert the needles into the circuit you have created around the abscess in a cross pattern, making the needles penetrate; and tighten the abscess in four quarters over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish, remove the needles and allow the extended flesh to fall back on its own; or incise that area which is thin and may be easily closed, and care for it with something that is suitable for wounds until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the umbilicus is due to rotten flesh in that area or moisture, you should follow the steps as previously mentioned and extract the pus or moisture from that area, which you will then hold in place, and care for it with something suitable and that consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De curacio de cranc.	Treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said in the division, about the kind of crab and in what manner is the cure for it with medicines, and that it is a scourer in its healing because it is ferrous so that it is not ulcerated; we have said crab originates in the spleen and the caution in its healing.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that sometimes crab is in a place where it can be eradicated, such as the head, which is like the mammary glands or their corresponding parts in other members, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it becomes old and large, it is not necessary to treat it, because I cannot heal from it nor have I seen anyone else, nor has it been reported to me.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient alone for some days and purge them of black bile several times, and apply hot poultice to it if it is a clear and obvious abscess.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation is located, and warn them of the painkillers that are necessary for it; and bend the entire body from all sides with a good traction until there remains no cause for the pain.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow from it and do not open it lightly, squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you can handle among those available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it contradicts your intention to bleed thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood stops, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Treatment for edema.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of edema from water and the signs of each kind, and the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The one that is cured by iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not appropriate to apply iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypoxeresis because it is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this species of edema tympanitis with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient has already achieved debilitation, or is suffering from another disease such as edema in the lungs or stomach, like those, then be careful not to treat it with iron because there is a fear about it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient with an excess of strength and not suffering from another disease besides edema alone, and neither old nor young, then the method of operation on it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and apply pressure to their abdomen with your hand, direct the water out through the lower part of the penis, and take a mouthful of dry peppermint leaves according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	two pointed sharp parts, of an acute shape like peppermint leaves; but it should be in some shortness, little by little, so that during the operation with it you do not pass into the intestine and damage it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Consider whether the generation of edema is from the intestines, because in that case you must be careful to move away from the navel by about three fingers' width at the lower parts, on the right side of it above the penis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by about three fingers'width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Your incision must not be over the ribs where you want the patient to lie, so that fluids do not accumulate at that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate the entire intestine with an instrument, enter that incision and lift your hand with the peppermint leaves between the intestine and the bladder, and you will remove it; if there is the thickness of a nail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the bladder to where the peppermint leaves reach the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Extract that and introduce an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver, brass or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is sharp at the end like a pen nib, as shown here:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the upper part of it there is a band (armilla), so that when the instrument reaches the water, you immediately place the band on the instrument to evacuate the water in the best possible amount, because if you evacuate more than what is necessary at that time, the patient may die suddenly due to resolution of their animal spirit, or they may experience cynopsia which is near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate from there according to the quantity of its power and according to what the condition of the patient signifies regarding the quality of the pulse and goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then approach the instrument, and let go of the water that is retained because it is being held by the clamp that is over the cuff, and recommend to you that you perform it according to that method. (Note: "le instrument" refers to a medical tool or device used in the procedure mentioned previously.)
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	If the patient tolerates it, approach the instrument on another day, and extract a small amount of water, do so over several days with caution, and be careful not to let any water remain except a little. (Note: "aquo" refers to the medical procedure performed earlier.)
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in sandy ground, move the wound over hot bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medications until it is healed. (Note: "aquo" refers to the medical procedure performed earlier.)
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize the stomach, and the liver and spleen near the water extraction site, as I have previously reported in that treatment. (Note: "aquo" refers to the medical procedure performed earlier.)
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 15. (Note: This appears to be a heading or chapter title for the next section of the text.)
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose genital areas are not perforated (or undescended). (Note: It is unclear what "locs de la urina" refers to specifically, but it seems to indicate a problem related to the urinary system or genitals.)
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	In some cases, one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of the genital region is not perforated (or the cord is tight or it is not in its proper position). (Note: "la sua mayre" refers to the child's mother; "mixtio" seems to refer to the baby's genitals, but I am unsure of the exact meaning.)
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform a perforation as soon as possible with a thin probe in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then, tie a thin lead clamp around the cord and leave it for three days or four (days). (Note: It is not clear what "trauc" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the umbilical cord.)
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wishes to urinate or defecate, release it (the clamp). (Note: It is not clear what "aquel" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the baby's genitals or the umbilical cord.)
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not release the lead (clamp), it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not be able to pass through this closure. (Note: It is not clear what "aquest claure" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the baby's genitals or the umbilical cord.)
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	If the cord is tight, treat it with a lead clamp as previously stated, for several days until it is expanded. (Note: This likely refers to the baby's umbilical cord.)
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	If the cord is not in its proper position, release it, which occurs because in some cases, when the baby is born with an umbilical cord that is not properly positioned, the head of the penis cannot urinate at the birth canal, and you must lift the penis to the birth canal with your hand until the penis is raised over the birth canal. This is not a problem related to procreation because the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should, and it is a serious illness. (Note: It is not clear what "les partidas" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the vagina or the birth canal.)
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The procedure for the operation in this case is to position the patient on his back, and then extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand using forceful extraction, and cut the end of the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp instrument such as a needle or blade. This should be done in such a way that the meatus (urethral opening) aligns with the end of the penis and the umbilical cord falls into the meatus as it should. (Note: "lu" refers to the baby's penis, "la tua ma sinistra" means your left hand, and "pluma" means feather or pen.)
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation of bleeding (or hemorrhage), because it often happens in this procedure; pause and wait for the bleeding to stop, and treat the wound until it is healed. (Note: The exact nature of the operation being referred to is not clear.)
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 16. (Note: This appears to be a heading or chapter title for the next section of the text.)
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On cleaning the albuginea (fibrous tissue) that occurs in the foreskin of the penis and scabs, blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis. (Note: It is not clear what "albater" means specifically, but it seems to refer to a medical procedure related to the penis.)
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this condition occurs in the penis and is a painful protrusion of flesh. (Note: It is not clear exactly what "es eminencia de carn laga" means, but it seems to refer to a painful or problematic protrusion of tissue on the penis.)
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and the other is not malignant. (Note: It is not clear what specific conditions are being referred to as "malignant" or "not malignant.")
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is necessary that you suspend it using a thin wire and remove it until it is completely cleaned; then pause over the affected area and apply Egyptian ointment on it; and after that, treat it with Egyptian ointment daily until it is healed. (Note: "enguent" likely refers to an ointment or salve.)
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if an abscess is malicious and dark in color, you must administer cautery close to its incision and lance it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If an abscess is at the base of the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and it splits into two parts, one inside and the other outside, you must first open the abscess that is within, until it consolidates; then you should take care of the outside because if you heal the split while the foreskin is still not secure, it may burst.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it often happens in the genitals and on the darkened and corrupted foreskin, so you must cure everything that has already been damaged or is about to decay or has decayed; and apply liniment on it, which is made with ground mustard seeds and egg yolks and vinegar.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then you should heal that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if blood flow occurs, administer lunar cautery as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because cautery helps in two ways at the same time, one for blood flow and another for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is destroyed and everything is corrupted at that time, you must insert a lead tube into the foreskin for the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this attachment does not occur except in one who has an intact foreskin and circumcision is not required; and when attachment occurs due to a wound or abscess) it is necessary to break the adhesion with a blunt spatula until the liniment dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate that very strongly, you must break the adhesion between the head of the penis and the foreskin in some way, because the foreskin, when thin, can easily be perforated by its own fragility.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then you separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin instrument that is moistened in water to prevent them from sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And it should be healed with warm styptic until it is solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and on the treatment of those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other diseases: but because it is our operation and theirs by our will, and the removal of that part is specifically in children, it is necessary to assign the best procedure and the easiest method possible without harming their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore they did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because it was not used in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experience, the cause being that I have found that most craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they use liniment and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and I do not find a better purification with scissors, liniment, or needle in circumcision like with the nail because many times the skin is torn more than before because the foreskin has two layers and one layer remains behind, and it is easily punctured again and certain pain occurs.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is performed by alphecats and is called digital, which is used by shoemakers, is not secure for the incision of the tip of the male member because it easily enters the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in circumcision with the nail, a sharp knife can cut and spoil your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the skin of a child is naturally short and many times it does not need purification in that manner because there is no need for it, and I have seen it myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the purification that is performed with scissors and liniment with a needle has been found by me to be bad, because scissors are of proportional incision, so the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand in proportionately two sharp points, and cut it accordingly according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the liniment with a figure containing the skin of the penis from all sides, with which there can be no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you keep the child lying down more if he is one of those who are small, that you do not make him stand up except when you put the needle in his penis and let it go the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And make sure that he is happy in every way possible with whatever understanding he has of this procedure.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Make sure that he is positioned between your hands and not in the center; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Insert your hand into the penis of the child and inhale the skin, pull it out until the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify that part which has become dirty with filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Approach the designated location with the needle and double it over, then tie a knot at the bottom of the same thread, and hold it with the said finger and press down on the knot to ensure good retention, and make an incision between two knots.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Lift the plaster gently and remove the head of the splinter; let the little blood come out slowly, as it is better; dust powder on top of it and over the powder place a cloth in which is spread mulle of hog's lard in rose oil recently boiled; leave it there for another day; and treat it with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps is modified, this is its shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the unarticulated ones be not-cutting and the others be cutting, so that the nail does not pierce the flesh, and let the length of both be as sharp as the length of two handles together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in modification is that it forces out completely the internal plaster or you must make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should stretch out the one with your nail in front of the abscess and make an incision according to its size.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a tweezers and make an incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it lasts for more than three days and remains inflamed after the abscess has opened, you should let it drain pus cautiously, clean it gently, and make an incision according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Be careful of the head of the splinter, as it will not come out with that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat it with the remedy recommended in the powder treatment.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If an incision is made in the plaster to the correct size and the edges are observed, it will not become inflamed.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But treat it with what I have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction, caused by stones or clotted blood, or by tumors or abscesses, similar to those mentioned in the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved, and the retention of urine is due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on his back and stretch out his abdomen from the area above his waist, and the patient should bend forward as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is constricted to expel the stone at the back parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it is not dissolved as I have said, and the cause is severe for the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be narrowly conical, as fine as a bird's feather reed and about the length of a thumb and a half, to which there should be a narrow cannula at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of emptying the urine by the instrument is that you take the folded needle and thread it through the wool or cloth for good binding; and insert the extramitatz of the needle into the area behind the syringe, and make an incision with the forceps if any cause requires the wool, but insert it into the cannula forcefully. And move the syringe away from the body and the linen and apply the albumen of egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Hold the patient on a hard surface and wrap the bladder and penis with wet oil, olive oil and egg whites.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Insert the syringe gently until it reaches the base of the penis; fold the penis over the pubis; push the syringe into it; and push it further until it reaches the bladder, which should reach the desired result, and not follow this order if it is wrong, but follow the path where it twists.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then stretch out the penis with a small amount of wool, as the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it and treat the urine, using a syringe, not ceasing to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 49.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of clysters for the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or an abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood clots within it, or it is constricted by a stone, and you wish to distill waters and medicines from that place, then do so with an instrument called a cannula, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If the part of it is mute, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three passages: two from one side, as sometimes occurs.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning there is a concave place, in which there is something that is covered, according to its size it should be added, until some cause is drawn from the humors towards that place, it should be drawn, and when it is expelled, with what it is expelled, it should be added, and when it is expelled long, as a cannula is made in naval battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to expel humors from the bladder, insert the end of the cannula into the humor, and draw with it the thing that is covered in the opposite parts, because the humor will be expelled into the concavity of the cannula.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the cannula into the urethra as recommended in the syringe; and draw the humor with what you are drawing, because that humor will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The subtle crucifix form of the bladder, which is called cystoscopy, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or copper, the head of which resembles a small feather, and inside it there is a hollow tube.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder in motion, and stop at that place where you wish to cystoscope the bladder, and tie it firmly with a double stitch with a strong thread, and heat the humor there.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the cystoscope into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then press your hand on the bladder with the humor and structure until the patient feels that the humor has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate it completely in its entirety; and insert a strong needle into those passages, so that they rotate; and attach the circle as a syringe, so that you stop at the place where you wish to draw humors, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that in the instrument and proceed as you have done with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humor reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones (gallstones).
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their cure with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also mentioned the operation on a stone with the hand and the knife.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder is that which is implanted in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And we will now tell it with clear and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, say that stones formed in the bladder mostly occur in children; and their signs are that urine which is expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; the patient strains his abdomen, and passes bloody stools, and it is necessary to press on the lower back in these cases.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	The cure of children from this affliction occurs before they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people, it is advisable to use what is appropriate for them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that stone which is larger and the cure is easier; but if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we approach the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a cystoscope which extracts all the fissure that is in the bladder; because that fissure sometimes prohibits the emergence of the stone and the search for it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Approach the patient with their feet and make them lie down in a position such that the stone descends towards the opening of the bladder or occasionally jumps out from its location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Prepare the patient with your hands and have them lower their clothes, so that the bladder is fully exposed.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Approach and completely expose the affected area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, you should immediately make an incision on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If the stone is not visible completely, you must anoint it with your left hand's oil if the patient is a child, or your right hand's oil if the patient is a grown man, and insert your finger into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Find the stone and insert your finger to retrieve it.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Turn the stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Approach and press on the stone with your finger and expel it outward through the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the servant to press on the bladder with their hand; command another servant with their right hand to spread the patient's legs apart at the incision site, and command another servant with their left hand to raise the bed sheet that is below the legs, in the location where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approach and insert an instrument shaped like this:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Cut through the area between the anus and genitals, not too much, at the left side; make the incision over the stone and your finger should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the size of the stone that can be possible, and not too wide, for if you press too hard with your finger on the stone, the incision may be difficult; and remember, it is better to err on the side of caution.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Know that some stones have edges and corners, making their extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	That stone is round like a peach pit and is easily extracted.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If the stone has edges and corners, adjust it in the groove.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If you are not careful, you must apply pressure on the stone or press it gently but correctly, with a tool whose tip is similar to a file and should be applied to the stone without going astray; or insert a subtle curved instrument beneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot apply pressure on it, widen the incision slightly, and if you see bleeding, cauterize it with concentrated vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, first press your hand to the opening of the bladder and insert your finger; then insert another small instrument near it; proceed similarly if there are more stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, ignorance is that you make a large incision, because the patient may experience one of two outcomes: death or prolonged urine distillation, due to which the location is not completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the stone's removal with care or use forceps to break it into smaller pieces and extract them piece by piece.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	When you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood ointment and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or rose oil and warm water, on top of it to prevent post-operative infection.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Place the patient on their side and do not remove the linen for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Once you have removed the linen, clean the area with warm water and oil, and care for it with an antiseptic and antibacterial ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if pus, cautery, and corrosive appear in the wound, which resembles blood in the bladder being frozen (and this is known as hematuria), insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood, for if it remains, it can cause the bladder to corrupt and decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Clean the wound with soap, water, and salt, and use any appropriate opposition until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	It is necessary during the entire healing process that you lie down with both legs and adjust the medications placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the vagina, and urine flow is prohibited, treat it with what I recommended before proceeding to surgery, for prolonged treatment of this condition can cause surgery; and as I mentioned earlier, take a perforating iron with this shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a triangular shape, sharp, inserted into a rod (or tube)
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take the iron and tie it to the base of the triangle to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the urethra, penetrating with ease until it reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Rotate the instrument slowly in that small stone, and you will perform the perforation on it gradually until the other side penetrates; for the urine is soon released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on that which is broken from the stone on the side of the urethra, because it is fractured and forgotten by the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not possible due to any reason that prevents it, then tie an iron over the stone, and another iron above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then strike the stone in the urethra between two incisions.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract that (the stone).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then remove the ligaments and clean the clotted blood from the wound, which is made in the bladder.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And there is no need for the iron to be tied around the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligament on top serves as a precaution, because when the iron is removed near the edge of the stone, it returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	You are required when you remove the iron from above that you lift the skin over it, or else you will not comply with your obligation, and the wound will heal in this way as has been said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and it is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first one is because the woman who gives birth easily is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is that you will not find a woman who knows if she has been with a doctor when she is a virgin, or belongs to married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is because you do not find women who know this craft, especially the operation with iron.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth one is that the location of the incision for stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring a deep incision, and there is fear in this.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if the situation requires it, you must take a woman who knows this craft and is scarce.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of her, then search for one who is experienced and skillful, or present a married woman educated in the affairs of women, or a woman who has mastered this craft in some way.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore present her and command her to do everything that you order her, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; this is because she must determine whether the woman is a virgin, then place her hand in her vagina and seek the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if she finds it, extract it from her hand, and then command her to make an incision on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, command the married woman to enter her hand into the patient's vagina and examine the stone; place her left hand on the bladder and press it firmly with good judgment.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, when she finds it, you must gently extract it from the bladder opening on the side and with the assistance of her strength until it reaches its destination at the correct location.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And make an incision on the edge of the hand to determine the location of the stone in any place; the incision should be centered on that side and the incised tissue should not remain attached to the extracted stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into the incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to its size, knowing that the stone will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Know that the types of stones are like seeds: for some are small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have rough edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know the types of stones because you indicate what you mean about it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see blood flow, adjust the location of the cautery and apply it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation when the stone has been forgotten (removed).
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is due to the arrow that is inserted, then you stop the bleeding with powder on the location and tighten it with pulvils and sutures, and do not repeat this; leave the stone in place and do not extract it, because a woman will die from pain.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the wound has become putrid after several days, if it swells up, then return to your operation once the pus is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Capital sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for strangulated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A swollen hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which contains the intestines and is called the sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is in the fatty tissue itself which nature has prepared for this purpose in the separation of the intestines, until it becomes a new intestine; and it is the membrane of the genitals between the white membrane which I have said is not the case.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, so this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens by an impact made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has different colors; the color of it is either turning yellow or blood red, purple, black and foul-smelling, or white swollen, and this is what is most dangerous.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this accumulation of water is recognized are as follows: if it is in the white membrane that I have said, then the abscess will be rounded and declining a little along its length like an egg-shape, and the genitals appear, since the moisture contains it entirely.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the fatty tissue itself, then the abscess will be rounded with the separation of the intestines, and thus it is considered to be another intestine.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the membrane of the genitals and the white membrane, cut it with scissors.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And in order to know the color of the moisture, you must examine the color of the moisture within the abscess with a cut made through the center of its shape; and according to what comes out from the interior, judge accordingly.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of it with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be lanced if this is possible for you, and sometimes clean the body of him.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then place a small cushion on his back for some reason and cover him with damp cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right side, who will extend his leg two arms' length to the membrane of the genitals and the lower abdominal wall.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a broad spatula and cut the membrane of the genitals from the same place along its length up to the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision according to the right angle along the line where the hair of the genitals begins, up to the white membrane containing it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Remove that, and observe it, and keep yourself for this purpose so that you do not cut into it; and your excision with which you have removed it should be suspended by the largest and most delicate vein, and scrutinize the excision according to its quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the swollen white membrane with a wide hole and drain all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between the two lips of the incision with scissors and stretch out the white membrane at its edges; do not touch the membrane of the genitals containing it, and make an incision in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Make an incision of the entire membrane or in pieces, and especially the thinner part of it, because if you do not scrutinize the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	More if the intestine processes from outside its membrane during the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the white membrane, return it inside and then sew together the two lips of the membrane of the genitals with sutures, and treat it in this way as other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the intestine corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you remove the tools that are its supports and extract the intestine, and treat it as I have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if the water is accumulated in two parts separately, you must know that there are two hernias; therefore incise the part that you have done on the other side, and if it appears to you that it is a hernia, then you do the operation.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you will abstain from blood, enter into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or in oil-soaked wool; and cover another wool which you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the lower abdominal wall; and cover it with double and thick cloths and linen, and let them lie there according to this pattern:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and place two cloths soaked with carminated wool according to this pattern; the ends of them should be sewn with thread or wet wool, and they should be attached with a structure in the arms of the shirts, and one of the ends will take hold of the buttock up to the back, and the second will take hold at the pubic bone, and two ends on two thighs on one side and two ends on two shoulders, and the entire incision should be sewn together in the arms of the shirts.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of surgery using iron; it is that you take a subtle cautionery knife and insert it into the hernia area near the groin, and it is lit when we have found the white chalk containing water, then you take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce that white chalk, and light it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then stretch the white chalk and cut it, remove it with scissors, remove it with a subtle cautery that is lit; and pierce it as far as possible until you eradicate everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Know that this operation is more safe and distant from bleeding, and better than surgery with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an abscess at the time of cutting or cauterizing, or bleeding, then you must cure that which opposes you for it, with treatment as appropriate for each case as previously stated.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not hope for the second operation due to its horror, you must perform perforation as previously recommended; and it is certain that you, according to what I have said about signs, must confirm that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You must then place the patient on a raised bed, and pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a shallow incision, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then pause over the area and let it lie there, so that the remaining water remains.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And cure it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to draining the water at that time you perforate it: this should not be done except when the white pus in the wound's orifices creates resistance and prevents the drainage of the water, in which case you must put a pen or instrument with which the water is extracted from the edema, following its design; or adjust in the pressure of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Know that the water returns, and is stopped for about two months or more; and when it has stopped, you must perform perforation according to the aforementioned method, as the patient will pass through their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision for fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in incision on this hernia there is fear of danger even in the best arrangements; for which reason I see the abandonment of it and being saved by the better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that case, and the characteristics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that abscesses are formed in bodies composed of genitals and caused by several factors: either by acute aggressive fluid accumulation which is poured into the genitals, or by injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	Its color depends on the color of the body, and it is not detected in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A flat abscess is hard, whose color is dark, and it is not felt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is done by knotting of the arteries, and swelling of those that are already perceived as remembered, or swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But the swelling of arteries is recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not necessary to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But the one caused by swelling of veins is not dispersed by any cause, you must press it with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type there may be incision and on the other fleshes; and you insert the genitals, and let the water out at the top, and extract it from the white chalk, and release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and pierce the suspensory that you release from all parts of the water's opening.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the water is already consolidated in those fleshy areas, you must extract the water and pierce it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any reason of the chalk, or between that which is between the bladders, you must remove all that adhesion and pierce it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the place of adhesion that is behind, you must pierce everything that is from it and extract the water as previously stated.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, you fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and wine; and treat it with the other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	The cure for a hernia is from a root (or plant).
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A boil surrounded by a kind of sheath resembling the scrotum and with softening of the testicles is difficult for the patient to exercise movements or walk.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear for what comes before it (a warning).
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must say what operation should be done next after those initial ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Therefore say that it is necessary to seize the patient on an elevated chopping block; and then separate the suspenders of the testicles at the junctures (the lower part of the body); and apply the belt of the genitals with your hands, with liniments proven effective for the loins, and let another servant extend it forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then insert a sharp pointed tool through a transverse incision on the right side of the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then remove all the tissue from that area, as you have said in the extraction of archery in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert an awl with a double point into that place where the boil occurred, and let one of them be in the first layer under it, and the other watched closely at the bottom (end) of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make an incision in the middle of that place with a straight cut according to the length of the body and extract what has been added from the putrid and corrupted fluids (pus).
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And cure the wound with treatment for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels do not become blocked, because it is not harmful for this purpose.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the boil occurs on all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be blocked by the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and become shriveled up, or shrink up so as not to be helpful to them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment for internal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The cause of this internal hernia is a cut made in the expanded cavity over the abdomen of the intestines, because when the intestine ruptures it goes into one of the bowels.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be from the cavity or the extension of it, and both types occur for various reasons: blows, falls, shocks, loud noises, or due to a heavy cause, or similar reasons.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, it is a boil that extends around the anus because the cavity compresses the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it is due to a cut in the cavity, because at first it causes a sudden, intense pain; and the boil appears in various places apart from the expected place, and that is precisely due to the bowel, and the body extends beyond the edge of the cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases the intestine is forgotten and it is called internal hernia "zirbal."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with wind, and sometimes the bowel tears open and this is retained, and it is a grave danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and particularly when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the types of this illness with sharp instruments, fear must be avoided, so it is necessary to avoid hunting in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of this operation is to command the patient to return the bowel with his hand to its cavity if it protrudes into it (the body), and place a cushion on his lower back between your hands, and lift his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stitch the belt that surrounds the belt of the testicles at the junctures, and make an incision in the entire length of the belt; and insert two fingers into the edges of the incision as needed to cut the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is large enough that some part of it can be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And remove that cavity where the belt of the testicles is located, until the white hard cavity of each side is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into the place where the testicle is located between the white hard cavity, which is below the belt, and between the white cavity and resolve the adhesion that exists behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And place your hand on the belt of the testicles at the sides, and with that extend the white hard cavity on its sides with your left hand, lift the testicle and the white cavity to the side of the incision; and command the servant to extend the testicle and you dissolve the adhesion behind it with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with your hands that there is no cause of the bowel wrapped in the white hard cavity.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you place it in the abdomen below (the lower body).
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And you take a thick-pointed awl with five sharp points, and insert it into the rear of the white hard cavity (below the belt line), which is where the incision is located; and you make an incision in the extremities that protrude from the awl to four sharp points, and count them on some figure in the manner of a cross; and let one of them hold the cavity that we have said is below the belt with great force from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Approach the ends of the feet and wrap them tightly with a bandage until some of the fluids that cause inflammation cannot pass, to prevent an abscess from forming.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Wait for a while according to the first wrapping, let three days pass; and leave the space between these two wrappings, which is as wide as the size of the finger, and insert everything roundly, and pour hot oil over it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Approach the division below the scrotum for section, from which blood and pus should run as we have recommended in what has been said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Approach the wound with wool soaked in oil and wait; then administer the bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes a white linen is cauterized, as we mentioned to prevent bleeding, because often this happens), and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the wound heals slowly, boil some water and wrap it around, then wait until it falls off as we have said before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Approach the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI. (66)
De hernia ventosa.	On ventose hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, no one has been seen to be cured by iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	In the beginning they said that this should be done as we have recommended for hernia caused by water; that is, you press the vessels near the section and seal the area around the abscess with something that stops it, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Treat the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII. (67)
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the rupture that occurs in angina.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in angina as we have said before, and you should open it up.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Do not give any reason for hernias to the genitals, and if they do occur, it is rare; and return them back at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time has been prolonged with this method (bandaging), a fissure should be made in the scrotum before the hernia descends into the scrotum; and this occurs due to the extension of the scrotum, which happens as we have said in angina, which causes it to become stretched out, making the area weak and susceptible to abscesses.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The cure is with cauterization, as described earlier.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is cured with iron following this method: the patient lies on his back between your hands, and you seal the area of the rupture of the abscesses with a section as wide as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Approach the white intestine that is below the scrotum until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Approach the rod and place it on the protruding part of the intestine, and press it against the abdominal wall.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Approach the two protruding parts on the end of the rod-like intestine and sew them together with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Approach the end of the rod and do not make any incisions in the intestine, or extend the opening, nor use other methods as you know in the treatment of internal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Approach that with the cure for sores, and when you incise the fields, clean it up and restore the sore within until it is solidified; because the scab has not formed and the prominence of the break is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	A cautery is better in that place, since it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the scrotum of the testicles is swollen in some men it is softened with herbs, since the flesh that is between it is softened and the care of it should be observed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked in its treatment that he make the patient lie according to his side, and incise the entire swollen scrotum that has been softened over the natural scrotum; and then adjust two lips with stitching.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut at the beginning of the excess swollen scrotum with three or four stitches and with a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then incise between the stitches, and care for other sores until they are healed and the fields heal up.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but there is a reason for me to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except in two ways, of which one is when it is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is questioned about it, who knows the cure for it if it occurs; and the other way is that we sometimes have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore, say that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation or by making an incision and cutting off the testicles.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	However, in the castration by strangulation, the method of operation is that we tie up the animal in hot water until its testicles are softened and lined up and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take hold of those with your hand until they have dissolved and do not appear again.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In cases of castration due to a split (fissure) and section, you must have the animal (or instrument) and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then draw together the sutures (suspensors), and make an incision through each hole with one cut.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then make an incision where each abscess has been cut open.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on the abscess, but treat it with a fine poultice over the vessels (veins).
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better when it is done by strangulation, because strangulation weakens the testicles and causes the animal to lose its desire for sex.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70).
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: one where it appears when the space between the scrotum and the testicles is filled, in which case there is a female vulva present with pubic hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of these [hermaphrodites] have a urinary passage that is located in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is one type: it is such that the female genitalia over the pubis resembles two male testicles, but it is slightly smaller and is divided by a small separation like male pubic hair and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: one for men and one kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary to cut open the flesh closely so that the poison escapes from it, and then cure it with other treatments for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second kind of men who have a urinary passage in their scrotum, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI (21).
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the treatment of leprosy and excessive flesh in women due to certain causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Leprosy is treated naturally and is improved by following certain regulations; but it is sometimes excessive in some women to such an extent that it spreads like leprosy in men and extends into the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must remove the excess of leprosy with your hand or an instrument and cut it open.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not continue cutting, especially near the root, to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then heal it with treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Newly born flesh is flesh that is produced in the mother's womb until it fills up, and it is called "cauda" because of its appearance; therefore, it should be treated like leprosy, and it should be cut open as we do for leprosy, and healed until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII (72).
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of jaundice.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Jaundice is when the female genitalia is not perforated or has a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and this is caused by poorly sutured flesh or strangulated bowel or spleen.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused either in the mother's womb, during childbirth, due to a suppuration above or below it, or due to a discharge, and it is forbidden to engage in intercourse, pregnancy, or conception, and it is also recommended that menses be avoided.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The diagnosis of this condition is made by examination of the cervix using forceps or a speculum if the opening is visible; otherwise, you should examine it with your fingers or with light.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the opening is due to strangulation of the bowel, and it is near the two labiae, you should dig and break it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers between the labiae and press gently on both sides with the forceps.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be on her back with her legs spread apart and you should extend the labiae with force until the strangulated bowel is broken and the opening is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And apply cotton dipped in oil to the area and leave it there for a few days to prevent the wound from scarring.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the strangulated bowel is large and thick, then it is necessary to incise it with a lancet or a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the opening is due to sutured flesh, you should suspend it with an instrument and then incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as opium, dragon's blood, and vinegar, mixed with white wax.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then insert a broad leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that for several days and administer warm liquid.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it heal with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes it happens in the greater growth of other fleshes, and then it is necessary to incise them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	However, if it is for cancerous abscesses, do not apply iron in any way to the cancerous abscess which is in the major one.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red lump that sometimes occur in women's vaginas.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized as the orifices of mottled veins in which blood continues to flow constantly; and old hemorrhoids that have become firm.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of these and the signs of these, and therefore I will say those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when in the cervix of the vagina and do not appear to the senses, then there should be no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	However, those that are in the orifices of the vagina which can be felt, are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to place the woman in more heat and apply oil of roses or sharp wool, or linen, and incise them with a lancet.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And apply powder over those (hemorrhoids) to stop the blood flow from one of the incisive powders without pain, such as opium and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And apply hot water bottles to her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flow continues, then make that sit in a decoction of sumach, mustard seeds, coriander and similar ones.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And apply barley flour with honey and vinegar mixed with water on the anus.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, it is good; if not, make it adhere with two forceps, and to the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And apply wool and immerse it in the juice of colandre, or the juice of arnagleza, or the juice of garlic with repentine vinegar and let it adhere to the place; and let the place be treated with gargles until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	However, oil of roses which is harsh should be cautiously used, it is necessary to incise that which appears to you according to what I have said in "they's entrails".
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let it heal until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of a septic abortion in the uterus.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Different types of abscesses that occur in the uterus, such as cancer, abscessed lapis, ulcers, bladder stones, fistulas hemorrhoids, ruptures, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already said about these diseases, their types and signs, and the treatments for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about cautery abscess that appears in the uterus when it comes from abscesses that are treated with medicine, and if you want to know how the operation of iron is performed on it.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, you must consider if the pain of the abscess in the patient begins suddenly with blows and chills and fever, and sometimes it swells and if you can feel that over it, then do not operate on it with iron, but let it heal with water that helps in the maturation of the disease until the acuteness of the accident ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must make the woman lie on a stretcher that has two stretchers; and she should recline on her back and place her feet near the lower abdomen, her thighs spread open, her arms placed under her breasts, and each one in its appropriate position.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows the doctor to the right side and administers the instrument with which the cervix of the uterus is opened, the shape of which will come according to those cases that make it necessary.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you should be in the same position as the cervix of the uterus of the woman, and whatever goes into the uterus from the instrument should not exceed the cervix of the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	However, if the instrument is larger than the cervix of the uterus, it is necessary to apply powder on the texture of the cervix of the uterus so that the introduction of any instrument into the cervix of the uterus is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary to let the liquid that flows out of the instrument of the doctor go above and for the one who ministers to hold the instrument and turn the liquid into it until it is opened the cervix of the uterus.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When an incision appears, it is touched with the hand and lanced, then it is necessary that you cut off its head with a lancet.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the pus is drained, it is necessary that you plug the wound with a plaster soaked in warm oil or vinegar in which there is some styptic substance, and place a linen cloth on top of the wound at its opening.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	When you separate the mother and the afterbirth, place a clean wool cloth soaked in water in which evil-smelling herbs have been boiled on top of the navel.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be cured for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	After some days, the navel and the wound are washed with water and salt, and then with water in which rosemary or long-armed asterisk is boiled, and then return to the enema.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is inside the navel and swollen, it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, having care of it as has been said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies when they appear unnaturally according to figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth by signs, and when you see the woman expelling at the onset of labor and desires to breathe air, and above her is lifted by that which comes out with birth, and hastens the emergence of the ectopic pregnancy, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and its head is the first to emerge, and the second one either attached to it or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's abdomen is pressed so that the embryo emerges gently because if it emerges over its head, the second one comes out with it and is cleaned of superfluous matter with good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if this birth is unnatural and incurable because when the embryo comes out above its feet and the body of it is outside the head of it and its legs are, and one hand or foot. The opening sentence translates to: "Either his head or his hand is turned towards his belly, and he has violently twisted his neck onto his shoulder, and the appearance of his body is not praiseworthy."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	The necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and skillful in all those cases, and avoid errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you are showing the entire figure of them, and which device is in them for it to be understood by him and be standing upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the man ejaculates on his head due to natural urge, and he is violent towards the woman and it happens with difficulty, and sometimes the potency of him has already been weakened, then do this seizer, or what women have, and evaporate the semen from him with fenugreek juice and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife enters between her thighs with a small spatula and cuts the second opening, or dries it up with her nail into which the moisture that is in it flows.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the woman's belly until she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If she does not give birth, then it is necessary to rub her with egg white and fenugreek mucilage with a pumice stone.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And command him to do it, rub him with a rough cloth and make him vomit with the condition, and open his mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be forgotten soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the two heads of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them gradually with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If it does not enter, the woman is made to lie on a stone and lift her feet up, and the stone is moved on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the heads are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then you incise them and extract the rotten part of the fetus or seize the body with cloth and extract it, because it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The embryo on his feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes out on his feet, it is necessary that you push them upwards, and then turn the fetus small, and open its mouth, and grab one of its feet and stretch them out little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If it is inside the vagina, then command him to push, and make him vomit with a condition, because it will be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If it is not forgotten by the water we have recommended, then you return the small fetus little by little into its natural position, because it will be easily forgotten soon.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take egg white and dissolved gum, grind everything well in the mortar, and apply the mixture to the cervix of the woman, at the base of her stomach.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And make that seizer in hot water until it reaches the hypogastric region.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts of him have become softened, then make him inhale myrtle smoke and suspend it upon him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the inhalation has lasted for an hour, then you make him seizer on a stone, and make him vomit and open his mouth, and take it out, and press gently on the lower part of his stomach to expel the fetus soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The fetus on its shoulders and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus comes out in this manner, then you apply a device to gradually insert its hands into him; and the woman is made to lie on her shoulder, and his feet are hanging down, and they are placed on a bed, and she compresses them together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And you press gently on his stomach little by little and extract what is in the armpits of him up to the lower part of the vagina.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, then you grab his feet and shake them violently, and gradually press down on what is above the hypogastric region into the vagina until the fetus is delivered.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And you insert his hands and deliver the small fetus little by little, and command the woman to push until the fetus is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The long-term fetus hanging from one of its arms.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If there is a reduction of the arm, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her bear down.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if bearing down does not work, then make her lie on a bed and hit her buttocks violently with a hammer, and administer the medicine that I have recommended with mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the labor has begun, then make the seizer on a stone, and study on the reduction of the arm, and deliver the fetus in its natural position, and make her vomit and command him to push until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The fetus on the expanded shoulders of its mother, and the opening of it is at her waist.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife have hold of the fetus and gently turn it little by little, with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is swollen and hardened, then you pause on the affected area with what we recommend for oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And apply small amounts of the poultice gradually, and when you have made it, then place that pestle on a pestle and command it to be tilted towards the right side, and also command someone to hold it; make it shake with condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Delivery of the fetus prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the midwife encounters an obstructed labor using this method, consider, and then you shall incise the second one with your nail as far as it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended on the face and neck, then you shall incise the navel to ensure it does not become stuck and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently push the child into the birth canal until you feel resistance and command the woman to take some breaths, and he shall easily come out if it is God's will.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Birth of twins or multiple children.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins born prematurely are often weak, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and usually fatal; however, it is not unnatural, but rather due to the mother's condition.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count the twins, regardless of how many there are, a second one, and separate them by cutting the ligament at the navel of each one. Sometimes they are easily born naturally, while sometimes they are born easily due to an unnatural cause, and some are born easily without being washable, as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, you must care for them in the manner we have described for treating abnormalities.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mother is thin and skilled in all ways that facilitate ease and subtlety, and delay, and is clever according to each figure prepared by the midwife for the good of the patient.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which forms in the womb from embryos and aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes the number of pregnancies in a woman can be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, or even more. However, it is essential to confirm that a woman has had either zero or eleven pregnancies, as this was caused by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this requires that the midwife be knowledgeable in understanding which of these is similar to the other and therefore apply it accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 66.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of a dead child.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead child according to what has been said in the division of medicine and it is not outside of that, and you are convinced that you must use force, then consider whether the woman is of good character and not one of those for whom danger is feared due to the circumstances surrounding her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman must be placed on her left side with her head inclined downwards and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should hold one leg or tie it to the left side to ensure that the body does not extend during the extraction of the child.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	You should moisten the woman's mouth with oils and poultices made from althea, fennel, and other seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	You should anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and poultices, you should enter your hand into the woman with ease, and you should surround the area where the fingers will be inserted in the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In the appropriate place: then consider whether the child is prepared to be delivered on its head, and you shall insert your fingers in the heels, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, in the crook of its arm, near the ribs, or beneath the hip bones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if it is to be delivered on its feet, you shall insert in the ankles or the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	It is necessary that you hold the finger with your right hand, and bend its curvature in the location between the fingers of your left hand, and enter your hand with ease and insert the finger into one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the desired result.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another hand or the third one if necessary on the abdomen of the patient, to prevent distention but not extension according to its natural length.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	It should be good all around, in order that the swelling may be alleviated as much as possible, just like it is done when extracting a tooth and rooting it out.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	It is necessary for him that what is between [the swelling and the affected area] should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some oil on her fingers and gently massage the affected area and rub the retained part.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the birth is forgotten, the fingers should be pressed into the place that is deeper inside; and do this until everything has been expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is outside the other and it cannot be reduced by pressure, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it until it has all been expelled, either at the joint of the hand or at the coccyx.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And in the same way, do this to the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens that pressure can be applied to the swelling, or water is collected at the head, then insert between the blades of the spine spreader and cut the head and drain the water, or break it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Do the same if the fetus is large-headed by nature: and then insert it with an instrument called "algeometre", or take it out with an alundat as mentioned before, and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and contracted by the furculum, then it should be cut open until the moisture that is in the feet has been drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there are no complications and it is not swollen or enlarged, then you should cut the head immediately as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the afterbirth is everted or in the wrong place, then it is necessary that you perforate it to drain the moisture that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then the extraction of it is easy and the direction to the mother's mouth is easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if the fetus is contracted in the abdomen and feet, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth that you will wrap around your hand, and cut the abdomen and feet to let the fluid that is in them flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are stuck and the head turns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, then insert your hand in the anus of the fetus and find the head with it, and pull it towards the mouth of the mother, and place a finger or two fingers inside, and pull it with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an afterbirth that is in the umbilicus, then it is necessary not to rub it; instead, administer a moist and oily emulsion.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Apply plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on the side, then pierce it if possible; and administer what has been mentioned in the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, cut it into pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	It is necessary to avoid any cause within the second childbirth.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your work, administer what has been said about the treatment of afterbirths that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, then send to a stytic water and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the belly of which there was a dead fetus, and above that fire another one observed.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	After a long time there was an afterbirth in the navel of the uterus; and it swelled so much that it burst into fire, and began to emit smoke.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to cure it, and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some powerful plasters with strong adhesive to it, and extracted a bone from it, and after several days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly surprised because there is no bone in the womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And so the wound healed, and many small bones were extracted from it, the woman living in that condition for a long time, but recovering gradually with a slight loss of arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not wonder about that, since in such cases there is knowledge and help for the doctor when administering treatment with his hand.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	In the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the lever used to open the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strangulation in which the veins are compressed, at which compression there are two benefits in the extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Perhaps this benefit should be more subtle with a constrictor, and it should be made of ivy or hazelwood stick.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The diameter of each stick should be two fingers and the edge of both sticks one finger, and the length of each is a little over a palm; in the middle of the two sticks there are two adjustments of that same stick which have already been fastened, the length of which is a little more than the width of a palm, and the diameter of each is slightly more than two fingers.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth to open it with those when you perform the prescribed benefits.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it from ivy or hazelwood sticks in the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it (the instrument) there should be two extensions like this, and the length of these extensions is a little over a palm, and the diameter of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with it (the instrument), you should first position the woman on a bed, with her legs raised and apart, and open the space between them.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then place your hand on the instrument in a manner similar to when you forceps compress, according to the width that you want for the mouth of the mother up to which the metal will be inserted.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertebral manipulation that the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of impulsion with which one pushes something:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form for anamnesis, in which the head is crushed:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps at the end, like this at times, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like this at times, at the end of which are teeth like the teeth of a vice, with which it is inserted and crushed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of brief anamnesis:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of incision with a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of incision with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps with teeth of scissors, in which the head of the instrument is crushed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spatula having two extremities, at which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spatulas wide:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when there are many species of that instrument and they are prepared, the craftsman should be as light in his operation and as much as possible according to the quantity of men.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect any of those instruments, for the necessity of them is not to be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the second tooth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is retained, it is necessary to order the patient to hold their jaw open, and then you should command that person to cough, and firmly press your hand on their mouth and nose, and if by doing so it has gone beyond (the tooth), good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, you should take a woolen cloth and perforate it with a hole, and place the herbs that are used to open the mouth of the mother, such as calamint, chamomile, anise, camomilla, scicadus arabicus, cassia lignea, and santaurea, in that hole.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water during the tide, and place that one on fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then insert a funnel made of cane into the mother's mouth and keep it in until the vapour comes to the concave part of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then let that vomit similarly as we have said, and the second one will come out quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the treatment remains close and is not evacuated, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or alum solution, and insert it into the cavity and seek the second one (finger), and when you find it, take it out little by little... If it is attached to the mother's anus, then insert the hand as recommended, and when you find the second finger, extract it little by little so that the mother does not suffer severe pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then lubricate both right and left hands with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Adjust the amount of attraction so that it obeys and evacuates from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with stirring and medication of water with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If none of the causes we have recommended is forgotten, then be careful not to overdo it in the process of extraction, but what comes out of her must be placed in the woman's vagina and anointed with oil and tetraformula; for it will heat up within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it becomes hot, the evil authority is raised to the head and stomach, and then it torments the patient; therefore, they should be administered sub-fumigations and appropriate treatments.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Moreover, among the ancients, sub-fumigation with cinnamon and dried figs has already been spoken of.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated should be used to retain menstruation and the second one (finger):
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Made of metal or wood.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	It should be stopped at the thin end inside the cavity and the wide end above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed on the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	It should contain whatever is consumed by the sub-fumigation, and another one follows.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment for an unperforated child's bottom.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Newborn children and those whose bottoms are not perforated, which must be treated with care and attention.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife should pierce that opening with her own finger; and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula, and make sure not to touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Place some wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and anoint it with oil inside, until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is obstructed, then pierce a cannula for several days and stop when the child wants to relieve itself.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	Occasionally there is obstruction of the bottom due to plague or abscess; therefore, that obstruction should be incised, and it should be treated with what has been said about the treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment for fistulas that occur afterwards.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur after the delivery are not painful and thick, those that occur near the anus or in the space of one delivery.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or moles.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	If the thickening is old and has become damp with white, foul-smelling pus or subtle ulcers, some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those that penetrate are recognized by what comes out of them during discharge and by the odor; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation, and it is beneficial for the worms to come out.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Some of these fistulas occasionally penetrate into the bladder space, and into the muscle of the scrotum; and some of these fistulas penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the buttock.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	That in which a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate is that you put your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of wood or metal into the fistula when it is not turbid.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If it is turbid in that one, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel it from top to bottom and do not perceive any cause of discharge, worms, or odor as mentioned earlier, then you know that it is not penetrating, and you can proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or muscle of the scrotum, the meaning is clearly that it is urine from that one and the place should be consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and pain occurs in the area, the sign is that the probe enters if there is no turbidity inside the bone, and pain occurs in the area around the delivery; and it becomes pus quickly; and that treatment does not work, nor is it consolidated with oil.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the treatment of them is the labor and futility of foolish doctors on which they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected, as I have told you, and what I have proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The patient should lie between your hands upon his back and raise the legs into the air, with the hips inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and then you should try to enter the cavity with lead or iron if it is in the fistula, until you know where the probe goes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you should insert your finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a resistance while inserting your finger to probe, or if you feel something hard with your finger, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and do not work on that one, because healing does not exist in it, as we said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some may say that it heals in some men too.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which healing is expected in that one also involves igniting cautery thinly according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and inserting that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then you should apply it twice or thrice until you know that all the tissues adjacent to the fistula that are similar to feathers of birds are completely tightened.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And heal that one with bandages wrapped in cotton until all the tightened tissues can be seen, and heal that one with medicines to generate and consolidate flesh, and if it heals, it is good; and if not, then it is not healed within a certain time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the anus with your finger, and between that and the suspected probe which may be of flesh or tissue, and sometimes the fistula is found in the scrotum where the skin surface is healed, then you should dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying along with the probe, and it should go deep into the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the tip of the probe ends, and through the probe the tissue is released and caught.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And heal those fistulous tissues that are similar to the shaft of a bird's feather and remain without any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if pus flows out between you and your action when probing those tissues, then burn it with fire or an acute instrument, as cauterizing with fire is useful: it tightens the fistulous tissues, and abscesses the pus through drying of the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And heal that one with bandages wrapped in cotton or in coarse cloth until the wound is covered by scab, and then heal the ulcer with hard flesh generating and consolidating medicines.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And the medicines in which there is stopping and drying: when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has entered into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and probe it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel resistance and it is suspected to be tissue or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate in that one but by faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is administered in one of three ways: either you cauterize it as previously mentioned; or you cut it until you obtain the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to enter and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting beyond the scrotum, because if you penetrate the rectum involuntarily, and it causes pain to the patient immediately and without his will; and heal it with what has been mentioned before, which works quickly, or stretch that tissue and clean the pus that dries close to the anus, as previously mentioned, either with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then clean those fistulous tissues in the section below where you can with percrustation; and finally, force yourself to restore the entire ulcer with cutting, and if the abscess pus is not consolidated and remains open in the division of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the side of the anus around the skin surface on the body and near the edge of the scrotum, then you take a sharp probe with perforated tip, similar to an awl for preparing coarse cloth in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And he penetrates into that faithful envelope of five fields or around those areas; and he approaches the fistula, trying to reach its cavity until he achieves it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If he penetrates into the margin of the anus closely, then you extract the feces from that wound so that you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the feces and adjust both ends evenly, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when the feces penetrates deeper into the flesh, tighten it within until those skins are incised which are between the ends of the feces and that they meet.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, make it penetrate in any way you prepare, except that it is not too wide because it should not injure the ligament; and approach it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of spine-shaped spatula for dividing the fistula: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not injure anything unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching hemorrhoids, where blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, for they can be in the anus like coal or as if it were a mass of fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And the small and large ones are those which bleed constantly and are one, and the piles that are multiple, and are outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But the ones that are outside the anus occur during months with little moisture, from which a clear liquid or a small amount of blood with continuous flow comes out, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of the one that is inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and to empty it before the anus becomes raw and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your nail, and approach the incision of those, you should cut their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hooks are not present in those because of their moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or cotton or woolen gauze, remove those with your fingers, approach the incision of those and sprinkle some powders containing resins near the incision, to be used instead of cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then cure those with other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not empty, then cauterize the patient with a small bite, and wash it with water that eases bowel movement when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is light, and it is that you grab those with your nail, or grab those with hooks, and incise them, and cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who has an incision, it is necessary to administer suture of them in this manner: take a feather and insert it into the needle and approach the hemorrhoids to the openings above, and make the feather penetrate through the opening of the other part, and envelop both ends of the feather on the side further from the needle, and transversely; tie the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and approach the wound closed and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, and leave one and do not sew it, so that the excess blood flows from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the anus, and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave it inside until it closes; and when it is healed, cure them with infusions or other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Multiple watched over wounds occur due to lack of healing or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and that medicine is not effective in them, it is necessary that you cut those with the point of spatula or your nail until they become wet and the flow is stopped above, which prevents their consolidation; and approach them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	You remove those that are very violent with the first cautery before any blood flow and they become scabbed; and approach them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Treatment of anal fistulas is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that anal abscess is essential, and it is not to be ignored according to the color of the body like the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more in the areas around the feet and chest, and it indicates pain through them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Therefore, it is necessary to incise what is around the nail and hold it with forceps or hooks, and be exterminated from its root; and approach it until it is healed.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you want, cauterize the following that is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, rough, round elevations on the surface of the body, and they appear mostly in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The cure for it is to extend and incise it, or to constrict it with a file or a heated iron tool that fits into it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you want, cauterize this (the wart), as I said, either with fire or with a sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	Warts can be removed with the tool that I will mention.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small, pitted or large elevations on the body that move in a line and when touched, they sting like an ant bite and swell around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for ants is to take a hollow cane or a reed cane and make sure it's strong. Place the canula over the ant within its circle; then turn your hand with the canula to incise the area around the ant, pressing it onto the skin, and remove the ant from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want, do this with a reed or iron rod in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part above the canal is to be delicately separated, closed (meaning not perforated), wrapped, and learned about its anatomy and rotation.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant using the method as described in the section on cautery of ants.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Concerning the tools that are administered for making an incision.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some incisions are made using silver or lead or melted or hammered metal; and some incisions are made with small or large instruments depending on those to whom they are administered, as the one given to a child should be small; and the incisions for the elderly or those who have cold and painful areas should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of a large and shallow incision:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the canal above, where the pouch is tied, should be wide according to this method, and it should be clearly distinguished where the pouch is attached in the same manner as sometimes seen.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus below, which penetrates into the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened) in a narrow manner, hidden under subtlety; and in one side there are two cuts, while on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the rays and the pus, being smaller for thicker rays and pus.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which medicines from animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed should be about the size of a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with multiple cuts in such a manner that it is rolled up, and if the space between the cuts is thick, the width of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And place it firmly within the strong and sharp needle or surround it; then adjust the pouch accordingly; when the pouch is placed, it should be tight at the head of the incision between two distinct points with a strong constriction, and cauterize each cut: But the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the pouch with medicine that is warmed according to the patient's tolerance; be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Place the patient on their back and elevate their legs, placing a cushion or pillow under them; then anoint the end of the cauterizing instrument with oil, albumen of egg or mustard or similar; insert it into the anus with ease, and administer the pouch, squeezing it with two hands and exerting pressure forcefully until everything inside the incision is evacuated from the hernia; then remove the incision and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine is forced through this method, it should be sufficient; and if it remains in place for an entire night, it is more effective.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize it in cases of abdominal solution and the issuance of it, then you must reapply the cauterizing tool until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there is diarrhea or painful hemorrhoids in the anus, then make a shallow and narrow incision, using the type of incisions that are given to children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Concerning the treatment of sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the section on treating sores what is appropriate for the free person, and I will now explain the treatment with herbs and medicines according to their nature.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that afflictions are diverse according to what causes them and according to the place where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of various times are those that cause afflictions are such as falling from stones, or incision of space or armor, or striking with a lance, or club, or arrow, or similar to these causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the afflictions that occur in the body are such as an affliction that occurs on the head, neck, feet, stomach, or back, and similar to these members of the body.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is recommended for the treatment of certain afflictions to pause that reasoning and rule over other afflictions.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And we begin with simple head afflictions, as the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore it is said that when a simple head affliction and not a fracture occurs, then consider: if it is due to falling from stones or similar, and the patient has already tied the bandage only and it is a large wound and you fear that the patient may have an abscess forming, then you immediately incise the cephalic vein and do not delay; and extract as much blood as possible according to the strength of the vein, unless any other cause prohibits venesection, especially if the blood that is exuded from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	The venesection should be on the opposite side of the afflicted part; and keep the patient from reflux, vomiting, and heavy food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause prohibits the reduction, then it should be reduced by reducing food and avoiding meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And wait for the wound if an abscess forms over it, fill with oil of roses or wine in which it is steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are certain of the abscess, then wait for the wound if it is new and its air has not changed the powder that I recommend applying cautiously.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then wait for some purging until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or due to incision of space and similar, and the lips are not properly closed, then close them with suture as I recommend for their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is exposed to bone and tendon, and it is not bound but only a small suspensioner, then incise it and treat the wound with medicine and restore the flesh properly covered by bandages, and order the patient to be careful about food that contains meat: fish and fowl, and similar until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if rot in the bandage putrefaction occurs and does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that protrudes and remove it; and treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these afflictions there is an artery or vein from which blood flow may occur and it has not been severed by medicine, then you examine the artery; and if the unsevered one is found, you incise it with a spatula or ligature; and if necessity forces you to do what I have said, you cauterize until the blood is severed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these afflictions are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder on them, as it will harden before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: Recipe oil from crushed poppy seeds, dragon blood, and ground cumin; mix all together and sieve it, then fill the wound with it, constrict it properly with a good constriction until it adheres to it, and coagulate with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply it strongly on top with a poultice and let it rest like that until it is not an abscess, as the medicine does not penetrate until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes do this alone with cauterization, when there are no poppy seeds and dragon blood available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now perform this operation on large wounds when it must be paused and tightened, and only on recently formed wounds whose air has not changed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has changed them, especially in summer, then it is not advisable to apply this powder, but instead treat them as I have said, that is, wait for some purging or wait for powder made from barley flour and water until they heal; and treat them with other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a bone fracture occurs in the wound, which is small, then you extract it with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the treatment for head fractures that are poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	On neck afflictions.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is like a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, do not engage in its treatment without caution, and avoid any treatment that causes intense stitching, such as zinc and zego which are toxic and harmful to nerves and inhibit healing.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any pressure on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and its continuation is near the brain, which is the head of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If it is being treated with light medicines, such as washing with sweet water, sometimes immersed in rose oil or not, and when it is washed with sweet water and other remedies are applied according to this method, and gargle with warm water.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, administer stitching or sew up its edges, and take care of it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or pus collects in its lower part, then perforate it at the most depressed point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery has been cut and there is bleeding in the wound, then separate or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spinal bones have been cut or not, and the vessels of the neck are saved, then you adjust the edges of the wound on the neck with suturing around the base of the skull and do not touch it; move it gently and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a proper structure, and leave it for several days; take care of it with stimulating and exciting powders until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has affected bone, then you percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; leave what is not appropriate until the wound dries up, and separate and the granulation of it should be relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula is formed in the wound, treat it with what will come to your memory in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds on the neck or similar, when formed between the shoulders and cut with a knife, a sword, a lance, or something similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound caused by a lance or sword, and sometimes deep, consider whether the wound is accompanied by wind when the patient complains of it; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with little blood, then wait for the first hour to sprinkle powder on it, and do not press it so as not to keep the blood in the depth of it and return to the heart and aggravate the patient, but wait until it has attracted pus, and remove it every other day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the pus is not present, then wait for the orifice of the wound to open up so that the blood can drain from the humors; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in it will settle.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed and the patient does not have spasms, tremors of the heart, palpitations, or other good conditions of it, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with heat and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is excused and it has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a knife or sword, and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what is prescribed before stitching (if large) or powder (if small).
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the wound has affected bone and there are separated pieces of it, then twist the wound and try to extract those pieces.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound dries up, for the extraction of them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And in other accidents on other members, the help in treatment is the same as what has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of stomach wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	A large abdominal indisposition may sometimes be due to the intestine or its nerve, for which an introduction of them and their suturing should be more violent and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption can be difficult in other ways, and know that its reduction is more difficult, if you do not take care to introduce it into its place as soon as possible, for it swells up and becomes bloated, making the introduction of it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is medium-sized, for in this case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two cases mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that abdominal stitching can be done in four ways, but two of them are common and are used for other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other stitching methods are specific to other wounds, but they are more specific to abdominal stitching.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you exposure and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, you say that if the wound is small and there has been a cause for the intestine by it, and reducing the intestine is difficult, then this can be in one of two ways: either due to the small disruption as mentioned above, or when the intestine has swelled up due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this is the case, it is necessary that you heat up that area and immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or cook it in hot water, and cyperus, spike, and bindings into that which goes inside to resolve the inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	In some cases, this situation is accompanied by stiffness, and it is better that water alone be used to resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And since you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water containing elder and mallow, because by this means is the intestinal pain alleviated with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestine is excluded from this treatment, then you cut the hernia with a small instrument using which you make incisions into the abscesses.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary cure is better when it is appropriate that it not be cut, and there should not be an intention to cut when necessary and lacking resources.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, take its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The sharp angle of the tool should be acute, and the other part should not be blunt. Its tip should be subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula's tip; it should have an obtuse edge to some extent.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is widened and the intestine protrudes, it is necessary that its reduction should be in accordance with its natural form, at its proper location if possible, because this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the hernia is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, with their legs bent as far as their head; and if it is above the abdomen, then you should raise the patient's head and legs to the same extent as the affected area.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should pause your intention and consideration always on this so that the affected area is more elevated than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	So it is necessary that you treat both large wounds and small wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small wounds, pause what is prepared, and make sure that the assistant who will administer it is among your most trusted, who will hold the hernia completely with his hand and adjust the lips of it, and uncover from one side to the other the area where suturing may be required due to another cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; and approach it from the edge of the hernia of the thumb, tightening the needle one time, without putting thread in both ends of the knot, with two ends of the cord on both sides of the inner parts, penetrating through that part; and you have already tied both ends of the cord and the suturing is made in four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten the thread double around the needle, and sometimes from two sides at once, and gather both lips and the wound through appropriate stitching; and leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into it, and tie it in the same way as the first needle; do not stop doing this if necessary with needles until you have completed the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Needles should be neither too thick nor too thin, because thin needles pierce the flesh lightly; and large needles are difficult to pass through the cord, so therefore they should be of a medium thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not necessary that the needle be inserted into both ends of the cord closely together, because this would pierce the flesh lightly and the wound would break down before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Do not prolong the suturing so that the wound is prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Insert the tips of the needles so as not to hurt the patient while they sleep; and pause on the suture with expanded pulp from all sides, which hold the tips of the needles; leave it until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of suturing with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, because they require only one needle or two around the wound.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: you administer four parts with the suturing, of the cord and two ends of the thread, in one go, with a needle that should be wrapped in both thickness and thinness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have penetrated these four parts with the needle, reduce the needle from that side of the starting point, so that the thread draws up the inflamed part of the wound towards the healthy part, so that the suture is like a seam with which the cloth is strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I sewed up a wound that had occurred in a man's stomach, which was pierced by a knife, and the hernia was larger than one palm, and it had protruded from both sides of the intestine around two palms from the middle part of the member; and after that I reduced it when the intestine had been out of the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or more, and it was cured and healed; and it lived for many years and was maintained in its condition, and it was convalesced in its dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; but by miracle, for I did not cure it with the mouth, for it was in a place where no medicine was found nor remedy, but rather it was pressed on the wound twice daily and rinsed frequently with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you two types of stitching according to the words [of Scripture].
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the sewing of the linen, and enter the needle from the outside to the inside [of the wound].
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, when the needle penetrates into the linen and enters there as instructed and in the length of the entire body, and leaves the head end where you have inserted the needle; and let the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside out through the other end of the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus, when you have made it penetrate there [the thread], then make it penetrate another time in the same end of the needle from the inside out to the outside; and leave the head that is there, and let the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside out.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let it penetrate with your puncture through the head at the end of the needle that is within it [the wound], and let all of it penetrate there.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and sew the other end of the needle to the head end that is on the other side, and draw out the needle from the linen that penetrated there, and return it to the linen and sew the head end that is on the other side with this end of the needle; and draw out the thread from the linen.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do it one time and another, and continue doing it until you sew all that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of sewing is that you sew with the skin suturing that sews the hair, so that you sew the head once from the side of the end of the linen, and let go of the other side until it is finished.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second type of stitching that I shall tell you, which is called "Gaul" and this one is of great authority and is highly recommended, is that you sew it like a semilunar suture as certain physicians do, namely that they bring together all the parts to their corresponding sides naturally; and they apply the end of one side and the end of the needle to the other end of it, and this is done as I have advised.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that the needle be placed at your side of the outside edge, and make it penetrate into the inside edge in the same place, and let go of two head ends; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two head ends.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And turn each one of them, and make each one penetrate from the inside out to the outside in two head ends that are opposite to the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than common light stitching, and it is the sowing that was mentioned before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Galenus
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And others say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you enter each one of them a thread, and begin with the intromission of the needle that corresponds to you, and let it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who sew the liver.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When disruption occurs in the correct location of the stomach, the suture is more difficult in that place than in other locations of the stomach.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for one disease is a judgment for other diseases as well.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you reach the recent pustule before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and cauterize it well, then pause over the carnivorous powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the pustule, then pause over that alum paste until it hardens and falls off, and heal it in the same way as the treatment of other pustules until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medicine, then pause over it as soon as possible, because it begins to rot, olden, and change every two days, as you have taught me, until it is healed, for you do not need another medicine in these simple cases.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the pustule may communicate injury to major members, then it is necessary that you immerse linen in dipped oil of quality, or rose oil, and apply it to the areas between the joints and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or rot in the intestines, as it often happens, then you must sterilize that with black teppe stiptic vinegar, and especially if the pustule has been reached in the intestine and has made penetration into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one of a large intestine is easier to heal than the one in delicate intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive healing from a pustule that occurs there; this is due to the great number of veins present there and the large size of it, as well as the subtlety of its body and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what comes from the pustule is the linen, and you succeed in obtaining it recently, reduce it according to your teaching with which you reduce intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed and already become green or black, then you must tighten it with a thread over the affected area of it, because in linen there are veins and arteries that flow blood.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert another ligament there and pause the two ends of the thread hanging from the area around the pustule opening, so that it is relieved of its attraction, you must cut off the linen and release the blood flow from the pustule.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the pustules when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some men, because I saw one who was pustulated in his stomach with the thrust of a lance and the pustule was on the right side of the stomach, and the pustule was old and made a fistula, and it was healed by treatment and wind.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore I continued the healing of it even though it was not yet cured, but I continued to refine it until the fire healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the area already consolidated, then examined the patient who had suffered an accident of evil in his stomach; and no one should approach this unfortunate case due to that misfortune and change their diet and drink, but instead stay in bed and exercise according to their words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones said that when a pustule occurs in the intestine and is small, it is necessary to tie it according to this method: take large bread crumbs; then adjust the two lips of the pustule and place one of them on its mouth over the two lips of the pustule; thus, when you take hold of it and tighten its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then pause another bread crumb next to the first one, and do not continue making them one after the other according to the size of the entire pustule.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce it and heal the pustule; and leave the attached heads in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient with any injury.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible to tie the intestine with a very fine thread made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, because it is finer; and take the end of these threads of intestines, and make them quite bare, and tie the end of it with another thread, wrapped, and insert that thread into needles and sew it with that the intestine, and reduce the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of stitching with needles is not only based on trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the wound is large and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle hernias, then not only is surgery required but also not complete healing will occur.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatise on ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or boil that becomes old and chronic, and does not heal and bleeds continuously without being cured, is universally referred to as a fistula and we call it an ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula is a hard, nodular, white lesion that is not painful and has a concave shape like the shape of an ulcer caused by a bird's peck; for this reason it is called a cicatricial ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In a man with an ulcer that bleeds, the pus is often purged in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this pus becomes thickened, scanty, and slimy.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have already stated the classification, so when I say ulcers, any ulcer that does not heal or is covered with necrotic tissue, it is not one of these causes: a) lack of pus in the body; b) corruption of the region and is a plague; c) hard skin prevents natural healing; d) the lesion is indolent; e) the ulcer contains pus that is poor quality or transmits harmful substances; f) the medicine is not suitable for treating it; g) corruption occurs in the region, and it is a pestilence; h) due to the region's properties, as in Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult, and healing of ulcers is delayed by nature; i) there is one bone, many bones or cartilage in the lesion.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all these causes, their symptoms and the treatment with medications in the classification.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so, you should know that the healing of fistulas is done through surgical treatment with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body, as they reach large veins and arteries, nerves, spleen, intestines, bladder, one of the ribs, one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed like the hand and foot; and those are the ones that provide proximity to the main member and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, the fistula that occurs in this manner is one of the difficult-to-heal diseases and does not receive treatment, with the occupation being labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If one of the fistulas has such depth that it does not reach the places mentioned and you hope for its healing and believe in its treatment, but wish to find out more about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula is straight, use it to explore it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with lead wire, because lead has the property of lightness in its body and will alleviate and correct the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has horrible movements (spasms), it is not possible for you to probe it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore close the orifices with its own orifices, because the moisture that you use to close one will pass through the others and run out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then proceed with extreme care, for it is important to know if you have bone or nerve here, and whether the fistula is long or short, or if it is one that has horrible movements and is all around the entirety of your strength, your questioning, the examination of the patient, and the discovery of pain, you should use compression on the area with your hand and similar to the symptoms and causes of an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all these causes with certainty, then go to the treatment according to confidence: it is that you consider if it is an apparent fistula near salt, long away from joints, or of nerves, arteries, veins, or one of the places which I told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry out the fistula as it was said in its description, and remove what is in that filtration and corrupted flesh, and what is born from the orifices of the skin, or nails and similar, and cure it within where it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is deep, and as it should be, you must incise it up to where it is possible for you, and clean out all its corrupted flesh; and administer warm poultices wrapped in medicines, and insert these into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this for some time until the acute medicine burns all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to its corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And place a healthy dressing on it, which generates healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, you must cauterize it as you have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify that, then you investigate it and dry it out as you have recommended, but do not prevent any cause of a vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness in it, you cut into it until the corruption is completely contained; and heal it with something that causes it to regenerate until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and continues to discharge pus like before, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you dig further and proceed with great care and cleanliness, and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, that is good; and if not, you should know that the corruption is deep in the body, which has not been reached, and therefore there is no hope of healing it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small and it is possible to remove it with forceps, then you remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if the bones are moving, you must perform the extraction of all of them with great care, and do not leave any cause of resistance with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humors opposes you, and in its incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise the membranes or flesh where they are, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then wait for the wound to heal, and leave it surrounded by flesh and membranes, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated and the section which you have incised in your operation is constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Therefore, if you fear, wait for the wound to become dry after being immersed in olive oil or in a strong Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green dressings, because when those membranes dry out, the separation of the bones is facilitated and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the femur or thigh or similar, and what is rotten is only on its surface, then you remove that with resin only to the point of removing the blackness and corruption, and restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is rotten is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and cut into it until the point where the corruption is found, and heal it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that which befits a man in his chest, namely, to place it as an example and aid on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Find a young man about the age of thirty who has pain in his chest, and from the inside parts, there is a bad smell near the matter inside the body up to where the matter reaches the chest, and it is matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and not caused externally.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was extended due to the error of the physicians until the abscess has been drained, and I ran for materials, and its healing was delayed until the wound became fistulated, and it was filled with pus and the moistures of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	For then the treatment of many physicians lasted around two years, and they were not wise but skilled, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the wound of him and the materials flowing from those ulcers due to large holes; and his body was completely solidified, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those ulcers and it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I approached and examined all the ulcers, and found that they were spreading in every direction from the wound.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut myself open and incised over one of the ulcers into which I discovered a portion of bone, and found that it was rotten, and already it was putrefied and corrupted; and a part of the wound had already penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cut out what I had uncovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out that which was not bone but corruption which I had excised and removed, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I continued to cut and uncover the bone again over the initial discovery, and found continuing corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I cut out that which appeared from that corruption, and then I was perforated to make the healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I continued to cut and uncover further and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and made the healing and restoration of it, but it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extracted with the marrow, and then restored it with medicines, and it healed and consolidated lightly.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	The operation and section of it were not necessary, but only for the looseness of it and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because to him it happened at all times due to excessive evacuation of bad syncopes.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it heals completely, and nothing remains in place of the bone; and its position is arranged well within his body and restores its virtue; and it converts in its dispositions, and does not harm him in any way nor cause any damage in any circumstance.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone protrudes in a place of the body that has been injured, then it is necessary that you cut it according to this method: and it is that you grab it firmly at its extremity, and order someone to stretch it out; and bind it tightly with linen thicker than the first binding; and hold it over the skin that was left behind, and extend its edge so that you pull the skin apart from the sides, and you uncover the skin over the place where you want to cut so that the cut does not harm the skin.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And stop a board or table beside the bone decently, because when you do this it is not prohibited to cut the corrupted flesh with the knife.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the cut be over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the rotten bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then perhaps the cut of the other side should be made.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not protruding, it has a continuous division with the other, and the corruption is in one or some parts of it; then you uncover the entire skin; and stop a board beside it, and then cut the first part where the corruption continues until the cutting of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	The cut should be according to the location of the corruption as I have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in a joint, incise that corrupted joint and cut the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but deceitful.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the hand or foot, it is difficult; but it is necessary that you investigate the corruption according to your method and cut it open, and clean it according to each disposal which is possible for you, and with each deceit rectify yourself, so that it does not harm a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know what the saws and knives are for cutting these bones according to their position, and the preparation of them, and the thickness of them, and their subtlety or coarseness and their smallness or large size; therefore it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of operations suitable instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation means for you the kind of tool that is required; when with you it is great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and witness to the methods of diseases, then you already have what is appropriate for the tools to all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	You are forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones with which you will proceed in your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Cutting instrument (scissors):
Forma de autra serra:	Another cutting instrument (scalpel):
Forma de autra serra:	Another cutting instrument (knife):
Forma de autra serra gran:	Large cutting instrument (saw):
Forma de ray:	Measuring tool (rule):
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rule be shaped like a cross-headed nail and its points be shaped like the points on a nail.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate except when the joint heads are crushed because they are corrupt, or the opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Large form of razors (surgical scalpel):
Forma de razori menor:	Small form of razors (scissors):
Forma de razori lat:	Long form of razors (forceps):
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw properly made: shall be arched upward and the edge of iron sharp, and the limbs of the handles properly formed.
Forma de lu:	Form of the body:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Curved form of the razors (scissors):
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another thin form of razors (scalpel):
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another form of curved-tipped razors (forceps):
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Small form of the scissors resembling tweezers:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of incisors for cutting bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another small form of bone cutters (pliers):
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another bone cutter that resembles a ruler and has a saw-like edge that is used in many places during the cutting of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of rule for measuring the holes made in the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the edge is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel and similar to all the causes we have mentioned about scissors, bone cutters, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision and of the setting of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	If the incision is made due to an internal or external cause, or if you have already treated the corruption with medicines and the treatment does not work, or if the corruption persists without any apparent cause, then it is necessary that you make an incision in that member to the depth of the corruption, so that the patient may escape by that way either from death or from a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that patient is that the member becomes black before it is burned, or if it swells around the black area until the gangrene enters that member and consumes the entire body, therefore take care to make an incision on that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poison from certain venomous animals such as scorpions, vipers or rattlesnakes and others.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the injury is at the end of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you access the hand, then you cut it at the wrist and do not leave space for the corruption to enter into the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If the patient's joint swells, then make an incision in the arm into the shoulder at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If corruption occurs and the joint swells, then it is the death of the patient; administering another cause in treatment is as effective as nothing.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similar to the foot when corruption swells the aforementioned part of the foot, then you should make an incision into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If there is a lump on the foot, then you should make an incision along the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it grows into the calf, then you should make an incision into the calf at the joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already reached the calf, there is no remedy but to release it and allow the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incising a limb or sewing it up is to tighten the ligament beyond the part you wish to incise, and then tighten another ligament at the site; extend a ligament below, and extend another ligament above; separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make the incision or sew it up.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is necessary to place gauze on all the parts to keep them dry, and bring the dressing and cautery to the patient adjusted and sterile.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the site or apply some hemostatic powder to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment when it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the affected limb with a ligament appropriate to the injury, and care for it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This pain in the man's foot, which occurs due to an event similar to burning coal, you and I recommend that he apply this remedy we mention.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	This initial corruption tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore, that man should prepare himself by applying heat to the affected foot with intensity sufficient to relieve the pain and burning sensation, and immerse the foot in hot water, allowing it to heal.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that remedy will have caused the corruption in the affected hand as well.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Therefore, go to me and have that excess remedy removed from the hand, and perform cleansing on the body, so as not to let the excess spread to the other foot before it started in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	He called upon me to amputate his hand, but I did not wish to do so, fearing the spread of that excess and moreover dreading the death of the patient due to his poor condition.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	But when he gave up on me, he returned to his land and informed me that the man prepared and had his entire hand amputated, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not related this narrative without purpose, but to offer assistance on the matter of this disease, and as a signification by which it may be recognized and treated accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding care for the anus and quality of cleansing with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged before drainage occurs, it should be broken and perforated, allowing the pus to drain out, leaving a cavity similar to a vessel, covered with fine linen, and not allowed to become corrupted again or press on bone, nerve, or ligament. This condition is called a sinus and is not referred to as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space becomes prolonged before corruption sets in any member, it is then called a fistula and not recognized as such.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment is that the cavity should be completely removed and especially when it is made thin like fabric, ensuring that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cavity adheres and that the corruption has not yet been completed, and in the cavity there is a swelling of the face, then you should treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	You should consider the sinus and if it is large and emits a fetid odor, then enema with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and garlic, which has been divided into portions and placed in a container, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes a rosy color and achieves its specific effect.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	You should take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; then enema with that solution the sinus, and tighten the orifices of it, and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	You should also remove that with care; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is eliminated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Sometimes it is enema with ashes water when this medicine is not present, and you should take the ash from the wood, put it in the water, and then strain that and enema it into the sinus until you feel assured that the sinus has been sealed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then enema with honey and garlic juice diluted, or wine and honey mixed, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when the wine contains excess strength and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this for several days and feel assured that the sinus has been healed, then perform an enema with a solution that makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	You should take digestive oil of roses and dissolve it in a mixture of white wine and tincture of spices, or perform an enema with various medications and remedies that I have mentioned in the treatise on enemas.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula for the enema, you should gradually widen it with a small iron tool, and pause when you feel that it has been expanded enough, covered with Egyptian oil or basilica oil until it is fully expanded.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the orifice is wide, you should sew the lips of it with stitches and leave a quantity within it that does not allow the enema to flow out.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice of the sinus from which the fistula comes is raised at the ends above it, you should dry that area where the pus collects so that the fistula can run out below, for when the fistula is blocked in the sinus, the flesh will grow there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone as desired, you should be prepared that you will prepare the member with the preparation needed for the fistula to run out easily as appropriate and without being retained by any cause of the fistula.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take medications that are to be applied on the sinus appropriately, according to what you wish to extend it over cloth of him.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The cloth should be of the same size as the communication of the entire sinus; then, with the forceps, incise in the right of the sinus orifice a small hole wider than the orifice itself, and extend it over another cloth from the edges of the lions according to the size of the incision, and place it on top of it for a distance away from the sinus orifice to alleviate the pain in the arm and not let the cloth be too large, but change it after a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one that is over the sinus orifice should be washed at all times to prevent anything that is near the arm from becoming infected.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you may know if what comes out of the arm is little or much, whether it digests, or does not digest.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you must consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been discharged from the sinus already adheres or becomes attached to it, then you should loosen or separate it on the third day, and when you separate the wound, you change the cloth for another and renew the dressing.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	However, if the sinus has a wide space and there is a subtle virus, do not despair of adherence from it, for healing occurs, for some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and those are the ones in whom it happens contrary to this.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus has been discharged for many days and the arm is not digesting, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you should dry out the medications, and if the medications are wet in their substance and in their effect, they become as drying as ointments like diaphinicon when they are applied excessively.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last thing is that you take diaphinicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and add an ancient remedy for the stomach to its substance, and combine this with the previous one, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems like this action when there is no arm, use diaphinicon ointment, honey that is cooked until thickened and apply it; or take myrrh, aloe and sage, crush them all and powderize over the heated honey, and line this over cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and line this with the honey that you have heated until thickened, and powderize over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered with long aristolochia and celestial root (and this is the celestial root) and erysipelas flour and centaury, and use these simple herbs or compound them, crush them and sieve them, and powderize over the honey that has been recommended; and hush it with it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed with this treatment, you should know that corruption is in its bone, and you must investigate the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with fistula treatment as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment of breadcrumbs, nail filing and cutting the finger nail, and incision.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Breadcrumbs are an abscess that comes from the nail of the finger on the hand or foot, and it is strong in other places, and when it is prolonged and its cure is expensive, or it becomes an abscess cauterized, or corrupted, and discharges pus into the arm until it rots the root of the nail, and it corrupts completely, and it carries its corruption to the bone until it smells fetid, and the end of the finger becomes rotten, and the color of it is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have that with what I have said in the division and it does not respond to your treatment, then you must incise all the superfluous matter that remains of the nail and apply cautery to the wound near it, for cauterization is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail compress the flesh at its joints, it begins to swell and inflame, then you must stop the pus that comes out near the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and apply a thin needle under the nail that pierces the flesh, and press it out with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines until it is all washed away; and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone and remove it, for there is no healing that occurs when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the corruption and corruption is spreading in the tooth, you must incise it in one of its roots according to its memory, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail is pierced by percussion or attrition, and pain is very intense, then you must at first numb the patient, and cut the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse section from above to below, and be careful that the incision does not reach into the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient intense pain, and it may cause the generation of superfluous flesh in the area; and treat the area with what reduces pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	A more adjusted one, born in the hands of some men, it is very fatty throughout the flesh, and it is very fatty in its bones, or it is very fatty in its nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born near the joint [or hinge], or their nature is in some knuckles of the mentioned ones.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But the one that is born in the knuckles of the finger is not ill, and the one that is born near the joint is very ill.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy, the section [incision] is easy, and it is necessary for you to dissect its nature with a lancet.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But the healing of the one that is born near the joint section is difficult; therefore beware of the abscessing of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the one that is born in the finger (or knuckles), you must incise the flesh of it at the beginning with an oval lancet, and you should use a suitable saw for this, and take care to cure it until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation that happens in the mentioned joints between their observed motes or by nature of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of wounds or burning with fire, or similar things, therefore it is necessary to incise that consolidation until the mentioned ones return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place a barrier between their cloths soaked in red oil to prevent them from consolidating easily, and separate them or place a thin layer of lead between them until it is consolidated as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if there is consolidation in some of the mentioned ones with the palm, then you must incise that consolidation as prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	The incision of blemishes are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are varicosities, and they are thick enveloped veins full of melancholic fluids that come in the motes of the members of the body, and the greater danger is in the legs, especially in the legs of the itinerants, the laborers, and the carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary to administer purge of the body from black bile some observed times with strong expulsion, and also let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The healing of theirs with iron is according to two methods: the first is that it is incised and the black blood is drawn out, and the second method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of it is according to this method: at the beginning you bind the leg with warm water into which the thick blood is resolved, that is feculent from the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg at the upper part of the thigh towards the lower part of the crotch with a bandage, and then incise the vein in one place or two or three places with a wide incision, and raise the black blood with the strongest force of the hand from below the leg towards above, until the amount that you want to extract and have taken has been removed, and this will remove the power of the illness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And tell him (the patient) to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the healing by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of theirs is according to this method: you must raise the leg of the patient, if there are motes in it, and place him in a warm bath and bind his leg with warm water until it swells and the veins are overflowing; or exercise it with strong exercises, if bath is not available, until the member is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And incise the sheath on the right side of the vein for an incision along its length or in its lower part you must remove the codena, or at the bottom you must remove the talon.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And open the sheath with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you must perceive that it is black in color when it darkens.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore if you perceive that the sheath is white, it is a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And place a small rod under it so that it is elevated and removed from the sheath, and suspend it with a pair of tongs.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And incise another incision opposite that incision for three fingers, and strip the sheath from above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And lift it and incise the lower incision, and extract it and raise it until it is removed through the second incision, and extract it from the incision that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until the sheath is extracted from the upper incision or any of the incisions, until it is completely removed; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce an awl with a double-edged needle and tie it, or introduce below it the rod and rotate your hand all around until it is removed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to incise it; for if it is broken, it is difficult to elevate the mot and comes upon the patient as harm from it.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the whole thing is completely removed, then place a bandage soaked in wine and red oil on the wound and heal it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is contracted with tortuosity in which there is envelopment at the divisions, and it is not as it should be according to what we have said, then it is necessary that you cut through that entire tortuosity of it and the places of its envelopment, and suspend it with sutures inside until it is raised.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not incise the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; use your prudence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Make an incision with which the life is cut off:
Forma de unci orp:	Form a purse-string suture:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be as with the sutures or be of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtlety; having excessive thickness as has been said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the thighs in cold lands such as Egypt in the lands of Arabs and in the southern and arid lands of India, where there is little water and where neither herbs nor wheat grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is strongly born in other places of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is of putrefaction that comes from the intestines such as venom from within the body, snakes and worms and scabies and worms growing between the intestine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	A sign of its susceptibility to the onset of this condition is that of this vein which occurs in the thigh inflammation; and approach the place; and as the vein begins to flow from the site of that swelling, it seems like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	When the limb becomes apparent, it is necessary that you wrap a weight of lead around it, equal to two drachms. Immerse it in water and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as long as there is any cause at the divisions outside of it, cover this with lead and tie it up.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover what remains; do not incise that which seems to be inside until it is outside, for if you incise it, it is contracted and enters the flesh and causes an abscess and pus formation in the area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore it must be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely outside and there remains no cause of it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein have come out in some men whose length is five palms (about 150 cm) and has been reported to me that one of twenty palms (about 600 cm) has come out.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, you insert the rod into it and penetrate it with a long rod through the body until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and treat it as an abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes moves quickly, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it moves out through many openings, and is often born from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore treat this as has been said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section over worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine disease in some places because it often enters into cattle and is a worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body, and is manifested by sensation of member to member until it bursts the intestine and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by the putrefaction of some fluids such as worms, snakes, lice and scabies in the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of the malice of it, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it reaches the brain, then strong evil smells enter it and destroy the brain, and this often happens.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, do not do so unless its movement and manifestation in the body by sensation are known, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is over it and what is underneath it with ligation and compression, and approach it dry and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is attached to the flesh and does not atrophy, you pause a cautery with fire over the place until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the area as has been said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see this arrive at the head near the brain, strengthen over the forehead with strong compression, and approach it dry, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient uses purification of his body with medicines evacuating putrid fluids and guard himself from foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From section on swelling of the navelf (or navel)
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is known in our land as the "navelf," and it causes pain in various body parts, which can spread from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen what I am about to recommend.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, where I found that her arm had swollen and there was a small inflammation in the basilic vein of her arm, which had burst for an hour, and then I saw this inflammation go up like living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then wait for the pain to subside in that location and settle into the muscle, and stay there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And correct any other faults found in the opposite shoulder towards the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	I recommend that you rotate the entire body as I saw, and it was very surprising to see how the exchange and speed of limbs took place.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I have seen before in the highest heavens such exchange as described by this method, but I have also seen others who suffer pain from the exchange of limbs.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I do not see this happening in women as I described before.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is the case unless the woman was old, where the body and veins were dry, and in this situation, the sensation of windiness becomes apparent.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are indulgent and have bodies with moist veins weakened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	If you want to cure that condition and the patient feels pain, do not perform this procedure in the manner I described before, but rather strengthen it slightly and dry it internally until the constriction of the windiness subsides, then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see this happening in your veins, then you cure that condition through the use of excision of the body and the expulsion of windiness, and administer pills made with wormwood and Serapion root, among others.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On extracting boils.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Boils are differentiated according to their species, and the areas of the body where they occur, as they have different shapes: some with large points, small, concave, sunken, solid ones; others with three angles, those that have tongues; and those that are stalks.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which relates to the members and the pains in which it happens according to two manners: for the members or are primary members such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, hernias, bladder, and their similarities; and thus when it happens in any of these primary members and signs of death appear to you, I recommend avoiding extraction of that arrow in those cases where death is imminent for the one in whom the signs are clear, and when such symptoms do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And as for the symptoms of the skull, when an arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, and exits at the base which is above the brain, this happens violently with headaches, blindness, dizziness, fever in the cheeks, inflammation and fever of the tongue, convulsions and confusion of thought, vomiting of bile, and the word is easily lost and the voice destroyed, and there is discharge from the wound of white pus similar to powder, and eyes like water from the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if such symptoms appear to you, then do not attempt treatment or extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	However, the symptoms of an arrow in the heart, which is near the left nipple and feels hard to touch, are not empty but filled; the movement of the arrow feels like the movement of a pulse, blood flows from the wound that is black, there is coldness at the extremities, excessive sweating, and fainting; therefore, you know that death approaches quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms of an arrow in the lung are primarily sputum from the wound that is frothy blood, and the vessels near the neck are compressed, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily and demand cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the arrow strikes the membrane located in the foot, and the pain is mainly in the small ribs, it causes severe pain with deep breathing and sighing, and not all of the member's muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, then a foul-smelling discharge comes from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the arrow strikes the abdomen and is buried inside, there may be a hole in the wound, or tissues such as intestines or hernias that have been torn apart, and there is no hope for recovery from extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow strikes the bladder and comes out with urine, and there are signs of bleeding outside, and strong pain is felt by the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	However, other members such as the head, neck, throat, shoulders and joints, spine, cervical vertebrae, pelvis, hips, and their similar parts of the body can be saved if the arrow does not pierce a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I recommend that you pay attention to the nature of these arrows, as this indicates the method of treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason is that when an arrow hits a man in the tear duct of the eye at the root of the nose, and it is extracted from the other side, leaving the eyelash behind, healing occurs and no harm is done to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew who had been hit in the eye at the root, leaving behind the eyelid, and the arrow had already been hidden, but could only be found by a small tip attached to its shaft, and it was a sharp arrow of Turkish arrows with lion-shaped heads without feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew was saved, and no harm was done to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another arrow was extracted from a Christian who had been hit in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers; therefore, I made two incisions on each side of the throat, and the arrow was already submerged in the throat of the patient; then I softened it and carefully extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been hit in the stomach, and I thought he would die because of it; but since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition due to his disposition, I made an incision on it and cut into it, and he recovered, and no further harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw another man who had been hit by an arrow in the back, and the wound had healed over time, and after about six years it came out through the opening of the spine.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman who had been hit by an arrow in the stomach, and the wound healed over time, but it did not change in any of her natural functions, and she suffered no harm in any of her operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man who had been hit by an arrow in the face, and the wound healed over time, but the arrow was removed without causing further pain, and similar symptoms occurred.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the nose of the prince of the king, which was in the middle of his nostril and had declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	You were summoned for treatment near the casement of the arrow for three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you probed the wound of the arrow, but it was narrow and you did not feel it; however, you felt the puncture below the right ear, so you suspected that the puncture was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	You spread the area with an ointment containing attracting and digestive properties, so that it would indicate the location of the arrow for me, so I could cut through it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	I did not find an accident that indicated the location of the arrow; I continued to apply the ointment for many days, but did not find an indication; however, the wound healed in the meantime, and after several days the patient felt the arrow in his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you cover the wound with a strong corrosive medicine for several days until pus comes out; and with the probe you can feel if it is thin, and then extract the tip of the arrow which is attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you carefully arrange the opening of the wound with that strong corrosive medicine until it is visible to me the tip of the arrow, and wait for my instructions for the period of time up to four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound has become swollen and it is possible for me to insert forceps into it, you hold it in place without moving, and I will not stop trying to extract it using various methods of engineering until one day I begin to use forceps designed specifically for this purpose to pull it out gently as described at the end of the chapter; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Some physicians thought that the cartilage of the nose was not restored and I restored it, and the wound healed completely, and the patient recovered without any complications.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend the method of extracting certain arrows according to this rule and this explanation, which does not cover everything that I have not mentioned, because the parts of this art and the difficulties of it are not understood through narration or reading these books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise artisan understands much with little; and from what is presented, he understands about what is absent; and it is necessary to adapt operations and new instruments when unexpected problems occur in the course of the art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the limbs where they are inserted, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the location of the wound; or by the opposite side of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And an arrow that is shot into a location where it entered will either be made of flesh or bone and will be shot and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not catch it immediately at the time of shooting, it is necessary that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it can be cut and the attraction and exit reduced.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is shot into bone and you do not catch it immediately, it is necessary to leave it for several days and move it with attraction every day until it is forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not catch it immediately, it is necessary that after several days, you perforate around the arrow in all parts of the bone with a very fine drill until the area is expanded by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the arrow is shot into the bone of the head and has already passed through one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of these symptoms appear in the patient which I have mentioned, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the arrow and leave it until his life is stabilized for several days; because if the arrow reaches the brainstem, death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is not shot but only into the bone of the skull and does not reach the brainstem, and the patient remains for several days without any cause of those symptoms, you use engineering to attract the arrow and the shaft.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is not shot and cannot be extracted, you administer various treatments around the arrow as recommended, and care for the wound until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow has already been hidden in the body and is no longer felt, you probe it with a probe, and if you feel it, you shoot it out with appropriate instruments for attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot get above it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and here is not bone or nerve or vein, you make an incision over the wound until it is expanded enough to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if the ears are inflamed and must be treated, then you should release the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with every tool you can use; and devise on this, if you cannot on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of them until it becomes necessary.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the removal of the splinter in any place where it is, then you should use twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides until it becomes necessary; and carefully with delicate subtlety ensure that the splinter is not broken, and made to be difficult for it to escape and for that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot perform that at your time, then you should leave it for several days until the surrounding parts can heal, and apply something that will alleviate it.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	However, if the flow of blood occurs contrary to this, then you should administer what has been mentioned for treatment in its own chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Keep your skill in the incision of veins or nerves, or tendons, and provide all possible means for the evacuation of the splinter; do this with ease, calmness, patience, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, you should oppose the splinter so that the patient is positioned according to the figure in which the splinter should be extracted, as it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	However, if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, if the splinters are situated on the opposite side of another part, or if they have caused damage to surrounding parts, or if there is inflammation outside the wound and it becomes apparent; then you should seek out that area; and make an incision according to the size that forceps can grasp, and apply pressure on it, as it will be made to emerge easily.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	However, if it is held in the bone, then you should twist the knife counterclockwise until the splinter enters the bone, and widen the area around it, and apply pressure to extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, leave it for several days and apply something over it until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the splinter is in that one, then you should push it out with something.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	However, if the shaft is cut and you wish to administer impulse, then insert it and push it down, if it is numb, strike a concave instrument into it so that it enters the concavity of the splinter and apply pressure on it with something.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	However, if the splinter is convex, then you should push it out with a strong instrument that penetrates it, as the splinter will be relieved by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the splinter is entangled, then you must flatten all the flesh around it, if this is possible for you, and apply something to it that is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle catches in the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the ribs, and it is near to the point that you can touch it with the probe and it is possible for you to extract it, then extract it and guard against incision of vein or nerve, and suture the wound if necessary, and heal it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Use a pair of forceps to draw out the needles:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Make them like the beaks of birds, made with saw when they are grasped onto the needle so that it is not lost.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made small, large, few or many, depending on the size and scantiness of the needle, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Make the convex end of this concave one like the tip of a bird's beak in such a way that it eases the insertion of the needle into it, and push on the other end softly.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Make the convex end of the convex one:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Make a hole in the concave part of the needle, and push it through with the rod.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, which are customarily bled through the cube.30. which are located in the head, sixteenth part of a cubit. So are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, say this: these are the two herbs that are apparent in both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes called 'aspient' veins; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two glands that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called 'anglic' veins; and these are the veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are to be lanced in the arms are .v. (vena basilica) For one of those is a cephalic, and it must be let blood with wild lettuce; the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is deaf, and it is a superficial vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is let blood in the domestic artery, and is named "cubital", and the vulgar people call it "vein of the belly"; the biceps brachii, and is located on the cubital fossa, and is the one that is punctured, and is the one that appears above the pulse for a clear appearance; and the cephalic vein, and it is between the greater and lesser cubital veins.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins: one of those is below the bend of the cubital fossa; the second is saphenous, and the location of it is below the bend of the domestic artery; the sciatic vein, and the location of it is below the bend of the cubital fossa; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The advantage of the veins that are near the ears is that they help with ancient catarrhs, migraines, headaches, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what I recommend for you: it should be scraped the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital region where both veins are located with a clean cloth with good friction; hold the patient's neck tightly with a bandage so that they appear in two places on each side of the head; and seek those with your own hand, and if you feel the pulse of those with your own hand, here is the test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the cutting lancet, which is sharp-pointed, and insert it below the vein into the cavity until blood flows out of the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And lift your hand with the vein and the cavity towards the joint above it, and incise (puncture) the vein with an incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be adjusted to two fingers, or around that amount; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And hold it firmly with your fingers and press it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has been previously mentioned at the beginning of this treatise the incision of those and their cauterization (sealing with heat or caustic agents).
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But from the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the advantage of bloodletting is for old chronic migraines and maladies of the eyes, and ailments of the head with acute fluid accumulation around the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend for you: constrain the patient's neck and move it until both veins appear clearly and manifestly, and demonstrate the pulse of them with your own hand; then perform the test (venipuncture).
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Approach you raise the bandage above the vein at the groin as indicated, insert the lancet into the incised area below, lift the vein upwards; and incise it in the same manner as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Approach you release the patient's arterial constriction, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place your hand over that area and knead it firmly, leaving it in place until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Here is the translation: And now let us remember them, and mark their incision, and draw attention to the beginning of the treatise.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore, the treatment of venous lancet for the vein of the forehead is similar to the treatment of the superficial temporal vein in ancient facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, abscesses and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of lancing is according to what I recommend to you; namely, that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a trepan which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the puncture point at the end of the trepan on the vein and strike it downwards or in another manner as described, allowing the blood to flow according to the quantity you desire; then release the perforation of the patient and leave it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	On some occasions it is opened with a lancet, but it is not necessary that the lancet be of an acute tip like other lancets; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and lance it transversely, for the bone is close and strong, so if the lancet is thin, it may break the bone when it is sharp.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the treatment of the two veins that are in the eyelids due to scabs from the eyes caused by migraines and abscesses in the eyes, and facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of lancing is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and you should lance them, and you should be standing over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the lancing should be done transversely across a small area and with few strokes, for there is not much flesh in that location; if the lancet is thin, it may break its tip.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Allow the blood to flow as much as you need, press on that area and hold it for a short time, then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the lancing of the nasal vein is given for acute fever and strong sweating, as well as facial diseases, migraines, and abscesses that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of lancing is that the patient tightens his neck and approaches your left hand to his nose, and takes a thin, long lancet and places it in the middle of the nostril as directed, for the vein is not felt here, and blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You should close the wound little by little and allow the blood to flow according to your need; then hold it for a short time, as the wound heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the treatment of lancing both eyes leads to constriction, leprosy beginning, and various other diseases and infections, as well as corrosive ulcers such as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of lancing those is that the patient tightens each one in his neck loosely; and the craftsman should be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient should sit on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And make a long incision on the vein with a wide, shallow lancet; and extract blood according to measured quantity or as necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And release the ligaments and tighten both veins with moderate constriction so that the patient is not overheated, and leave it to mature until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The treatment of lancing veins in the area near the ear confers small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, decay of gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of lancing those is that you should place the patient facing you, tighten his neck with a bandage, retract his lips and observe both veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more so because around those veins there are small black veins; and then incise each one with an incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are uncertain, and do not know which one it is, then incise the larger of the two, and from the pus present.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make them similar to the veins in the upper lip.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more common to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are placed nearby the tongue assist in phlebotomy of the carotid artery during prophylaxis for epilepsy and in the treatment of diseases of the uvula, as well as mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of phlebotomy in this case is that the patient lies down with their head slightly elevated and their tongue lowered, and you should look at the vein from one side and the other side, and the color of each vein is darkening towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then phlebotomize each vein, and be careful not to pierce through them as they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those in which there is blood flow for all men, and the method of phlebotomy for them is done in two ways, either with a mirtilat or olive mixture made thinly; or by cutting with a phlebotomizing knife, and it is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This alnessil is that which should be done by making an incision of the specified length and subtlety according to the width of the veins and the narrowness of those vessels.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirtil phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The first sentence is: "If the pulses are as large and visible as often happens, it is necessary to open the concave veins full of blood that appear swollen, and to these which contain thick clotted blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	Here's the translation for the given line in English: "And this is the procedure for lancing an olive:". The previous sentences were translations from the provided text.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this lancing is smaller and with a thin tip, and it is necessary to perform fine vein lancing that contains thin citrus juice blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Furthermore, the lancing of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, drains the blood from the sick areas that are located in the neck and back, and of that which purifies the feet and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the lancer to be cautious when performing lancing, as there is an artery nearby, and if it should be touched or punctured during lancing, the artery will be cut and blood will flow, so it must not be lanced with a sharp instrument, but rather sliced like a slice of bread.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilic vein does not appear due to a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you locate it and switch to another one or search for its branches; or lance in the area at the end of the arm, as this is visible; slice it with a lancing instrument like a slice of bread as mentioned before.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to lance the median cubital vein, then it is necessary to be in front of the bend of the arm and find the location between where you know the pulse is located, and hold it with a cloth; place your hand on it and locate the vein with a concave incision using a lancing instrument like a slice of bread as mentioned before, and be careful not to miss the area near the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel the tenderness of the pulse, press in the location that you have marked with a cloth, and that pressure is on the artery, so it swells and should be avoided.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see blood flow during the lancing like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, then you know it is from an artery; place your thumb and forefinger on it for a long time; remove your thumb, and if the blood is severed, as it often happens, tighten the arm and let go.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the patient to avoid wetting them, be cautious with them and do not let them move for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood is not severed and there is no medicine available, then you should cut the artery if it appears; as its end will contract and the blood will be cut off; or take scissors, cut the wound, and take a piece of cloth and tightly compress the area near the vein with pressure and pulse for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the blood is severed, that's good; and if it is not, then take care of it with the remedy that follows the location of the powders causing bleeding.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The draining of blood from the wound is difficult due to its small size and the possibility of the arm's pulse.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Lancing the dark vein is beneficial as it drains blood from the supracranial portion of the head and the region below the chest; since it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein, as mentioned before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	It is necessary for the lancer to be cautious during the lancing of a vein, as there is a nerve nearby; and if it touches or punctures the nerve during lancing, it will result in numbness, which makes healing difficult and recovery slow; sometimes this nerve appears with sensation, and if it is hidden in some people and is thin and not easily visible, it is necessary to pause the lancing using a slicing instrument, avoiding the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you should make an incision along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of lancing the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this way, if you want to lance using a lancing instrument for an olive or a myrtle, as all the blood is saved, since there is neither an artery nor a nerve present.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary that you perform the lancing so as not to hit the tip of the finger with the lancing instrument only, and look for a lighter location, and do not notice it if it is not touched by the first percussion that occurs during the lancing in some cases.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, a hard lump may appear in some people when it is not lanced during the first percussion, but it will not be noticed in the recurrence.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the lancing and its complications are many, for which it is necessary to consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you must know that lancing is not administered except for the preservation of health and with hope for improvement and caution against illness, and that lancing should be performed on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting during spring and autumn, and in winter near meals, when there are signs of swelling.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if it is to be done, let there be phlebotomy [bloodletting] on the third day or at the first pulse that has occurred after three hours have passed from the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But it should be administered when there is a need for it, or whether it is night or day, in any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It is necessary that the child should not be bled before it has reached 14 years of age, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bled except during the fourth month up to the seventh, and old women should not be bled who have already passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be bled in any way, it is necessary to clean the intestines before bleeding with a lion's clyster [enema], if there is an open wound retained, so that the superfluous fluid does not enter the veins during the bleeding of the intestines, which are pure, and that they do not go to the main organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And it should not be bled those who are ill with seasickness or gluttony, nor those afflicted by illness or drunkenness until the ailment has passed, nor someone suffering from dropsy, but rather bleeding should be feared in relation to colic pain and vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplication of sexual desire and labor, exercise of fasting or vigils, and any cause that weakens strength, either bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And in consideration of the subtlety of the fluids beforehand if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medications if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into the bath if there is no cause to prevent it, or exercise for any exercise to make the blood thin.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Stop bleeding from the legs during the day, namely around third hour, just as has been said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perform that the foot should be guarded on that day from all animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear and from all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain and sexual desire and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in the case of a woman, let there be present the causes for which it is customary among men to use aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar to these according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the one who is to be bled with a pulse or that of the patient who needs to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And extract the arm, and feel it with your own hand, the one who is to be bled, two or three times; and tighten the ligature with ropes or bands and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the ligature should be tightened, for if the ligature is not tight enough, or the ligature is excessive, then prevent blood flow; or if it is softening, then immediately prevent the heart from beating.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And the ligature, it is necessary that the one who needs to be bled feel his own hands between them until the veins are inflamed and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the one who is to bleed anoints his bleeding spot with a little of ancient oil specifically; and pause your left hand on that vein, over the place where the bloodletting is to be done, so that a small amount of blood flows out, and the percussion should cease because some of the veins behave like cords and flee when the bleeding is to be done, and those are the ones that are filled with vitality and when you pause the bleeding over them, they contract and are discovered; and the bloodletting does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, it is necessary that the one who is to bleed should be fixed and carefully considered in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And pause the bleeding, but if the vein is cut in one examination, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat the examination a little later, or quickly if the location is not marked.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is marked or the patient feels pain, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the ligature, because excessive heat will cause an abscess to form, nor enter into the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the blood flows thinly, and you fear that there will not be enough blood, then you repeat the bloodletting in the same place according to the rule and adjust the opening a little, and do so quickly before the location is marked, because when it is marked in many men, make only a few incisions.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it has already been marked, then do not repeat on the same place, for there is no excuse to you in any cause; and pause over some part of the oil incision, because it relieves the heart of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this location with oil than with other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And administer an oil incision in all bloodletting where you are prohibited from beating the heart, and do it tracheotomy (tyriaca) when it is stopped on one of them over the location, for the blood is made thin and is turned when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated at the site of bloodletting, which often happens, and more so in one who has not been bled for some time or in the incision of a vein with little opening, then take cotton, and pour sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, over it and tighten it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it must be done to bring the yellowish part of that vein or another vein into contact with it.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If a black or green discoloration remains in the area for some days, do not notice it; and if you wish, apply some cause of alienation and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamint or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times abscesses and protrusions occur, you must perform a lancing of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on it, and if you notice that the area becomes soft, you must apply pressure to it; if the protrusion is bad and malicious, then be careful to place some cause of what has been mentioned on it, because strong blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply a plaster with a substance that has astringent properties, so that the area is hardened; and care for it with another remedy until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of its virtue and the color it takes on in the blood, depending on what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the blood is black, you must allow it to settle until it turns red; if the blood appears thick, you must allow it to settle until it becomes thin; and if it is sharp (acute), you must preserve its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	To the person who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting on a certain day, the lancing of the vein should be made larger, and the lancet should be long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In a weak person, the opposite of that should be done; and in that case, bloodletting should be performed too often, and the instrument used to let blood should be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method for venous lancing is a transverse section rather than a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of venous lancing avoids blood flow and nerve injury, and is safer than lancing according to latitude (north-south) and longitude (east-west).
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	When fainting is likely to occur, venous lancing should be done; and before doing so, you must treat the person with a small amount of pennyroyal infusion in white vinegar or simple warm scalded oxymel, and let blood three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is congestion in the chest, you must take something before venous lancing to infuse with myrrh syrup or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or with aromatic and fragrant syrup and oil.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs, venous lancing should be done, and the cause of this is likely due to too much blood; in that case, you must drink water from meat and a subtle fragrant syrup; use aromatics in some way, and limit their weight on your feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes that were mentioned in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	If someone wants to reduce the size of their arm and dissolve their blood every day, it is necessary for that person who requires venous lancing as a strong evacuation method, and its virtue is gentle; it will gradually dissolve blood according to the quantity of its virtue in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if someone wants to reduce the size of their arm and expel blood several times, and their body is strong, do so approximately seven or eight hours after the first venous lancing.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But if someone wants to direct the blood from their body in the opposite direction of where it normally flows, it must be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in a body where there is already much hot blood that is sharp and causes fever, it must be expelled from the body once and a large amount must be expelled with an enlarged opening until fainting occurs; then you will have preserved all the conditions of venous lancing, and you should place your hand on the pulse of the blood to prevent death in the event of fainting. However, several times it happens when the person performing venous lancing is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you wish to release the arm and drain the blood as observed, since the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to draw blood, press firmly upon that area while gently extending it, for that is very harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it be until it is ready for second venesection; or let the vein's coagulation of blood in the orifice subside; or pause over that with a lancet, or leech, and apply a light compression to it until the blood has come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not touch it until the swelling subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If there is a need to draw blood a second time and it is not an excuse, then make an incision on that area or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is venesectioned at the crook or the basilica, when it is not shrunken or hidden, for it consists of these two.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the venesection is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the needle becomes swollen and the vein appears prominently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure firmly with a tight bandage and make the venesection transversely, not longitudinally or obliquely.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The incision should be wide and your venesection on that joint of the hand, make it small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is forbidden, immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, you are exempt from immersing your hand in warm water, and the flow of blood during winter is stopped by immersing the body in warm water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the venesection of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there is neither a pulsating vein nor a nerve nearby.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The venesection of the cephalic vein of the right hand is beneficial for liver disease.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the venesection is that you apply pressure to the hand firmly or with your other hand, after it has been immersed in warm water, until the vein swells and becomes clearly visible to the eye; and make the incision transversely; and if it is not possible to find the vein completely, this will still be beneficial.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to injure your hand with the lancet, for it is where the tendons of the fingers are exposed without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow from it, for if you do not immerse your hand in warm water, the blood will clot in the vein's orifice, and the flow is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when blood is drawn according to the required quantity, let it be paused on olive oil and salt so that it does not coagulate quickly; and similarly, this must be done in all narrow passages.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of venesection from that of the left hand is for gallbladder disease.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do the same in the venesection of this as you did in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the saphenous vein's venesection is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as uterine disease, retention of menstruation, and diseases of the nose and ulcers of the chest and abdomen, and similar to these conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the venesection is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it until the veins become visible; and on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein must be pointed out, and from there it should be followed to the face of the foot towards many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, venesection should be performed widely along the arm or towards the leg, for it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform venesection on the face of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot, and pause your venesection with the incision you make transversely, as if you were about to make an oblique incision.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let the venesections be circular.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is forbidden, immerse your foot in warm water and let the blood flow from it until it is drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the venesector makes a mistake in the first observation, immerse it again with the lancet in the same place, for the location is safe; and do not fear the trickery, but be careful of the nerves as previously said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do the same with the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location should be similarly as we said, the heel must be placed under the wild thigh-bone.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The assistance for the lancing of it is for back pain when due to blood clots.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the lancing is that the patient immerses in bath, and then tightens the back muscles from the lower part of the spine to the heel, four fingers' width above it, under a long, thin bandage, as it will not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, you do the lancing according to your skill and depending on the transverse direction, and that is better; or insert it with an incision or cut it with a section, as the place is dry.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in many men who are not weakened; and if that disappears without being felt, you do the lancing of a branch of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the ear and the ankle.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Be careful with the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Release the constriction and place on the site of the lancing, pressing the area, as it heals easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventosection and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventosections are for corns, or eruptions, or verrucae.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventosection is performed in two ways: one of them is by scoring and extraction of blood, and the other is ventosection without scoring.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	The ventosection without scoring can be done in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The ventosections with scoring and extraction of blood are in twelve parts of the body, among which one where ventosections are applied is the ankle, and it is the last part of the leg; and the middle part of the neck; and ventosections of the chin just below the jawbone; and ventosections of both arms; and ventosections of the shoulder; and ventosections of two feet; and ventosections of two shins; and ventosections of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventosection does not extract blood from the veins, but rather from the small scattered vessels in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the effect as achieved by lancing; nor is it necessary that ventosection be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion before the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if it is necessary due to disease or constipation, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in men, blood multiplies within them until it becomes necessary to extract it by ventosection and they become seriously ill; and of those who suffer from repletion and heat on their body and head, and neck; and of those who suffer from pruritus on the body and forehead, and darkness and dullness in the eyes; and of those who lose the site of their ventosection; and of those whose laughter is excessive; and of those who taste blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is protruded and spits blood; and of those whose sleep is increased, and of those who see blood while sleeping, old age, and other similar causes to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when it happens in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth decade of the month, you command that ventosection be performed more than two or three hours after the day has passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the assistance for ventosection of the neck is that when it causes gravity in the head and causes sinking into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventosection is at the site of lancing of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not appropriate to use that which is of complete purge, or in which there is catarrh, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore, it is not necessary to use that for the elderly or those with diseases of the head.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	However, for those who continue to suffer from it, it is done by forgetting; and therefore you command the ventosector to pause his hand a little on the ventosection at the sites, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	However, ventosection of the alveolar is at the site of lancing of the vein radialis and basilica: and therefore it causes asthma, constriction of the chest and scissuring of the stoma of the chest, coughing, repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to be cautious with the ventosection of the alveolar, as if it is left alone, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventosection of the alveolar causes headaches and migraines, dizziness, nausea, pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of lancing of the vein basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary to command the ventosector not to press his hand with scoring so as not to incise the artery and cause blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Swelling of the lower jaw is treated with alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, resembling diseases that are in the mouth, and they are located near incision for alveolar puncture on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The swelling that is made on both cheeks is treated with cataplan, which is made by heating.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The swelling of the two cavities inside the eyelids is also treated with phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, falcata and cephalica, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and these small veins from other large veins enter until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	The command is given to the one who performs swelling not to proceed with scratching, because the area is denuded of skin, and there are nerves and arteries there.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This is a swelling which is made on the buttocks and is used to treat hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	It is necessary that you command the one who performs swelling that it should be a large swelling, and that it should be made of horsehair, because the area needs deep incision; and strong blunt swellings are better than subtle swellings, and it should be scratched with scratching.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But swellings on the small joints are made for minor manifestations, because they attract blood from the entire body, and they are used to treat old pains in the throat and the mother, and the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and are used to stop bleeding and swelling; and they are located near incision of two veins, and in this way they can be drained, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it should not weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the swellings that can be drained, the remedy for the swellings on two joints is close to it.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of swellings is that you press the swelling at the beginning and suck it out with timely suction, and do not prolong the position of the swellings, but lightly release them and remain there constantly, and that humors come to the area by accident.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area redden and swell, and the pus appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you scratch and repeat the suction little by little, and pay attention to the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has tender skin with rare pores, it is necessary that you scratch once and do not go further, so that the area is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the one who performs swelling to increase the scratching and make a small incision, and suck the pus with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the pus is thick, it is necessary that you scratch twice, because in the first scratching the path of subtlety to the blood and water is opened up.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second, during the thorough examination, the vigorous extraction of the thick pus takes place.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul-smelling, a third scratching should be made to achieve the goal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or in small amounts, it suffices for us with one scratching.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract a lot of blood, scratch with deep scratching; if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to make a strong scratching.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scratching" only refers to the depth of the incision.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites of the swellings be lubricated with a more lenient and resolving oil; if it is in summer, for example with olive oil or violet oil, or sesame oil from coarse grain, or if it is in winter, use oil of garlic, oil of lily, camomile oil, or blood oil, and those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick, fry oil of amaranth or balsam, oil of olive, oil of dill, and those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the one who performs swelling has wide pores of tender skin, it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and it should be washed with water or hot water from solanum, or coarse grain water, or bitter water, and those similar to these.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the one whose blood is of great moisture, wash your swellings with vinegar or bitter water from myrtle and sumac and those similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that person whose superfluities are thick, wash their boils with old wine or water of roses, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or camomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	It is necessary to keep the boil covered before washing it; it is necessary that it be administered immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it is necessary that they sleep near the boil.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	It is necessary that the sandbag (ventosandus) be tied with a leech (phlebotomatus) before bloodletting (ventosationem).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who will lance or is to perform bloodletting is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation, it is necessary that you take cooling substances, such as mustard, vinegar, lemons, and shallots, and bind them, and use julep and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Stop their food, such as potatoes, and meat from sparrows, and food seasoned with sour things, and similar things to them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	For that person whose complexion is cold, it is necessary to take elixir of almonds or elixir of anise seeds, sumac, and a moderately-scented spice between winter and spring; and it should be commanded to use little drink and eat less, and stop consuming potatoes, cabbage, fish, and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of boil lancing and bloodletting, let them drink more than they eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink in some hours alpharac tyrionic or musk medicine, that is musk, or celery before the boil lancing or bloodletting, or near them to comfort the main members and to make the blood thin; and it is not necessary for them to take that scald.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, boils that are not incised are boils that are stopped in the liver, and on the spleen, and in the umbilicus, in the joints of the fingers, and the pit of the ankle, because these members cannot bear incision on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but the attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a boil on the nipple in sickness of bleeding of the nose's blood; and they use that to dissolve cold and thickened boils in the member, such as stopping on the stomach and umbilicus; because that thins the member and scalds it, relieving pain, as it resolves boils.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it occurs in their opening or eruption, it is stopped on the nose because, by the strength of attraction, it weakens the opening and eradicates the eruption from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is stopped on the liver and spleen, boils are trapped in those locations.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These boils are administered with juice only, but some are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some are administered full of boiling water in sickness of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is why the boil should be filled with pus and be large, which means boiling water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of boil administered with heat: the width of the opening should be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of pus should be the size of a palm; and in the depth, in the location that is in the circumference, the depth should be the size of a finger, the hole should be small according to the quantity that can fit an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make a mixture of rose oil or lemon, large pieces of leon (possibly an old spelling for lion's tooth, a type of root), ginger and pepper to prevent the member from slipping from its position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let a thin transverse iron bar be placed over it (the affected area), on which a candle is held alight.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this (plaster or poultice) should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and less in amount according to the severity of the illness and the state of the patient using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And (plasters or poultices for) children and weak people should be different from those of strong young adults.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of applying this plaster with fire on the member is that it extends the meat with fire properly, but only a little bit of wax candle should be placed under it, and it should be placed on the middle of the transverse iron bar at the middle of the plaster, so that the fire is ignited around the edges to prevent burning the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And let it be applied to the member of the patient, and the hot plaster should be placed on top of the stick that we have mentioned, until when we have applied the plasters and do not need the heat and let the vapor rise over the stick, then the plaster will dissolve quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And cook the meat according to its method, and repeat if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	However, in the case of plaster for pleurisy (inflammation of the lining of the lungs), it is not applied with fire, as there is no transverse iron bar or stick. Instead, it is filled with water and applied only to the member (affected area).
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger the plaster, the better, because it can receive more water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 75.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisuga is not administered to other members except to those members where it is impossible to apply plasters due to their small size, such as gums and similar areas; or in a member deprived of skin, such as the nose and similar places.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those (plasters) where you have found Sanguisuga is to use them in thick muddy waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be soaked in muddy water for a day and night until they become soft, and there is no remaining cause in their stomachs; and they should be evacuated from the body at first with phlebotomy (bloodletting) and with plasters; and the member of the patient should be bathed until it becomes red; and they should be applied to it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and soft.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suck the liquid from the area with a plaster, it is more beneficial in addition.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, wash the area with vinegar and add coarse water to it; and rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the duration of blood in the wound is prolonged due to Sanguisuga, and it begins to ooze, then put a cloth on it in cold water, and place another cloth over it until the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If there is excessive bleeding, sprinkle it with powdered vitriol triturated or similar stiptic substances over it until the blood is absorbed; or apply freshly cooked broad beans to the area and let them adhere to it, and the blood will be absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repetition of Sanguisuga, when possible, should be changed.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the use of Sanguisuga is forbidden for suspension, then wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the area until it bleeds; and apply plasters because those that feel any bleeding will soon stick to it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to adhere, sprinkle a little bit of aloe vera powder, salt or ash on them and immediately apply.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Similarly, the process of the third division begins: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is mostly concerned with the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations due to accidents.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or son, my child, aware that this chapter is scorned by foolish physicians and the common people and those who do not pay attention to ancient books nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scholars on earth is hidden; and I have not forgotten it at any time; but I have not applied what follows, except after a long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of them, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And let us direct our attention to experiments and studies for the duration of our lives.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the main science and about which experiments were carried out; since here I abbreviate it for you and relieve it of unnecessary elaboration; and abbreviate it in the end of abbreviation; and show it in the end of explanation; and form various shapes of the instruments used in that, as is done by adding an explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections of the nature of bone fractures, from which a preliminary is necessary before we begin the restoration of broken limbs and those of various types for each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Recognize that I must declare in the introduction of this chapter the main points of the discourse; and the chapters that follow will be filled by craftsmen and placed in accordance with the truth of those matters; therefore, it is for you and those who are eager to learn or master this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so, say that when any fracture or dislocation or twist or break occurs, it is necessary at first to use trephining or an incision, or whatever may be appropriate, except for any reason prohibited, such as debilitation of virtue, or if the patient is unconscious, or an old person in decay, or the time of intense heat or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be satisfied with food consisting of leeks and birds such as sparrows and thrushes; and prohibit thick meats and fill with any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are certain of a cauterized abscess, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his original regime according to what was customary for him.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods consisting of soft and thick food that has viscosity, such as wheat porridge made with water, rice, peas, beans, beef, fresh fish, large vegetables and similar, and with this diet coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that when bones are fractured in men who are elderly or in the first youth, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continued and consolidated according to their nature at all times by the drying of those limbs, and those that are in the end of softness such as bones of small children are continued and consolidated.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and tightens around the broken bone in every way some similar to glue in which swelling occurs that adheres and hardens it until it is also consolidated and joined together, until the end of the softness and firmness come, such as fire at the beginning, unless you prohibit any cause of its operation.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick as we said earlier.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The fracture varies according to the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, since the fracture of the thigh bone is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the hand; and similarly all other members are different from one another.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I return with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The diversity of fractures is important.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Fractures of bones are diverse in their manifestations; since it is called a curved fracture when it occurs at the joints; and some fractures depend on the length of the bone: and those that occur in the shaft and splintering, whether they are present or absent such as when the hand is prepared to write, and is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and is a fissured fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every type of fracture has its own pain or torment in the healing process, as will be explained in its separate chapters.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	By this is known the fracture of the bone: it is a deformity and prominence of the bone that can be felt, and it is that which you compress with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, if there is no apparent deformity or it is not felt when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel much pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be a deformity or small fissure, in which case you must press it with your hand and compress it completely; stop on the medicine of which there will be a reminder at this moment appropriate for the location; and apply tightness by gentle compression.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Know that the location which is arched and not divided into two or something else that does not occur in satiety, such as the entire circumference of its part, requires correction from your time of applying a cauterizing aposteme.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If a cauterizing aposteme has occurred, leave it for several days until the aposteme stops; and hold it down with any method that you can of lifting and binding.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Know that restoration of the location and puncturing of it is easier than in the bone where this satiety occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen the area as the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there is satiety, it is necessary to perform an extension of this broken member from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Place your position alongside the broken member as it is in its natural form, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, and then perform that you make the additions return to their places with ingenuity and any method that you can use in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be careful not to cause harm or injury to the patient by your operation or treatment; and perform it as best you can apply one bone to another in the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	It is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if you find any other cause, correct it and bind it with the amount of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Be careful of excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause apostemes or contractions in the limb through their operations, or you have seen this happen through the operations of their watchful eyes.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect, equalize, and perform a decent operation and tightening of that member, rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and warn him not to worsen it during the times of his vigils and sleep, watch his rotation and agitation, attend to his diet, attend to all his movements with all your strength; wait for the position of the limb to be in a position where pain is assured, which causes are that when he feels the disposition of the position of the painful or injured limb; then it is necessary to change its position to another position in which there is no pain; and watch so that the position of it is straight and bound, so that the limb does not develop tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightening of the broken member is the one I recommend; therefore, know that the broken members are diverse in their smallness and size and in the shape of these.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of thin fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a hard and thick wrapping, because the tight lacing connects the large member and strengthens it all over with tightening, so that no mold enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin with a suitable adjustment of the tightening, place a convenient number of wrappings, three or four according to the member's need; and strengthen your hand slightly with the lacing.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And approach that at the elevated part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen as much as possible without injuring the tightening you have already applied to the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And approach the wrapping of the location of the fracture slightly, and soften the slight tightening little by little, until you take a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another bandage and wrap it over the broken location with the wrapping, and approach the wrappings to the part below the fracture; and let your operation be in tightening the wrapping and softening it as I have said in the primary wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And approach the wrappings of leather or fabric that straighten the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and do not place any cause elsewhere.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And approach the other bandage, and bind over these well-made wrappings as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or cauterizing aposteme in that location, and then place it on the site of the aposteme and stop the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and you strengthen over the stitches.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the stitches are of hard cane race, well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm rinds; and each stitch should be the same size as follows and in this form:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint placed on that fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, but not too much, and the length of the splint should correspond to the size and smallness of the member; and apply tension on the splint with another band according to your first tying; and tie it above the splint as decently as you said in the previous tying instruction, and this tying should be according to the location of the fracture more, and when it is farther from the fracture, the tying should be smaller.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	However, the threads should be moderate in thickness and fineness, and made of linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people using coarse ropes to tie their wounds, it is a great error, when the tying is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve tightness with such thin threads, and it is not necessary that there be space of one finger's width between the splints.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints near the tying in those places, then place some leather or woolen padding under it until it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a wound, and there is rupture in the skin, and I will come to remember it in that chapter according to its specificity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that every broken limb is not straightened with splints on the first day; this is because when the member is large, it does not need to be splinted immediately, but rather after 5 or 7 days, depending on your confidence in the avoidance of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters that the ancients used to restore, which were applied to fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The common method of plaster applied for the restoration of fractures is suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, as it is about which no heat or cold is needed; and you should take powder from milled grain, and this is the marrow of the flour that comes out of the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it in this way, but first strain it through linen cloth, and the consistency of the plaster should not be too thick or thin; and apply it with that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of healing fractures, dislocations and twists: recipe for asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, gum myrrh, migrach (which is a kind of wild frankincense), equal to one thousand drachms; of myrrh and aloe equal to fifty drachms; aloeswood equal to two hundred drachms; all are sieved and powdered and mixed with either alum water or egg white if the patient's complexion is scalded; use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones gently, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of healing fractures and twists: recipe for migrach (wild frankincense) and clay mixture equal to one hundred drachms; myrrh and aloeswood equal to fifty drachms; acacia equal to six drachms; Armenian pitch equal to twenty drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground into a paste with pestle and mortar, sieved, and mixed with water or linen cloth and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and separated bones from their places, and to relieve pain in those areas and wounds and fractures: take wool soaked in sour wine and olive oil and place it on the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, there is no virtue for restoration, abscess healing or the expulsion of pain itself.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores fractured bones: take leaves of wild opium poppy and leaves of fig tree; mix everything to make a plaster of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster applied for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want resolution of abscesses: make a paste with white alum, chamomile, violet flowers, wild rye flour, all ground separately. All are ground and mixed with wine if the member is not scaly.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scaly, then prepare it with water from crushed colander or with water and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another strong method for the resolution of long-lasting abscesses when the member needs restoration: make a paste with white alum and its seeds, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all ground separately and crushed nettle or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the rest of the color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not state in his book that a splint should be placed on the broken member for its restoration, but rather a small wax seal made of wax and oil, and no other cause; and it should be moderate between thick and thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A Gualia it is seen that points are made over the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is excessive dryness with little heat, as is the case with myrrh, ashes, and those similar to them, which we have mentioned previously.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A salve for wounds and pain: a recipe of poppy seeds, celery seeds, ground human hairs or feathers from an eagle, althea, and salt, ground together; they are to be strained and sieved, then cooked, and made into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount according to which the wound must remain open and be dressed, is that you consider if there is not pain or discharge, nor if the bone is broken from its place, then you do not remove it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs intense pain or discharge or swelling at the location, then you should either press or remove it at that time, and apply a plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take cloth and sea sponge, soak it in warm water, then use that to wash the location where the discharge or pain has ceased, and let the member rest for an hour; then place a linen cloth dipped in sour wine or oil or rose oil on top of it, and leave it there overnight to ensure that the abscess is cauterized and the swelling of the member subsides, and the pain of it is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Approach that subtle stricture with a thin and gentle plaster and do not strain it with your initial constriction, and be gentle until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all these symptoms have already subsided completely, and you no longer require plaster and constriction, then you treat it as you did at the beginning of the healing process.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there occurs no cause to the member of those mentioned, then do not remove it for three or four or seven days. And for some days all of this is left to rest for twenty days according to the appearance of the member during removal, as mentioned, until the fracture heals and the flesh adheres to it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then you adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction and tighten the swelling of the patient's food supply as directed in the previous instructions.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see the location of the fracture already drying and extending more than necessary, then know that nutrition must not reach it; therefore wrap it with warm water for three days to prevent this; and gradually loosen the constriction, and through this operation allow the member to receive its nutrients, and heal gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If what the false healers of a fractured member do after it has not healed at the beginning, as is required, and restore it crookedly, according to their operation, and in great fear, if this were correct, they would have enlarged upon it according to the Ancients in their books.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have not seen any of them do this, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are multiple, and the shapes of them are various, and their causes are distinct, because some fracture is caused by blunt force that breaks all the bone and leaves only the marrow as in the case of the thigh, and this type of fracture is called comminuted; or the blow cuts a part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh but does not pass beyond its surface; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two types of fractures can be large or small, and the nature of the fracture is either contracted or stretched; and its cause is blunt force with a hammer or cudgel on stone, and their similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture can either be penetrating and close to the panniculus which is left of the bone; or it can be on the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And a fracture that is narrowed in the bone, in its small hollow, and by this is called this type of fracture hairline.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	A fracture that is caused by cudgel or blunt force on stone, which makes a layer of bone enter the joints inside, and occurs in the concave areas such as in the knees when it is struck and split open and enters into the joints inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this occurs in soft bones like those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are treated similarly, like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	I will return to the topic in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We should be familiar with all these types of fractures through detection and investigation by probing and examination of rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The hairline fracture is recognized by this that it appears on the bone and is abscessed, then becomes thin over it through probing, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through clear signs that they indicate fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscesses in the mouth, fainting, acute fever, sores on the hands or redness of these areas, and similar symptoms in greater dispositions, do not doubt it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you see non-recurrent accidents (incidents), you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it is struck at the beginning as it is struck and that is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the placement of the bone before the twelfth day according to all precautions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary that you remove the bone before the seventh day, knowing that what remains of the bone is rotten from the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the panniculus covering the brain, and is in small pieces and shattered, then it is necessary that you incise the fragmented and shattered parts, as I will advise you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the struck patient, and expose the bone according to custom and your ability according to the figure of the injury, and it should be easy for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you, you must detect the bone, drain blood or an abscess, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and it is that you moisten the area with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, make the injury rest until the abscess subsides, and ensure that there is no bleeding; and then begin with the circumnision of the bone and removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you incise the bone with a narrow incision tool, and this is its form: Then administer another incision tool of slightly greater width; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then apply the incision tool wider than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	It is necessary that you have several different incision tools, some of which are wider than others, and some shorter than the others and with sharp tips at the end, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them with ease when striking the incision tool so as not to harm the skull and pierce it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you pierce around it before administering the incision tools with stirrups, which are called non-penetrating stirrups.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called so, but rather that the stirrup does not reach the end of the bone from above, because at the tip of the stirrup is a round extremity or edge similar to a rim or small circle, which prohibits it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is appropriate that you take a large number of these stirrups, the amount of which corresponds to the thickness of each bone, but only when it is present in all parts of the skull, the tip of which is sharp, the quantity in length and width should correspond to the thickness of the skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of stirrups: The method of piercing around the broken bone is to place the stirrup on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the stirrup to another location, and stop at a point where the total thickness of the ray or environment is reached.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then incise the bone using incision tools between each crack, making it as thin as possible at the end of the cut, as we have said, until you extract the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by means of certain instruments that you will prepare for this, such as tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	It is necessary that you take care so that the incision tool does not touch any nerve of the skull.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, as you perforate the bone and separate it from the skull if it is continuous with it, and extract it, then shave and smooth it on the roughness of the bone with another instrument similar to an incision tool, but rather thin and more delicate than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small pieces and shattered bones remain, then take them with ease with what is necessary from the instruments; and then cure the injury with liniments and ointments that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The second method of operation is light and distant from fear, which is called the Gallic method and has great praise; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture in the place where the fracture is most vehement and manifest, until when you have discovered that fracture and stopped at its tip, the end of the incision tool should be long and gentle. Its form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The concave fracture is lean and does not incise any cause, and the acute fracture is flat from two sides forward in length, sometimes; that the concave fracture should be adjacent to the skull with its edge sharp, incising the bone aggressively.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Approach with caution and strike the incision of a fracture with a small hammer inside where the bone is visible and easily accessible, ensuring that the panicum (fat) does not occur in the area you fear may cause complications. If the surgeon was the most foolish and ignorant of all men and asleep, certainly, he would do so.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any attached cause of the bone by fat in certain locations of the bone, you will make an incision along its edge with a round chisel, releasing it easily and safely, because it has been released from harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture does not penetrate into the fat, and what is separated or remains from the bone is a face, it remains rough and has subtle protuberances, then you must smooth that roughness and remove those protrusions with fine razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places the most suitable and correct ones for that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	It is necessary to administer the treatment with the razor that you use at the beginning of the procedure, close to the very subtle fat, and do not stop until you have finished administering all the fat and the fine layer of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Furthermore, in other small capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer treatment according to what you learned during correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because it is not suitable for all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	It stands on what we have written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the fat is rectangular when you remove the bone, then you must take cloth of it according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in vinegar and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and lightly apply the plaster on it that you can without causing injury; and administer the liniment to it with a wide spread, but not too strong, only according to the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; and remove it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as lime rind and wheat flour, and powder of incense and Aristolochia, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make powder from these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, so that they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine with a property that prevents adherence and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Keep in mind your virtue that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and do not leave it in dirt or anything else; nor let virulence accumulate there; because when it is in contact with brain fat, it corrupts it and poisons it, and causes a malicious mischief to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	It happens in the healing of the head, as the bone is clarified and especially when the treatment of it is administered, it becomes blackened on its surface; and therefore, consider whether the patient experiences the complications that we have mentioned, knowing that they are harmful with every precaution.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it does not become blackened due to the medicine applied on it, and is in the nature of that medicine that makes it blacken, then you must take honey one part and three parts of rose oil. And with those liniments take a cloth, and place it on the healing area; and treat it with the appropriate medicines for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On restoration of the nose when broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into one piece but two pieces lifted up or one of them is observed because in it there are two bones, where the lower part is cartilaginous and is not actually broken but is bent, twisted, and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	However, if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert a small probe into its nose and guide that fracture inside with your finger and outside with a spoon handle until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Make sure it is done easily, and be careful that your procedure does not harm the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not extend to that, then it is necessary to align it with the end of the bone where there is a slight bulge.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, you should do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Take care of it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait for the seventh or tenth day for the cauterization of the wound to heal.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or insert two calipers if the fracture is in two parts, and make sure they are as thick as to fill the hole in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	As some of the ancient restorers did, calipers should be wrapped in bandages and left on all day, but I have not seen it; however, it is necessary that the cloth should be wrapped in alum-oil emulsion with powdered millstone, and leave it in until the bone has set and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes it should be inserted in the nose, in place of the nostril, for fear that a foreign body has penetrated it, wrapped in lion cloth; and if the patient's nose fracture is visible and obvious, and they are not forbidden to breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This phrase does not concern you; if it pleases you, do this, and if it pleases you, perform cauterization. (Note: "cauteras de punt" refers to a heated metal probe used for cauterizing wounds.)
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another boil appears, cauterize the nose with a horn or a piece of cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with alum. (Note: alum is a mineral used as an astringent.)
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if the boil does not appear, then apply powder of chalk and cinnamon with alum on it, place your hand over it (the nose), and do not let anything come out from the nose.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are fractured and small or comminuted (crushed into many pieces), then you should break them apart and remove them with instruments suitable for the case; and sew up the wound, and care for it with a dressing that promotes healing and consolidation, and with appropriate ointments.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If a plague occurs inside the nose, then you should care for it with warm compresses and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed. (Note: "canulas de plom" refers to lead tubes used to drain pus.)
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV. (Note: in medieval manuscripts, each chapter was often preceded by its number, usually in Roman numerals.)
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is fractured. (Note: "mandibula" refers to the lower jawbone.)
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not associated with a plague, consider first whether the fracture is only on the outside, and if it is not broken in two and is curved at the edges inside, then its diagnosis is easy. (Note: "plagua" refers to an infection or ulcer.)
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jawbone, you should insert your index finger (left hand) into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, you should insert the index finger of your right hand; and you should press gently inward at the inner part of the fracture, while applying pressure outward on the edges of the bone with your other hand; doing this with care and evenly pressing both hands.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone fracture has already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of both parts so that their alignment can be achieved as much as possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is commotion of teeth to disruption (loose teeth), you should bind those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or gut; and place cotton over the fractured jawbone, and a double layer of cloth, and a broad strip of well-made cloth, or a single piece of gauze the length of the jawbone; and tie it up as necessary for the healing process, so that it is not destroyed. (Note: "cot" refers to cotton.)
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And tell the patient to rest and remain calm, and restrict their intake of sour foods (lemon).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then examine it and loosen it on the third day; and correct any deformity with powder of milled rice, alum, or chalk flour (calcium carbonate); as you have removed the cotton, place wool over the dressing. (Note: "terra" refers to clay.)
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And thus, when the dressing has been applied and the bone alignment is not altered, leave it in place until it is healed and strengthened (the fracture), as this fracture often takes three weeks to heal.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another boil appears again, administer the same treatment as previously described until it is healed and the boil is drained. (Note: "remaugut" refers to drainage.)
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is associated with a plague, consider whether it is a bone fragment separated or osteitis (inflammation of the bone), and carefully remove those fragments with instruments suitable for the removal of such fragments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the orifices of the plague are narrow, you should enlarge them with a leeches (medieval medical instrument used for bloodletting) according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed the fragments, and there is no more pus draining from them, you should sew up the orifices of the plague if they are wide; otherwise, cover it with one of the dressings suitable for that purpose and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V. (Note: in medieval manuscripts, each chapter was often preceded by its number, usually in Roman numerals.)
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured. (Note: "furcula" refers to the clavicle bone.)
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	For some time, the clavicle is broken at the front edge and this fracture can occur in one of three ways. (Note: "manieyra" refers to a way or manner.)
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken (fractured), separated, or separated into two parts other than osteitis (inflammation of the bone); and it is easy to restore; or because it occurs with osteitis, and restoration is difficult; or because the fracture is associated with a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that, when the fracture is without wound, is that you make two ministers present, so that one holds the assistance and follows the broken neck, and the other extends the neck to that parted side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with the teeth that the form may be made according to its shape, and it should not be in a hollow or concave position.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If more extension is needed, then it is necessary that you place a support of fabric or wool over the patient's chest, and its size should be according to your need; stretch, lift and compress the neck and press the chest with your hand toward the fracture until it is aligned as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the fracture's end out through the partition outside, which is necessary for the traction, then it is necessary that the patient is supine on their neck, and place a large size thumb or hand on one of the muscles.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the servant presses the muscle of it on the outside of the fracture until the bone of the neck is lifted to the traction point above, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the teeth.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If symptoms of the neck (pain) and swelling are felt, it is necessary that you cut through it and extract those symptoms with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, you make an incision through it with one of the incisors that you have prepared for this purpose, as you had placed the saw on the neck that serves for the chisel; and it is a chisel made of wood or iron, and its shape is like:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to the shape of a chisel, with its concavity facing downward; and let its width be according to your need, depending on the size of the bone or the hollowness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the wound caused by the incision that you made when extracting the swelling of the bone is wide and certain of pus, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the wound is small or you fear pus, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If pus occurs, then you pour wine vinegar and rose oil over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the bone (neck or spine) is fractured without a wound and incision, then you place a plaster made of flour mixed with egg white on it, and place it on a thick leather pad, and place your hand over the area if it is necessary, and take human fat, which is called "torca" by the Saracens, that is long, and its width should be one palm or slightly more; and place double powders over the leather pad and the plaster; and take a thin wooden stick with a width of three fingers and wrap it in cloth, and wrap the cloth around the stick in the location above the fracture; and pour human fat as needed, and rub it over the neck and over the patient's head, and move it back and forth over the area until the bone is reduced to its original position. Whenever the bone is reduced with a reduction that descends, it should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And in addition, the stick should not be harmful to the fractured bone; and therefore, you must examine the patient every day, as when the swelling is reduced or the stick is removed, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's head on a pillow or bolster and sleep with their head slightly elevated, so that the support under their neck is also elevated, which raises the fracture of the neck to an elevation of the muscle; or it may be that their arms are placed on their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless pus or pressure sores occur in the area before twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the plaster if you see any signs of infection in the area, and adjust it in the bandage and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the neck is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it should be strengthened and comforted according to the usual period of twenty-eight days, and in some cases in men, it is done within the month's time of that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken at its middle part and not completely, but only at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore when it is broken in its middle part, and not completely, but only at the edges, it is recognized by touch alone. Then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare for its reduction and align it in accordance with its natural position in any possible way that you can.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Place powdered poppy seeds mixed with white of egg and stopper lion; place double-fold cloth over it; place on the steel rod of thin table according to the size of the spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the rod is concave at one of the parts of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with stopper lion and adjust the rod accordingly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Place strong and long human hair over it, with tight constriction and secure the rod inside so that it does not protrude from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the bandage every day; and every time it becomes soft, replace it with a new one and tighten and adjust the rod if it protrudes from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Wash the patient over his own bed.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula will heal in 20 days or a little more.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Therefore when this number is completed, you should remove the bandage and be sure that the bones from which it began have healed and their dissolution is not feared.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if there is pressure on the bone and you see swelling, then cut it open and remove it, and proceed as previously mentioned in the cervical fracture treatment or cauterize the abscess if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in its middle part and it heals by itself; but the ends move which are swollen and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	The signs that the middle part is broken are that it inclines towards the sides and a great pain occurs, difficulty in breathing, coughing, high fever and vomiting; and it is visible in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The treatment of this is that the patient lies on his back, a cushion placed between his shoulder blades; and press the muscles of it, adjust the ribs of it with both hands and be careful during the operation and in the alignment according to any possible method that is appropriate and convenient, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Place a plaster and stopper on it, and place a thin steel rod of willow or walnut and its equivalent in weight, then wrap it; be careful not to damage the broken bone; move it slowly according to the curvature of the back for some time, and tighten it with proper constriction; consider the position at all times, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, you should cause its removal due to corrosion or prussic acid, pain, or abscess that occurs in the area; then cut and release it, remove the plaster and correct any problems caused by it with methods of healing it; and replace the plaster as needed; and adjust its tightness until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs in large parts and not near the spine; and at the ends of these divisions, it does not occur due to compression but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the detection of this is not hidden from sensation, so you should investigate it with questions.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the treatment is to fill the fracture with questions according to any possible method until it is filled as necessary, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a rod, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the sides, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncture, like the pain that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason the lining of the lung should be applied; and there will be difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting with blood; and this is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancients were skilled in that area with many ingenious methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: it is necessary to stop the food of the patient that produces inflammation and wind, so that his stomach may be inflated and extended, and the fracture should be pushed towards the sides outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should avoid this as much as possible to prevent the formation of abscess, if not necessary; and if it occurs, help with it immediately.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Some of them said it should be stopped above the bladder and that urine should be expelled; this is like reasoning, but it is feared that the bladder may attract impurities to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Some of them said: it should be covered with wool that has been immersed in hot oil, and powder should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, and the position should be aligned when wrapping it according to its curvature; and the patient should be treated with pleurisy diet and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is experiencing intense constriction which they cannot bear, and their bones press on a tender spot through puncture, fear for the patient arises. Therefore, it is necessary to make an incision at that location, expose the fractured rib, cover it with the instrument mentioned before (which preserves the opening), remember its recall, and cut the bone easily, then extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we adjust the two lips of the wound (if it is large), sew them up with sutures, and care for it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If there is an abscess inside (a collection of pus), then you must make an incision and pour warm oil on the affected area, wait for it to heal, and take care of the patient with whatever is required for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	The person should lie down on their side on the affected side until they recover.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fracture of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck and soon thereafter cause their adhesion, similar to fractures of the spine in the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you want to know whether a fracture will heal or not, consider that if the muscles around it are already softened and stiffened and dead and cannot be strengthened or extended, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in this case, it is fatal within a month.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if the muscles are bad and feel constriction when pressed or pricked with a needle, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see a fracture of the spine in the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, consider the position of the legs (paralysis).
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that they are already softened (meaning the fracture has healed), then apply whatever is appropriate for such cases, and when they lie on their back, they vomit involuntarily and have a feeling of restlessness and sometimes lie on their chest and cannot urinate, then you know it is fatal, and do not bother with its treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of these occur, the cause is better and easier to manage.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for this is to perform the incision of the abscess with a warm cautery applied to the adhered spine, or with mullein leaves soaked in oil; apply it several times a day until the abscess is healed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a comforting and healing plaster, strengthen it with lint, and command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the affected side until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to adhere the bone to the cartilage or any cause that has been separated from it, then you must dry the affected area and remove the bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound (if it is large), sew them up with sutures; and cover it with a dressing made of ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the joint of the bone at the ankle is broken and the end of the tendon is affected, then you must insert your left hand into the buttocks, grab the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by equalizing it, and cover it with a plaster and splint if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel broken joints in it (the patient), then cut them open, remove the bone, and treat the wound with the treatment prescribed until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the inguinal hernia.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the inguinal area are usually broken, and if they break, their fracture is not a true fracture but rather a dislocation at the extremity that is pushed inwards and goes through the length and slope towards the affected side; and when the patient feels pain in that area and pressure or pricking with a needle, the hernia swells when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of this is to stretch your hand over it until it covers the fracture, which is the shape of the hernia.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of it (the hernia), then you grab it as much as possible according to what is appropriate for equalizing it, until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or slopes towards the affected side, then you have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of the fracture is prepared.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have grabbed it, apply a plaster to it, and cover it with a wooden or cloth splint, and strengthen it by tying it tightly, without fear of causing further fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Grab the concavity with what fills it until it tightens evenly, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms (a collection of pus), you stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is healed, and cover it with whatever is appropriate to heal it; then return to the restoration of the hernia, and strengthen it as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this happens in the bones at the joints or they are fractured, you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Title. XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the Restoration of Adjuvant Bone Fractures.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutor is that which is between the shoulder and the neck.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is done in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a flat piece of lead of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And attach them at both ends with straps, and place it in a raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the patient over a seat, and throw his broken arm into the hole up to the handle, which is in the middle of where the curve of the pole is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it for some serious reason, or the minister extends it to the outside; and have the doctor and his assistants near where the fracture is, until the fracture returns as needed.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient lies on his back and suspends his arm from his neck with a strap, and commands two assistants to one of them to hold what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other to hold the pillow below him; and each one extends to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, you must pull on the fracture with a strap and on the other side with another strap, and each of the two assistants extends to their sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is close to the muscle's edge, it is necessary that half of the strap be placed on the handle and the other half on the side of the fracture.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, it is necessary that the strap be placed at that location and on that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Tie it with ease and without effort, and apply it as necessary and in good alignment, then pull on it if an abscess does not develop.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess forms, leave the tightening for seven days and apply wool soaked in warm vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess subsides, then pull on it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of strengthening it is to apply plaster on the fracture, and place a cover of thick cloth over the plaster; and adjust the arm on that support, and place his hand open on the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And hold the cloth and pull on the support for the arm to be in a stable position, unless there is any reason that prevents it due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And you use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture than the others; and between each splint leave the width of a finger, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture with an addition of three digits in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And pull on the splints with the tightening mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your tightening on the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as the fracture becomes longer, the tightening should become smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if the situation of the splints and the tightening is as described at the time when you restore the limb to its position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, leave the tightening and splints for seven days as described.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the strap in all parts for three days so that there is no immediate or inflammation at the site, or food is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening of the strap; and therefore correct everything as described.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that there will be no problem with this, do not remove the ligature until at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The patient's sleep should be on his back, and his hands on his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a hot cooked splint full of woolen bandage on the injured limb, and consider at all times of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb should not be loosened or dissolved, or that the straps are softened; therefore correct everything with your judgment.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The patient's food should be according to the order that was previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and therefore you must make it coarse.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	In custom of the assistant and bedside, they are strengthened for forty days; and then it is necessary that they be discontinued and a bath given, and medicine administered with oil, which corrects [the condition].
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is open, then you do not remove the ligament and splint immediately, but leave it for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	12th Chapter
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two focils; one is small, and it is the one that is referred to as the little head, and the other is large and is the one that is placed below the small one, from the lower part of the arm.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And when only the large bone (focal major) is broken or both are fractured together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone (focal minor) is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is more easy.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone below (the larger one) is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse if both bones are fractured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, it is appropriate for the doctor to make a small extension with ease before the wound is sewn up.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large bone is fractured, a more forceful extension is necessary.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, you must make the extraction less forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	You must make the figure of the hand with the restoration and extension stretched out on a cushion, and place the fingers at the edges above, as all others have said, and the ear (auricular) should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie down centred over a low couch.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at his height or inclined to him, so that the patient does not suffer labor.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And bring the minister (assistant) to stretch out the arm from above to below with his hand or a ligament, and another minister should do the same above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And bring the doctor to sew up the bone inside so that he reduces it according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is a fissure in the bone, you must carefully reduce all things in their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if a fissure appears separated that pierces the skin and is not hopeful for restoration of it, then you make an incision over it and remove it according to the manner we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with an ulcer, then refer to the special chapter we have already discussed, and thus take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess arises at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a suture made of rose oil and white wax, which is moderate in thickness and strength, and stretch the cloth over it with a subtle string until the abscess is softened; then remove the suture and apply an emplaster prepared from milled powder with clay of huou, and place splints; and let the splint that is placed over the fracture be firm and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the number of splints for the arm is seven in the major positions, or if the fracture is in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And place your string over the location of the fracture firmly and forcefully, and when the extraction is to the edges above or below the fracture, place the string a little less tight according to the reminder given at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or harsh, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of moderate thickness, as we have recommended above.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb (arm) and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as a swelling on the limb, then you must bind the limb with warm water until it ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Unbind the limb and let it rest until it is healed, and then replace the string.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extraction has been softened and the bone has healed and appears similar to others, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider more if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess binding, for then it is necessary to soften it slightly and leave it for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if there is no such cause for the patient as we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove it before about twenty days or more after that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the hand of the patient be suspended by its ability to move agitatedly, and place it to sleep on its own back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 40 days, or it heals quickly in 28 days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the case and the properties of the individual.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the healing of a finger fracture and thumb fracture.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that a finger fracture or thumb sprain can lead to a fracture, but it does not occur unless excessive movement is observed.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the finger or thumb is fractured or sprained, it is necessary that the patient remains immobilized and elevated at an angle equal to the elbow, and place a pad under the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the assistant should extend the fractured bones, and the doctor will align them properly using good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	It is necessary to apply a plaster and padding, unless an abscess occurs; place a steel splint as needed over the affected area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	However, if the fracture is in the palm area, you should place a bandage around it and instruct the patient to grasp the broken part with their other hand. The bandage should be tightened with a long strip of cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The splint should be made of wood or some other material that allows for elevation, so that the palm is in contact with it and the splint should be tightened as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the fingers outside of the palm, you should place a splint above and another below the finger on the palm side to open and straighten the hand. Then apply a tight bandage as needed, like wrapping the hand around the wrist using linen strips.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a toe or knuckle of the finger is fractured, if possible, immerse it in warm water and align it as necessary and tighten with a small straight splint to raise the fracture and prevent it from worsening.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger or index finger or thumb or ring finger, immerse it in warm water and align it with the affected digit or all of them together if possible, which is better; or place a small splint over it as mentioned earlier for the toe.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your treatment the disposal of an abscess and its prevention with proper operations, as well as what should be done when any cause of this occurs, according to the narrative provided.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the healing of a hip bone fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	A fractured hip bone is recognized by the feeling in the affected area and swelling above and below the groin.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The healing process involves wrapping a bandage around the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies on their back with their legs raised.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The assistant should extend the bandage over the entire affected area when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If the dislocation of the hip joint is suspected, apply a bandage to the lower area around the pubic bone, so that the extension covers above, and another bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is suspected to be in the lower area, apply a bandage near the pubic bone and let the extension reach the areas below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The doctor should align the bone with both hands inside and reduce it as naturally as possible so that the bone is properly aligned and joined well by good joining; then apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the affected limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If an abscess occurs, leave it for several days until the abscess has been treated, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be applied like this: wrap a firm bandage around the fracture, fold it over two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap a cloth around the affected limb up to the ankle and hip joint.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long probe between the thigh and hip close to the pelvis at the dividing point, and let the ends of the probe extend from the lower division more than from both parts, then roll it back and forth over the thigh and hip so that the excess of the bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then pause on the thigh at the location of that fracture, and place one steel rod on the bone of the hip.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the empty spaces between thigh and pelvis with much cloth, to coagulate the extrusion.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Begin with a strong bandage around the middle at the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you get further from the location of the fracture, your bandage should be lighter and less wet.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend the ends of the probe to the dividing points on both sides of the foot until it reaches the heel of the foot, and strengthen the ends of the rods from the other side so that the bandage does not slip out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Lay the bandage on that which does not cause corrosion of the member, nor cauterization abscess or swelling and resemble those; and if any such occurrence arises, then immediately remove it, and correct whatever occurred in an appropriate manner, as I have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is pain in the bone that you have set, then it is necessary for you to immobilize it as much as possible; and if you cannot do so, fumigate it and remove it, and heal it with what follows the memory of the cure until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	This fracture of the thigh is strengthened more than those that are set with rods, as I have said in the assistant and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the treatment of this fracture in such a manner does not cause the patient's limping; and if it is treated alone, another thigh must be applied to it, then it is necessary for the one affected to always limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few weeks, and all of this depends on the diversity of complications and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the treatment of the fracture of the heel bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the heel bone heals more slowly than in many observed cases.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if there is a fracture, then it is only a fissure or crack in its divisions, and that is with one or two plagues, and all of this is with the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The treatment of it is such that what is broken in its divisions should be immobilized until it is united and consolidated as much as possible by means of easy, simple, and convenient materials.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply plaster and place a round rod on it if necessary; and strengthen above with bandage as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as cauterization abscess and similar to these as long as they oppose any accident that is appropriate for it until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the treatment of a hip fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the hip there are two bones of which one is large and is called the pelvis; and the other is thin, and is called the acetabulum.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if there are any of the species of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm, and its treatment is done as in the treatment of the arm by immobilization, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the bones are crushed together, the pelvis is converted into all divisions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is crushed, the pelvis is converted to the anterior divisions.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is crushed, move it backwards, and it is due to those causes that you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And apply extension, alignment, and ligature of the rods according to the immobilization.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the pelvis fracture is shallow and has many cavities, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the pelvis is any cause for operation on the arm, and it occurs when you immobilize the rods and complete all the necessary procedures, then you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes that are already cushioned with soles, and they are made in exactly the same way as branches of palm; alleviate those with a small amount of coarseness, and it should not be too thick, and the length of these should correspond to the length of the pelvis from the hip to the heel.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then cover each one with two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one on the dividing line of the pelvis of one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the hip to the heel of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place the two rods in three locations of both ends and in the middle location, because with this bandage the pelvis is prevented from clinking on the left and right sides, and it is a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And apply a splint of wood according to the length of the pelvis; it should be placed on the pelvis to prevent movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And moreover, you must do this for a fracture, and when it is indeed an open wound.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And daily observe the wound and study it further, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those occur, then apply what is necessary until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel bone and the bones of the foot, and on the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not every part of the heel bone suffers a fracture; instead, certain bones in the foot may experience fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely experience fractures, except for strains during the months of discomfort.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot undergo a fracture and the bone fragments are elevated above their original position, then the patient should place his/her foot on a prepared surface such as when walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	The patient should place one foot on the elevated bone and apply pressure, push, and hold it in place until it returns to its original position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	The patient should place a plaster and a pad on top of it, and under the foot, place a small table with two hollow spaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And bind that part of the foot in a downward position with bandages, as you have already wrapped it using various methods.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days, you should remove the bandages because you will observe the bones that are held in place, either broken or dislocated, and the operation in such cases is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if the toes are broken, then you should set them, and hold them in place as I have previously recommended for the restoration of the hand's fingers.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the broken toe in the position it was before, slightly wider than its original width; and under the foot, place the table that I have recommended to you, and bind it with appropriate bandages.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the fracture involves more than two or three bones, then you should place a splint on each toe of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the table under the heel of the foot, with it standing on one of the table's legs to keep it stable.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And be careful to remember that you should not overlook all the causes mentioned in previous discussions on fractures of the various accidents that have been described; and always apply remedies for any such occurrence.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the coccyx in women, the pelvis bone, and the sacrum in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the coccyx of a woman is broken, you should cause it to heal in a fallen position, and incline it slightly towards the posterior part, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The midwife should pack the coccyx with cotton, and apply it in the same way as usual; and the woman should be shaken, and gradually raise her hips slightly, for everything will heal behind the coccyx until it is in front of the split bone, and the broken bone returns to its original position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Place poultices on the hips and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and allow her to urinate; then return it in the same way as you initially applied it, and then return the poultice to its original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or until it heals, as it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if desired, take an oval bladder and bind it over the bone with a reed tube; insert the entire bladder into the coccyx, and inflate the tube with air until the bladder is inflated inside the coccyx, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And fill it with cotton and keep it as I have recommended until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the pelvic bone in a man or woman is broken, administer the remedy and treatment for healing and reduction that I have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And do not hide these remedies in the treatment of such fractures, as they are few and far between, especially for those who have studied medicine, are familiar with my book, and understand its meaning; for this fracture indicates to you that the correct path towards healing and binding lies in its restoration and stricture, and therefore beware.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of male sacrum fracture, take guarguamela root, place it on the sacrum; and then bind it with linen cloth, and bandage it for three days or until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is open.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is necessary for those who experience a fracture with an open wound, especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus, or similar, to cauterize and probe it as soon as possible under conditions of cauterization that you or your witnesses have described previously.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound exudes blood, you should take measures to stop its flow until you apply powdered zeja triturate or use another means if necessary.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begins the restoration of the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it if there is no abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If there is an abscess, leave the restoration of it for up to ten days, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day altogether, because you will cause bad consequences.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone protrudes above the skin opening, it is necessary that you force yourself to reduce and bind it with your hands as easily and with as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not well prepared and the position of it with your hands, you reduce it with these tools; and this tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers or according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take one of these three or four depending on the quantity that is needed for the treatment in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and not too thick so that it is not bent during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It should have a sharp tip at the end and be thick on top, and of moderate size between the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek "labre voluntas atelarem", which means a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary to be placed the tip of it raised above the end of the bone that protrudes.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Press it into a position and bind it with some kind of fixation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, bind the fracture ends together, and if the broken end is thin, do not use the tool for good reason, but you must insert the tip of the bone into it until the instrument has enough power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone completely with this tool, then insert it as far as the chisels we mentioned; or it will be with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Remove that which remains in the bone, rough and full of small notches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and the patient suddenly feels strong pain again, you know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; then do what will bring great benefit to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your treatment of the bone is completed, immerse a piece of black stiptic cloth in vinegar, and it must be done in summer, and do not wait over the wound or any other cause where there is oil, because it will not allow pus and corruption to occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then administer steel in the time of your completion of the bone treatment, and leave the wound open so that you insert a probe with forceps and bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, because many times false doctors have done this, causing death or rotting and weakening of their patients, which is sinful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the tightness is loose, soft, different from the tightness in other types of fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or a bad one, and you fear the bad consequences that we have mentioned, and there is pain in the area, it is not necessary to wait for stitches, but rather use a hard bandage instead of stitches and tighten it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a day or two after the wound begins to form pus, which may be due to a bruise, you remove the cloth that you placed over it with vinegar and apply warm poultices, and according to our custom, we treat wounds with poultices such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is necessary for you to remove the dressing and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and the limb must be prepared in such a way that the pus flows out of it easily towards the parts outside.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes more than a few days and is not consolidated or abscessed from the bruise, you know that it is a sign of smallpox, so you must examine the wound with caution.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	Of those signs that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and place the limb and cause pain, pierce them as possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound festers or puts out pus, it is styes, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, you must wait for one of them according to what is necessary in the treatment of which is described in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in the case where it is necessary that you make the main point and present your decision: when a large bone is broken, protrude it over the limb like the bones of the hip and thigh and similar ones of the larger members, but do not presume to attract or extract it because many times this causes death; leave it until pus can form, since strong pus will fall from it in about 20 to 30 days. Treat the wound if seen by you, and do not leave it unattended.
Capitol .xx.	When the urine is green or of a dark color, as well as when the kidneys are affected, it is called dropsy. But if the member which is affected is the liver or spleen, then it should be called hydropsy. Moreover, there are four types of this disease. The first, called edema, occurs when humidity collects in one part of the body and the skin is swollen. The second, known as scirrhus, happens when a hard tumor forms under the skin. The third type, which is called hydrothorax, occurs when water accumulates in the chest. Finally, there is the fourth kind, called hydrocele, which takes place when the testicles or other parts of the body swell due to an excessive accumulation of fluid.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodes that occur at the site of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this node occurs at the site of healing of a fracture, and especially near the joints, and it is formed by the figure of the member; and often it hinders the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider whether the node is recent and administer medications that have astringent properties such as alum, mastic, mirra (commiphora myrrha), sarcocolla (gum resin from Boswellia serrata tree), and similar ones; take some or all of these and compress them on the node with lint and bind it tightly with good bandage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And release the extraction (of the pus) that does not drain for many days; then loosen it and apply another one until the node is gone; or place a lead plate firmly over it, because lead has the property of keeping anything inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the node has become hard and tight and it is necessary to remove it constantly, then cut it through the superficial incision of the wound, excise the excess and prominent parts, or remove it with sharp scissors until it is gone; and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	When a tumor forms under the skin that does not move when touched, or if it moves slowly, it may be cancerous. If there are any signs of bleeding or pus discharge, this is indicative of inflammation. And when the limb has been affected for a long time and the cancer spreads to the bones, then it is considered incurable.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone has healed and the member is restored, support it with a splint according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, support it with a splint only when necessary: for one reason being an excessive amount of swelling and the improper application of bandages or slings; or due to excess tightness of the bandages before the nutrients are prohibited from reaching the member; or due to excessive embrocation (massaging); or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to insufficient blood flow in the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of it is to feed the patient and make his body tender until the blood is multiplied in him; administer baths, and give him warmth and comfort over him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a poultice on the member to draw out the pus so that the pus attracts more nutrients, or continue massaging the member with warm water until the nutrients flow and return to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	The following chapter discusses the treatment of wounds caused by a sharp object that has pierced the skin deeply, but has not penetrated through it completely. First, cleanse the wound well with warm water and use a poultice to draw out the pus and any other foreign matter from it. Then cover it with lint and bind it tightly with bandages. After several days have passed, if the wound does not heal on its own or becomes inflamed, then make an incision in it, cleanse it well, and apply a new poultice to promote healing. If the pus continues to accumulate, apply warm compresses to help it drain.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When broken bones are healed crookedly, prevent any further operation on them as necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member has been healed and there is a crookedness or prominence of the broken bone and node, it may be due to the shape of the limb, but nevertheless do not prohibit the natural operation of the limb; however, it is necessary that you receive the opinion of one who knows whether the limb was recently fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly condemned as causing great harm and even death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limpness and node are recent, they should be massaged with warm water containing soft herbs such as althea (marsh mallow), daisy leaves, melilotus (sweet clover), and similar ones; and it should be made into a poultice using a softening agent like dyalliquilon (an ancient emollient used in medicine); or a mucilage of althea root should be prepared and moistened with gum arabic or camphor oil, and applied to the area; or figs should be mashed and mixed with pigeon feces, and similar medicines known as "amermans consolidation" (bitter remedies for healing).
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is resolved by persistent light friction with the most humid materials, and movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if crookedness has already advanced and is made hard and turned into stone and is necessitated for treatment with iron, then it is necessary to remove the pus over the affected area and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved; and make an incision in it using fine scissors and remove any excess from the node of that area, and administer ease and comfort to it with warm compresses.
Capitol .xxiii.	Title (or Chapter) XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is simply one of the joints of the body that cannot move due to its dislocation, and it distorts the shape of the limb, causing pain and severe injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an event occurs with a dislocation, it is necessary to perform reduction immediately, and not to delay its reduction, because if delayed, the limb becomes necrotic, and reduction of dislocation becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is necessary that the limb be neither numb nor stretched at the time of necrosis, because many times it causes spasms and painful swelling.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary that you apply cautery to the patient, and quickly stop the necrosis; and cover the limb with warm water and oil, and reduce it easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And treat all parts with the remedy that will return in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation as previously described in fractures; from the upper to lower parts of the body.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Title (or Chapter) XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On treatment of mandible dislocation below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both mandibles are dislocated, it should not be prolonged; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they remain stuck in their places due to little movement, and are slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated, so that they must be mollified at the junction until saliva from the patient's mouth flows out and he cannot take it or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation is slight, then it returns by itself with minimal intervention.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and prolonged, it is necessary to perform a reduction of it gently, without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister must place the head of the patient, and enter his hand into the mouth of the dislocated mandible to manipulate it, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he enters both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the patient's jaw outside with their hands, guiding him; and commands the patient to stop moving his jaws and separate them from each side; and the doctor guides the mandible and wraps it in a cloth until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated, administer warm water with oil, until it becomes easy to reduce both without delay, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore, when they return and are wrapped up, and the patient's mouth is closed and not mollified, pause over those pieces of cloth with wax, make it with wax and rose oil, and apply it gently with a cloth.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be kept between two pillows to prevent him from moving to the right or left; and do not make him swallow any solid food; having his own provisions, let them be forbidden lion meat, until when the pain subsides and the mandibles are mollified, you may give what is desired.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And it should be given gently, and avoid forcing the opening of the mouth, with regard to food, drink and speech, until the mandible is mollified and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, it frequently occurs that fevers and sodium follow, and the patient's abdomen becomes bloated, and strong winds and pure vomiting occur.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you know it is a disaster; and many times the patient who experiences this dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Title (or Chapter) XXV:
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On reduction of the dislocation of the neck and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The neck is not dislocated from the side due to its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the junction outside, and this can be diagnosed by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And cover the location with your hand with firm compression, because it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And pause over that plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The dislocated extremity that is connected and continuous with another one, is not displaced in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and fixed as previously said and as you are equipped to do so.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then press on that wound, and apply powder, ointment, and bandage, and order the patient to observe tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of healing, the dislocated extremity of the muscle should be reduced when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the upper part (tibial tuberosity) and another at the lower part (distal end).
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it may be dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, but this rarely occurs; it is not dislocated at the back part by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Furthermore, it is more commonly dislocated and extruded at the lower parts of the tibia (distal end), especially in those with less flesh; but in those with thicker flesh, it tends to be extruded with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens to some men due to blows or accidents that the muscle is separated from its sheath and treated with a cauterizing ointment, which is then cleaned as it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should find out what treatment the patient needs, and then proceed with his healing process.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The dislocation at the lower parts of the tibia (distal end) is known; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the non-dislocated one, as there are clear differences between them. You should find the bulge in the head of the muscle, and below the tibial tuberosity, touch the bulge on the head of the muscle like a hump, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the bony prominence or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the dislocation is at the foot or ankle, you should find a clear touch, and it should not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, easy reduction occurs when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of it is that the attendant raises their hand above the dislocation; then they place their thumbs below the tibial tuberosity and elevate the joint with strength to its location, and the attendant raises the patient's hand and extends it; and they place it down again because it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return with the method described above, and the dislocation has persisted for several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered a broth made of chamomile, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And place the patient on their back and support their feet below the tibial tuberosity with pillows, so that there is a gentle but firm pressure. The physician should place their foot on top of the dislocation and elevate the head of the muscle with force, pulling the patient's hand towards the upper part to prevent it from moving away from the dislocated area, while another attendant holds the patient's head so that it does not move from the dislocated area. This will help the dislocation return to its location as soon as possible.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this way: find a man who is taller than the patient and stands on their side, enters his muscle below the tibial tuberosity of the patient and elevates it to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air, and another attendant pulls the patient's hand from the lower part of their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, it should be suspended by some means so that the cause of the dislocation is relieved, as the dislocation will return quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in the same way: place a long pole (about the length of the patient) with its cap round on the ground, not too thick or too thin, and support the patient below it; then place lionskins over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and their hand is extended to the other side. Extend the body of the patient from the other side with force, as the joint will return to its location quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if reduction (of the affected part) is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: you should take a stick of length equal to two forearms and width of four fingers, and reduce its thickness at the tip in the shape shown below:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then place a lion's skin (cloth) on the round head of the stick to prevent the stick from hurting the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the patient's finger at the tip of the stick, and stretch your hand or arm over the stick up to the division (joint), and hold the stick with both hands and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arms on a ladder (or step) according to its width, and extend your hand up to the division, and whatever else is required should be suspended from the other side, as the joints are near together.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Once the instrument (for manipulation) is completed in any way possible for you, and then it is necessary that you place a reed (or small stick) covered with wool of appropriate size; and apply plaster prepared from powder of mullien (herb) and alum over all the muscles, thus revolved (around), and strengthen the tip with appropriate sutures; and let the ligament be revolved over the plaster, and let the hand of it (the affected part) be annected to its neck, and let it hang loosely, and do not move the hand for 7 days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient sparingly, until the member (affected part) is comforted, as it is more vulnerable to healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And give the diet less or very little food and encourage exercise (movement); so if it is kept firm and not softened, then it will heal (or recover).
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	However, if the joint is dislocated more than three times due to moisture that occurs in it or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three cuts, as described in the section on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all of the above is done and the ligament is not loosened for seven days and the joint remains unhealed, and the plaster and sutures are reduced several times without healing and cannot lift the arm up to the division above, then you should know that the nerves of it (the affected part), which are located at the head of the muscle, have become injured or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	In the case of a dislocation that has been done, you should apply pressure and extension to the feet and breasts or the posterior parts, reduction is performed with force and extension until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And administer another suture there (to the affected joint), and take care of it until it heals.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is severe healing delay and slowness in the movement of the member (affected part), then have the patient use baths several times until that gravity (symptoms) is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, and more so in front of the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it appears crooked or misshapen depending on which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder using a rod, that is clearly evident to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch the muscle with it.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should take care that the dislocation is not caught, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to an abscess (cyst) with caution, for if it reaches an abscess, reducing the dislocation becomes difficult, and recovery is incomplete; moreover, when it occurs at the back, all other types of dislocations are worse, and more painful, and many times that leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of it (the dislocated shoulder), when possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it should be stretched out with both hands and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with his thumbs or the edge of his palm towards its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	However, if the dislocation is at the front, then return it by bending the arm with its own hand until it strikes the shoulder with the edge of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two attendants should stretch the arm, and there should be another two attendants to prevent the extension from being too much.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And let the arm be rotated entirely, because it is wrapped in doubled cloth or ligament around its hand.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help with the lubrication of the joint and ease the reduction; and then push the joint vigorously until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Approach the reduction of that member which should be placed on top of the plaster in which there is stiffness and swelling accompanied by albumin of the egg white, and it should be drained with a descending stricture, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Approach its removal; therefore, if the joint is formed at its location, then you remove the ligament and leave it (the dislocated part) there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not stronger, then you massage the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is drained; then remove it (the dislocated part).
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If gravity occurs with the reduction of the joint and its position is moving, then administer moisture in bathing and subtle friction, and press, until it is relieved; or rest on the dislocated joint, if it is a heavy one; and tie it, and leave it (the dislocated part) on the bone for a day and a night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove the dislocated part, and put it in bath; when it subsides, then scald the joint with hot friction, and apply pressure on it (the dislocated part), if it is a round one, several times, and the third, and the fourth time.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	corruption has reached the denouement of bathing, until it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, press on the cow's wet and scalded wound with tweezers and strengthen it (the dislocated part); do this several times, for it is wet and will reduce to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder joint (meaning arm), which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder joint (meaning arm) is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints, nevertheless, it is necessary to be quick in reducing it at the time of dislocation before the location becomes swollen or a cautery apostema occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's arm on a table and extend it (the affected arm), and then place your hand or palm over the proximity of the joint, and push it back into its location until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed on the abdomen of the hand, in this case, the patient should place their two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes, then the position of the hand of the affected person should be intrinsically on the table so that the doctor's hand can rest on the proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	Therefore, if it returns immediately, that's good; and if not, strengthen it (the dislocated part) with a plaster, allowing the apostema to form, and leave it; do not massage it, as otherwise, it will not bear or endure pressure on the reduction of it until after several days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may retain its twisting; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but only soften the hand so that it cannot strengthen any cause; in this case, know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and therefore, do not engage (meaning attempt to set) it unless it is strengthened with a strong cautery for the relief of the condition.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the shoulder joint (meaning arm) is returned, then rest on the plaster that you have recommended, and leave it and strengthen it for 5 days; then remove it and leave the arm free to exercise.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if there is no movement in it and a gravity occurs, then soften it (the dislocated part) with warm water and gentle friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, fingers are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger of those is dislocated either at the base of the palm or in the middle of it, then seize the finger and gently push to correct its dislocation until it returns to its proper position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the head of the finger and suspend the area where it is dislocated for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend and stretch that area until it is properly aligned on the specified day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When the night comes, follow that procedure, and do not stop moving or massaging it during the day and exercise at night; do this for several days until it becomes strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist and place it in that position, and perform the same procedure as previously described until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Similarly, do the same for dislocations in other places.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae in the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and several vertebrae move from their places, there is no treatment for this condition because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of this condition is that the patient's excretion is outside his control and cannot be retained; many parts of his body or two limbs, or one arm; or a vertebra has moved from its place, because in many cases a vertebra moves and in many cases it is removed from four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been removed in several directions and is known as syringomyelia.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of this condition is to consider whether syringomyelia occurs in infancy because there is no treatment or healing for it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in cases that occur due to an accident, injury or similar situations, the ancients described methods of treatment in a lengthy manner; I will now condense and simplify what remains from their extensive discourse on the subject, while preserving its essence and presenting it with new tools for the same purpose.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	It is said that in syringomyelia caused by the front side of the foot, there is neither healing nor recovery for it; and similarly for those that occur on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	Only that syringomyelia caused directly by the spine can be cured with what I will recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient should be extended on his back, with the affected area close to the wall, and the rest of the body supported by a soft mattress or pillows so that the feet are not restricted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A straight pole should be placed, stuck into the ground at the end of the head of the patient, and another pole should be placed at the other end to support their feet.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The attendant holds the pole, ensuring that it is not fixed in a pit; another attendant holds the other end according to the same arrangement.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	A cloth should be wrapped around the patient's head and tied tightly with a cord, then extend one end of the rope to the pole that supports the head and secure it there; another rope should be stretched over the lower back of the patient from the hips to the chest, and the mattresses under them; finally, adjust all the ropes and secure them on the other pole that supports the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The attendant extends each rope to the pole and ensures that both poles and their ropes are not removed from their places where they are anchored, but are not fixed as previously mentioned.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor should place his hands firmly on the vertebra with strength until it returns or rests them on a table and adjusts his feet on it until it heals.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is the same as three arms, and carve a hole in the wall on which the patient's head rests at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And you place a cushion on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and tightly press until the vertebra is dislocated and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you want to turn the part that is twisted with your hand, you must kneel before the patient's head at the end of his feet, and the length between each foot should be one arm, and both heads of the feet should be at the same distance from you; let the distance between each foot be a palm, and make a hole in each foot where the vein runs through, and each one should be tightly fixed to the ground so that it is not damaged.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Let there be a rope looped around the dislocated area, and turn it in both holes of the two feet.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a hole in which the rope is formed, whose length is one palm and a bit more; the other ropes are similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tightly bind the ropes that you have tied around the patient's feet in the hole where his head should be, and the ropes that you have tied around the chest in the loop where his legs are.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	You should place each vertebra with a servant who twists it with his hand, and the doctor ties the spine as previously mentioned.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the vertebra:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	After the vertebra has been returned and the hole is covered, it is necessary to place a dry paste made with alum and egg white, and then cover it with a linen cloth; then place a wooden stick over the paste, whose width should be three fingers or more, and the length should be as long as the distance between the swelling, and on top of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And use the thin rope that we mentioned earlier, and feed the patient with subtle nourishment until he is cured.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there remains any danger in the place at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth with prolonged administration of the tablets, which we have recommended, and a lead sheet has been applied in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes, there remains danger in the lower vertebra of the back due to dislocation, and it is feared that this bone will cause further damage; therefore, it is necessary to provide an opportunity for healing with this medicine because a large amount could lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxx1.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not dislocate but only move, and this does not occur in those who suffer from other dislocations due to minor displacement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the pelvis can be dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated inside at the dividing lines, or outside at the dividing lines, or in front at the dividing lines, or behind at the dividing lines.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Moreover, it is more often dislocated internally, but less so in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the internal dislocation is that when you align the healthy and diseased thighs together, the healthy one appears longer and the affected one shorter, and the patient cannot bend his knee; this area should be cauterized with a small cautery to prevent further infection since the tip of the abscess has already been reached.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of external dislocation is that the symptoms of the affected area are opposite to those we have described.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of anterior dislocation is that the thigh expands according to its nature, but does not bend without pain in the front, and if it is perforated and cannot be moved forward; urine is retained and the abscess is drained, and walking should be done on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The displacement of that person who experiences dislocation at the rear parts is indicated by the fact that it does not expand the anus, nor can it bend the anterior part that bends the posterior one, and the leg is shorter than the other, and the dislocation is softened, and the head of the dislocated joint is to be placed in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of the type of this dislocation that you are considering is as follows: if the dislocation is old and long-standing, which has already become ossified, then you administer the reduction of it and leave it in its position, but this is not the entire cure; therefore, it is not necessary to perform an operation on it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	However, in the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you should try to reposition the joint and extend it between the thighs both inside and outside, on the right and left, forcibly returning it and not requiring any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, you must then prepare and administer strong medicine, extending the leg of the affected thigh farther down or holding it with a ligament that is attached above the anus; and another person should extend the hand of the dislocated limb upwards to place its other end lower on the thighs; and another person should apply strong pressure with a rope on the side of the dislocated joint, and another person should hold taut the end of the rope.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension of the leg or thigh between the anus to the front of the neck, or from the back thigh to the chest.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension should be made in one move so that the patient is raised with their own body from the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns with the method described earlier, it is good; but if not, it is necessary for all types of cases to follow the method I have described for treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocation, if it is in the thighs, it is necessary that the patient lies on their side; and place the ligaments on the side of the dislocated joint at the location between the head of the joint and the point where the ligament is to be placed; and extend the ligament above the part of the anus to the frontmost part of the neck.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong person should grab the arms of the dislocated limb, and press hard on the thick part of the patient's dislocated joint, and extend it outwardly by forceful extension, as it will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This type of reduction is easier to cure than other types for this affected limb.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if the patient is excused and does not agree to this type of treatment for all cases, you must then bind both feet of the patient with a strong, light ligament, around both ankles and both buttocks.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let the length of each one be the number of four fingers, and let the affected leg be extended more than the other by a distance of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the patient be suspended from the top of the post and hang down as far as possible; and let the length of the rope from the ground be two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to push the head of the joint, and let another strong young man be suspended with the patient, and the third strong young man should pull on the joint forcefully, as the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the reduction of the dislocation if it is outside the thigh, you must let the patient walk on crutches as I have recommended earlier; and apply strong pressure to the affected leg itself and its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And let two posts be placed, one at the feet of the patient, and the other at the head; and let two ropes be tied to the middle of each post that are adjusted so that drapes with wet cloth are wrapped around them, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the backside is not narrow.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each person extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art (medical practice).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if the patient agrees to this method, it will be good greatly; and if not, you should pause over it carefully as I have recommended earlier with the guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	However, it is necessary that the patient lies on their side as needed.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in front of the thighs, you must gently extend the leg as described earlier on the pole; and the doctor places his right palm on the affected leg, and another person compresses it with the other hand, and with that compression, the person extends the leg to the backside to the anus.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in back of the thighs, it is not necessary to extend the leg outwards, and the patient should be elevated above the ground; you must lie down on a hard surface, as it is necessary to do so for the dislocation of the hips as I have said earlier, with the patient lying between two hard surfaces; and the face and the ligaments should be extended, as described earlier, without any improvement.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	It is necessary to administer a compression on a table at the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	In order to perform the reduction, you must first extend two blankets of the patient and when you see that the intestine has relaxed and the patient opens their blanket and expands it without excuse, then you know which member is being reduced — and then you adjust two cushions and apply a paste with a bandage so that it is not too wide in any of the parts; and keep the patient resting for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then unbind and remove the bandage, compare one blanket to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see that the intestine is in its proper place, then you know that the dislocation has been closed, and let the patient rest.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a poultice to it, and let it rest according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then unbind that one, and have him walk slowly on each side for several days, until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle can be dislocated in three ways: either at the outside parts, the inside parts, the front parts (more so than the back parts); but it is not dislocated at the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation is when you ask the patient to apply their blanket to the affected limb, and then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the ways of ankle dislocation is to place the patient correctly, so that they extend their blanket if possible; hold your hands on the sides of it, and keep their foot between your feet; and bring the ankle towards you with your palms, and hold it there until it returns to its proper location, and another servant extends their foot until the ankle is back in place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction of the ankle is when the blanket adheres to the affected limb without any effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a poultice to it and have the blanket adhere to the affected limb, and bind it for three or four days, then unbind it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not let the patient walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the ankle is not possible for you, then administer strong traction with bandages as described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle may occasionally be dislocated by a slight movement, and occasionally by a blow, and the dislocation of the ankle can occur on the inside parts or the outside parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the thigh appears swollen, leading to separation at the point where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure for dislocation is easy reduction and that it should be extended with ease and guided back into place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of a dislocated joint following the principle of complement, it is necessary to immobilize the patient and have a strong and skilled assistant from behind the hip in the same location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then place your right hand on the top of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the leg in the hip area (pelvis).
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot toward you with your right hand, pull it twice more with your left hand, extend it with your left hand and push the leg's thigh against the bed with your right hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this repeatedly as previously mentioned.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the leg's thigh against the bed on the third pull and you are in the pelvis area.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If it returns in one or two attempts using this method and if the foot is guided back, that's good; otherwise, continue with the operation since it will return again.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If reduction of the joint is prohibited by the patient's condition as previously recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, spread out a flat stone on the firm ground and have the patient lie down with their feet in the box, and you have already wrapped them in cloth to prevent injury to the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The assistant should hold the patient's feet and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or use ropes to keep it on top of the neck; each assistant should then extend that limb in the same direction, and the stone should remain between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being pulled apart at the joints.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The doctor should guide the dislocation back with their hands and another assistant should hold the healthy limb at the joints since the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, when the dislocation returns and is declared as the reduction of the joint, you should stop applying plaster and pull it off firmly, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	You must be careful or protect the nerves that are behind the thigh to ensure that the ropes around it are not tight and do not injure it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave the patient for two or three days; if the ropes become soaked, change them.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then release the patient on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If the patient is forced to move in that space, it is not guaranteed that the dislocation will not be dissolved and damaged, and that it will not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If an abscess forms due to cauterization, you must administer the treatment mentioned in our narrative in another location for healing and dressing until it heals.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the dislocated joint be guided back gently without force; this should not be difficult and can be easily done.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the toes on the hip, it is necessary to immobilize the patient's foot on a flat surface or table and keep them as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Stand on one foot, and place the other foot on an object that supports the joints, and press down with your other foot until it returns, ensuring it is guided back properly without appearing in a prominent position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Place the pelvis of the foot on a table that supports the entire foot with two legs, and tighten it securely with a suitable structure for three days; then release it and allow it to rest from walking for several days until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation that are caused by injury or fracture, or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When such a cause occurs and you proceed with the treatment of that injury and restoration, many times death ensues.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Therefore, in the treatment of that injury, one must not presume but be knowledgeable and experienced in the art, long practice, mercy, compassion, patience, prudence, and humility; use only cauterizing medicines at first, leave the patient to divine judgment, but help those who hope for salvation from perdition with relief from the illness, and where there is any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then forcefully perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess appears cauterized.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	If the limb returns as desired, then administer the regimen which will cause the abscess to subside and heal the wound with whatever is appropriate for dry soothing agents.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and separated fragments, then you perform the treatment for them, and do what we have said in simple fractures, but before that in their locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Be careful and avoid as much as possible the instrument within the fearful paths according to your ability, for that is better for you to obey your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more healthy to your true body in your times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	In this way, the words of Al-Zahrawi are completed perfectly, may God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
