O, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its fulfillment its end is achieved in it, and by its expositions, and by its declarations, it is my view that you complete this to you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with me, so it is my surgery.
Because the operation with me is prostrate in our region and in our time entirely deprived, whereas it is greatly perilous the science of it, and its vestiges are held hostage; and there remains of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered and have become subject to those errors and uncertainties, because their clauses are understood and the strength of it and the art are elongated.
And it is seen to me that you bring to life that with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and the other instruments of the work as it is by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no one has been found to be a good artificer with his hand in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it requires the actor to be exercised before it in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia in that he knows the movements of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and to have the knowledge of the bones, the nerves and the cartilages, and the number of those, and the egress of them; and of the pulsatile veins and the quiet ones, and the places of the effusion of those.
And for that reason, it is said by Hippocrates that in name it is small, but in the work it is great, and most of all in the art of the hand.
But now we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said of anatomy, it is not evacuated that he does not fall into error for which many men die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and cast themselves away from that knowledge and their experience.
For I saw a foolish and inept physician who had incised an abscess scrophilos in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed, and the woman died among her hands.
And I saw another physician who prescribed that the throat of a man who had been in his state be purged, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man on the third day died.
And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and the disposition of the patient, I recognized over him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was taking a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he was given a black castrated man who was broken in the hip; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, I extracted the fracture, over the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and I did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he set it according to his desires, and he bound it, and then he left it for some days and commanded that we untie the bandage; and it came to be so that the hip and the foot were festered, and it came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I helped to untie the bandage, and obtained tranquility and then eased his pains.
But however, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not stop it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it was magnified to its lord.
The cause of which is that the cautery is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not come to it with iron of all, but that it be in a member which suffers that it be all held hostage.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary to you that the operation with me be devised in two divisions: so it is in operation to which is associated health, and in work with which is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already stated this in all places of this book in which I bring operation in which is error and fear; for it is necessary to you that you guard this and leave that, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and to dishonor you.
And therefore, take your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and laudable success, and leave the diseases terrible of difficult healing, and hold your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more is remaining to your glory, and more in the world and in the end to your sanctities.
Gualia already said in some of his admonitions: “Do not treat a bad disease, so that bad physicians you are not called.”
And now I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head within feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of leeches, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to them, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of twisting and of things similar to them; chapter ordered of the head within feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
Know that you should say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and of its inconveniences, and in what completion it should be prohibited cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cautery and of its inconveniences is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already of it have spoken a great multitude of wise men, and of it they have been disagreed, and to me suffices a little of the sermons of theirs, fearing prolongation.
And therefore I say that cautery compares to all complections universally which are in matter or have matter, except for two complections, which are complections which have no matter.
In the dry and thin complection with matter they disagreed; for some said that cautery is beneficial to that, and the others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient is that illness dry and thin with that which is hot and dry be healed.
And they say those who say the contrary of that, that by cautery is made benefit in all dry and thin illness that comes in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say for the sermon of that, that experience this already to me some times has discovered.
May, however, it not come upon this that which already is exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cautery by prior exercise, and who has known the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
May in the other complections, there is no fear upon you, and more especially in the cold and humid illnesses, because already all the physicians have agreed upon those, and do not disagree in the judgment with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that of the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of its goodness, is because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not touch the other member attached to it except with a little inconvenience.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members which are distant from it, and greatly makes them come in the member illness of difficult healing and greatly increases.
But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do this except that it is superfluous. And already it is to us known by experiment and by length of service of study in the truth of the causes; and for that I am excused of the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this pause to you secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels the illnesses, with philosophical and demonstrative sermon, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because so that the inconvenience for the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which with the cautery is aimed, and more especially if the cautery is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malice, which is greater than a little inconvenience entering for time.
And so do not catch in your minds, or, sons, that this is not esteemed by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, because it is that to that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not at all so as they care for that, because cautery is nothing but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidities which are the cause for which the pains come.
But however, cautery is superfluous over medicine by the will of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns at any hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of its illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and what has reached it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humidities, as cautery of tooth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it it does not return that pain, but rather that it is done in smalls.
And more commonly spoken is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is rightly spoken, for I do not understand what is said about it, because I believe that there is no cure that would benefit with medicine or with any other cause more than cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause one administers cauterization, and it benefits to that. And therefore, because cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand the common people and many of the foolish physicians.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and I have found that it does not do that except in some bodies, and cauterization with that is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the heat of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts by the fire, and in the fire some plates so that the craftsman catches for the occupation of that.
And for that reason cauterization with iron must be done more lightly and more properly to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that later the one who asks for it may have what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and coldness over the nerve affected by the two causes of which it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and the ears flow, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth and of the throat, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to what requires the virtue of the patient and the age of him and his custom.
And then command him to shave his head, and then make that seizure between your hands on a low bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
And then place the root of your palm near the nose between his heels. But however, as the tip of your finger has arrived at the place, sign that place with a tent, and then ignite the cauterizing olive of which this is the form:
And then place that upon the place marked with a tent, in the manner that it descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being uncovered any quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of a grain of peas, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until it is seen of the bone what I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that over the place and leave that for three days.
And then place on it a poultice embedded in a border and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the bone should be cauterized into the bone, and that the cauterizer should be held until some part of the surface of the bone is burned.
And then be scraped that which is burned of the bone, and then be cured.
And others said that with the cauterizer it should reach the end, until it presses into the bone forcefully until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small: And they estimate that from that place the vapors of the head expire.
And let the plague be kept open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two kinds of cauterization have not been seen at all, except in some men according to their way of fear; and leaving that, I, in my opinion, is better for health, when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of it as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
And the kind of cauterization first is more saved and better, in my opinion; and from that, I and with that work with health.
Second Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head, and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use herbs and potions and purgatives and plasters and poultices and ointments and compresses and remedies, and mostly if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which is recounted and does not benefit them from any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and finds a very great burn, then cauterize it with another cautery besides that one a little. Then cauterize that one on the horn of their head with a cautery until the bone is parted. Incise the bone and discover the quantity which we have recounted and cauterize that one with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the place which is called the basin—and that is the place in which a cupping glass is placed. And alleviate your hand in this, and do not discover the bone, for the patient by this finds a very great pain different from the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
And you say this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the nape is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Third.
Of cauterization of old non-antique.
When pain in the head is felt, or pain is spread into the eye, it is evacuated with medicines that modify the head, and the other cure is administered, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if none of them benefits, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp, burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and you choose that one and cut off the extremities of it from both ends. And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid until there is a place made in it behind the bone, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen over it with a stopper by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then untie it and take off the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place over it a poultice submerged in broth until the place forms a crust.
And then cure that with an enema until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
But cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a clove cautery, because the head of it is as shaped as a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small eminence.
And then place it over the place of the pain, and hold your hand—so that the artery which is behind is not burned—and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the thickness of the bone is as much as the majority of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery which is behind is not burned, so that there comes no flow of blood.
And then immerse a poultice in salt water and place that over the place, and leave it for three days; and then place a poultice crushed with broth, and then cure with an enema until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the extremity of the scalpel according to cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this proper non-antique migraine.
Chapter Fourth.
Of cauterization of old migraine.
When you cure migraine with what we have said of the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and it does not benefit the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not reach it what we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then you cover the scalpel cautery until it is white-hot, because it signifies over the place of the pain with a line of length of which is the majority of it, or which one of those; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen it until you incise the artery and it reaches into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is bad for chewing, and that the ligament is not burned and the nerve which harms that, and that it does not become a spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and mostly to that one who ignores what is done and is not studious and experienced; and leaves the operation to him at the beginning.
And you will come with remembrance of the regimen of blood flow accident of the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see of this illness that does not reach this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you will, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter of the streccio of arceria, with a cautery having two handles, and this cauterization is better and more convenient.
Chapter V.
Of cauterization of the pains of the ears.
When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has the name "puncta", of which this is the form:
And with the "puncta" ignited, and it is moved around the entire ear as a wheel is rotated, or in the circuit of whichever part if the pain is in whichever. Lengthen it with the cautery from the root of the ear little by little as much as you feel the location with the touch.
And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of tumors.
A tumor which is cured and by cauterization is only of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of tumor with poultices and capipurgi and gargles, and if you do not find comfort in your cure, then you must cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first you must at the root of the ear, the second a little from its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear more sovereign a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the cordena is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special of the cutler, the form of which is shown. But however more subtle is that one a little so as you see; and that handle in its place of superfluous thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is shown before until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and you do not find comfort in your medication and the disease has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on top of all the horns of its head; and with the cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery in the cheekbone. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it is cured with the water which proceeds.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of forgetfulness made by flame.
Then give to the patient at the beginning large poultices and pills of the  servel modifying.
And then shave the head of the patient and place on the cheekbone of him a plaster of cente described in the treatise of plasters.
And pause that several times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to that same order which I have already said.
And therefore if by those he is healed well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part more below the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water which proceeds.
But if you add to it and the patient is that water tolerant, then make to him cauteries in the middle part; and if you want greater addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and be the cautery olive according to the form given before.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
Then you must process in softening the head with poultices and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with the cautery in the middle part of the head, and with the cautery on top of all the horns of the head, and with the cautery on the rear part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of too much that and the diseases tolerant and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the loins, and certainly with the cautery until it is burned of the cord of it, and raise your hand. And then take care of that one who is being healed, and this one is an olive cautery.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, if you modify the brain of him at the beginning of him with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating the excess of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer guarguargisms and mastigators to the serving brain, before that for a few days, with the blessing of the foods.
And then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the occiput of him, and on each horn of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and is tolerating, then cauterize him with cauteries the ones which I have said, having paralytically and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be an olive cautery according to what has been preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then pause cautery subtle according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then scrape the head of the patient, and then make a proper torticolis on him over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
And the patient be sensed  castrated, and be held from every part.
And then pause liniment; and it is more worthy of bordering ointment of sheep. And warm that over the fire for a moderate heating by measure, which the said suffers when it is most in him. And then pour that in the middle location of the head of him in the circle, and let him inside that be cooled.
And make water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that he is healed; or if you want, cauterize this making small points according to the best of him, unless that you have the hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then pause that coated in ointment or in grease of quail.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of  water descending in the heel.
When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient to drink water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
And make that suzar in bath in degu for some days.
And then command him to scrape his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of  ysement of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left the codena; and be the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see of him fluxes of blood, stop him with some medicine, the which is to you possible.
And you will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the abscess of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And some times it is cauterized in the cervix below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the heels are old and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that that is superfluity frigid phlegmatic, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water  falling in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the cervix below two temples, and with two cauteries in the cervix below two bones. And if you need of addition, then cauterize that in all the latz of the tail of the heel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of cauterization of stench of the nose.
When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you prepare and give to the patient the cochias to drink for three nights; and then scrape the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with an olive cautery. And then cauterize that with a clove cautery with two cauteries on the two eyebrows leaving the hair a little.
And guard yourself from the artery that you do not burn that.
And of the clove cautery this is the form.
Chapter XV.
Of cautery for softening of eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, cauterize that on the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and they are elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Chapter XVI.
Of cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to the parts of themselves and pierce the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the parts of themselves so that they pierce the eye, cauterize in those two ways, whether cauterize or it is with a medicine comburent.
If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of that he may see his hairs as those which they are cleaned, until they are prolonged and equal; and if pierce that of you must their nament, then you strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it not be bad until the hairs are born.
Therefore, as they are born and equal, then place the head of the patient in your own, and then send over the eyelid of the eyes of him with tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
And then place a cloth soaked in  oil of  or in a mucilage of ptilli over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the skin which is as a myrtle leaf, be all burned properly.
And the sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated above the puncture of the eye.
And therefore elevate your hand and leave that for three days, and then place over it a cloth with border until the scab be eradicated. And then cure that with an enguent until it be healed.
But if returns for the hairs any cause to their nament and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery over that all as you had done first.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not pierce the eye.
But the cautery with medicine comburent this is that you command the patient that he may see the hairs until they are prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of sabot known and of live cautery one. i.e. or that, and then mix those causes well, and make that with a festinacio so that it not be frozen; and then expand of that over the cloth which is made as the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that over one eye or both; and place over the eye a cloth soaked in oil of , and the head of the patient be in your own.
And place the said over the medicine and press that a little and not the mauguas until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for bite is in him as of fire.
And therefore as he will perceive that the other bite, then leave the medicine and mau that with your own said; therefore as ceases the bite, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is elevated as it is washed above the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if it does not return over that of the medicine on the place in which it has not put the medicine and does not degrade until it be equal your operation and be contracted the eye.
And then place over it a cloth with border until the scab of the adhesion be eradicated, and then cure that with an enguent deafinicon or with another until it be healed.
And it is necessary to you, above your operation that you guard with pervigil diligence that in the eye does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid about some days is softened and some cause of the hairs pierce in the eye, then iterate your medicine over that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you had done at the beginning, and then enaviro him until it be healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
And the path of rectum should not be hidden from him who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it in this way: command the patient to place their head on your lap, and hold the head of him some minister between your hands in such a way that it is not disturbed nor agitated with his head.
And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which is concave, as is the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, from one extremity of which the cautery is made.
And if you want, it should be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you want it to be shaped like a tentacle.
But however, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it pus and dry it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little from the cautery of the heel to the side of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the heel and corrupt it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and surround it with an exsiccative enema until it is healed.
But if after eleven days it is not healed, then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what you have prescribed in your chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first-dayers: understand the place of the fistula and make a cut there and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which is the shape: And melt in that a quantity of one ounce of lead; and hold your hand with a fine retention, and do not disturb the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the heel of him; and when you place on the heel of the patient a cloth soaked in oil or in water, because lead will burn the place of the fistula and heal it by a miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cautery and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula to the nose of the body according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Many times fissures occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form that is taught:
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a needle.
Then place that ignited cautery carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there develops an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is cured, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure it and do not profit from the cure, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited one in the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the burning iron reaches the bottom of it, and after it you do this once or twice; and then cure it with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
And therefore if the pus is abscessed and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and then ignite the cautery the shape of which will come near so that you place the nozzle on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then take your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the patient rinses his mouth with salt water and keeps it there for an hour, and then spits it out, because the bad tooth is stopped, the gum is softened and strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterizing tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is a worm in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with horn is that you take the horn of a cow and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a handle and wrap it over the tip of the iron, and then immerse that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly until it is burned.
And then repeat that several times until the force of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a stick in the heated horn below, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the nozzle of the iron or of fire, and that in the heart of it there is some thickness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cauterizer is burned; and do this several times because the pain will be removed either on that day or the next day.
And so that by the impression of that cauterizer the patient rinses his mouth with good broth and keeps it there for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
And cauterize with whatever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
Of cauterization of tumors.
When tumors are of phlegm and of cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cauterizer whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke of the cauterizer escapes from the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you judge it necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cauterizer according to the size of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick soaked in broth over it until that which the fire has burned is removed.
And then cure that with gargles and poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
Of cauterization of hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat.
When the humors come upon the canal of the lung, and most especially when that is of cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place at the root of the larynx in the depressed area.
And take care that you do not reach the cauterizer to the larynx nor burn the cartilage of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cauterizer at the junction of the neck at the lower vertebra of it. And the cauterizer of it be a pointed one according to the previous manner.
And then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has no fever nor phlegm and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the breastbone in the depressed areas of the left and right; and with another cauterizer in the middle of the foot between two toes; and let the cauterizer be pointed according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauterizer that is called a point, the shape of which you have seen in the cauterization of ear pain.
And make points within those; and then cure that with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
And let the cauterizer have three ramps because cauterization is done in this way: at one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
Of cauterization of the tic douloureux, which is the pain of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, and by a little movement it is dislocated again as it should, as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient be reversed on his back or on his side; and then elevate the cartilage which is in the front part of the collarbone to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the front part.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the tendon while it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be of four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
And then place over the cautery porous cuytz with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the parts above and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery chisel or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach fire and many humidities because that excess of its complexion and so multiplies raumaces in it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then it happens that the patient is on his two respirations, and extends his hands and his thighs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery below the foot for the quantity of a finger with a cautery chisel, and with two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, so that it comes to the figure of a triangular cautery; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so that they will make a poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach pointedly to the one who is frightened by this cautery; and it is that you feel upon the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tend, and then cauterize it with cautery in the points; and then cure it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of cauterization of the liver fire.
When it happens in the liver pain by fire or by humidity or by gross windiness because of its normal complexion being thrown by excessive egress, and it is cured the patient with that which we have said and do not confirm it, then it happens that the patient is respiration on his neck, and feel with tend three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hipocondres, the honor for the decubit of man.
And be the space the one which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
And do not compress it with the cautery much.
And if the quantity of that which is adhered the quantity of the majority of the thickness of the tendon, and there be no more adjusted; and if the patient standing on his feet of him; and if it is not standing, then be lying, the one who already has extended his thighs, and elevate his arms.
And to you it is possible to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery chisel, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself that too much you process in the cauterization, and be adhered the thickness of the whole tendon so that it be adhered all the body and reach into the bowels, because the tendon here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of perforation of abscess of the liver with cautery.
When it happens an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in the tunic of it, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient suffers more gravity and pain is sharpened.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is sharpened great and sometimes that already fatigued the physicians the cure of it.
Therefore, when the patient is facing towards his neck; and feel the location of the abscess with tend; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which preceded in the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the tendon be cauterized, until it reaches the ciphrac, until in it be healed.
And then cure it by cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not happen that of this form of cautery use only that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; more this with experiment sometimes be dared upon this operation, but however leave that of us, and it is better.
Chapter .xxix.
Of cauterization of pleurisy.
They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristolochia to pleurisy fire according to this manner to be made, and it is that you take of the roots of aristolochia long dry a root pun long that is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge that in oil and put that in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries placed, one slightly sloping towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is sloping between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, sloping slightly towards the back; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not put your hand on the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the code in work.
And some ancients have said that some of the men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it is purged healthy, thus as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because it quickly heals in the place of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cauterization of the spleen.
When you cure the disease of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it is according to three manners, all of which are straightforward, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
And do not put your hand on the cautery; and the patient be elevated on his two.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticents, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the straight line of the spleen the one that reaches the lying of the left patient.
And be your elevation with which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the width of the body.
And then, entering the two verticents, ignite it, in that which you penetrate the code from the other part.
And then, extract the cautery; and then are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three verticents.
And then you cure the cautery as if it had laid for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of cauterization of hydropic.
Cauterize not in hydropic but in alcinte3 properly.
When you cure the hydropic with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it lays for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with what you must so that two understandings be added to it, and it is festinated to it with auxiliary healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be clave as according to the form of that is used before, and that with which the back is cauterized be olive as according to what is precedent to its form.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cauterization of feet and of the genitals.
When the feet are suppurating in hydropic and are filled with  serum, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the serum is retained.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two genitals two cauteries, and in each genital be made cautery with the tip of the cautery cutter. And be the cautery according to the length of the genitals: and one below and the other below the middle location of the genitals; and on each genitals two cauteries.
And leave the plague open for cure for a long time so that no water is exuded from it.
And then take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is from cold and humidity, and it should be cauterized, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured by these methods of healing and not by conferring, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize this with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery; and with cautery on the skin above the navel, large or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humors are exuberant and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize this on the intestines and on the bowels, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, for it is a perfect cure for the benefit of which you will not err.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors, cold or of corrupted humors, and they are cured by what we have said in the division and not by conferring your healing, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left behind from the small and small triangular spine of the back, and with a cautery below the navel, going through two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of him is cold and his food is not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize this on the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and with a cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a subtle cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then take care of him while he is healing.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of the aethyl near the abscess of them.
When you cauterize aethyl, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray. Then introduce that ignited one into that cauterized aethyl, and keep your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if the aethyls are too many, then cauterize each one of them according to what we have recounted, and then take care of them with what you confer to them of the enguentz until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of the parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, he is healed with cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the nature of the back, and it is old, corroded, and healed with pus and corrupted humors, and therefore what is most worthy of cover is that you probe it with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then introduce that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
And iterate over that cautery within those corrupted parts until they are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from burning of nerves and of veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the materials are abscessed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it or corrupted, or comes from those causes of which remembrance will come in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterization of the boils.
When in the boils it should pain from cold or from thick windiness, and because of this the skin of the patient is inflamed, then you should cauterize this on the boils with a cautery on each boil with a subtle cautery of which I will recount the remembrance.
And firmly you cauterize with the second one a little, so that there will come three linear cauteries, and then they are more beneficial in healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When there happens in the bladder weakness and softening from cold and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize this in the part below above the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the pubic bone, and cauterize with one cautery on the right part, and with another on the left of him.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the knots of the feet; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And cauterize with a pointed cautery as it is processed.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the vein.
When a vein is swollen and humid, and therefore pregnancy is forbidden, and the menstrual flow of the woman is corrupted, and the onset of menstruation is delayed, and pain occurs in the lower abdomen, then the place should be cauterized with three cauteries in the circle of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be pointed.
Chapter .xl.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
When moist humors are poured into the area of the hip, and they are caused by the swelling of the area, and a sign of this is that the thigh is elongated over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is felt in that which is below.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the hip with a cautery in a circle similar to that which you will have felt in the circuit of the area as it is turned, and so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery of which preceded the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire hip; and take care that it is healed.
Chapter .xli.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the area of the hip, and it is caused by the swelling and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, therefore when you lance the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the area of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And be the spaces which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is on the middle part above the head of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is to say a circle containing and burning the thickness of the entire hip.
And this is the manner of cauterizing the sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the place where you feel the pain of the patient; and with one cautery on the calf for four fingers a little below the cylindrical part.
And if the cautery is a knife, and the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the hip.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends into the place near the toes, then cauterize that here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is necessary for that.
And if the patient feels pain below the knee of the thigh, then cauterize that here with a knife cautery.
And guard yourself in all cauterization that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that by this to you is over the patient no harm or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the calf and ended in the cauterization, and the leg burned inflated until the tumor reached the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted the whole foot. And then acidic strong solution of the belly, and by that the death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the hip the cautery of which this is the manner: make like a circle of iron of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be the depth of it according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And from that circle be another third; and be the spaces which is between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and be those circles opened of two parts; and be the length of those cauls a knot or two knots, and make in those marks of iron decently fitted in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it is set on fire in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it is placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with butter and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: or, children, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
Most of the cauteries to him who suffers them, and it is found with him in that place of him.
But cauteries with medicated ointments are that you make two circles having an armlet pierced in which they put the guaffo of the iron door; let the length of the sides in the naivety of them be two nuts or as many as those.
And if the space which is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they are open below and above, and they contain themselves between each other according to this form:
And then place on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side, and compress your hand on the area of the back; and then take some boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the little fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it — for that bite is so as of fire — until the bite ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the boiling water from all the back with sweet water.
And then leave that for three days and place on that butter until the blackness of the adhesion is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run out pus; this is called in healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make to him a poultice in it that contains water as it is made in the back equally.
And this is the manner of boiling water, and you have already written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and quicklime, each one part, and crush them and place them in a new pot of which the bottom part is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And place below the pot another pot inverted, and pour over that alkali and quicklime boiling water, which covers them by a finger, and as soon as you compress those with your hand for a good compression, and leave the pot that descends from it water sharp in the bottom of the inverted pot.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another quicklime and another alkali renewed, for that one is then of strong force sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation makes of fire.
And so of the medicines some of which are cauterized much, as tizic and honey anacrat and quicklime in sabon so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which is cured pain of the back and sciatica, and magnifies very well being of that, and says that there is no need of other cure, and that it is healed in one time as it recounts, for strong lie that interweaving in bath and already sees of that.
And it is that it be taken of certain green fig, and if it is not found green, it be taken fresh fig; and much be crushed with a little of grains and be placed on the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be tied.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cession of the adhesion.
And then put that in a bath and then when the body of him is red, then put that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cauteries with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when with the fenda of goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits him very well; and let the cautery be with him according to this manner: take wool and be it soaked in old oil, and let it be placed between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take dried goat's fenda and inflame that with fire until it is made charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extended. And then repeat that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the bite reaches into the back and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter .xlii.
Of cauterization of pain of the two.
Sometimes pain is in the two for many causes, as for hammering or for percussion or for superfluous evacuation, and for causes ad those similar, for infusion of matter cold and humid.
And cauterize not but in this single species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills stuffed and similar to them, which are made on the two sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the patient, because you have to make cauterizations or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial chisel cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
Of cauterization at the beginning of inflammation.
Many times this ailment befalls small children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that they ache on their structure in the leg and have elevation and movement.
And it throbs in the last vertebra of the spine and its knots that already begin to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this form: that prenges the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two lines or three. And let the points be close together.
And after care the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cauterization not be administered in inflammation that is made by spasm of a nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured by means of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let it be an olive cautery of which this is the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise into the ankles or to the other joints, and this many times happens, then cauterize that on each painful spot with three cauteries or four of the whole part with this olive cautery.
And if many cauteries that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard your hand with the cautery beforehand, be only around the outline of the bone.
And if the pains rise into the ankle of the spine, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the heel only, and it is called a suagra, then prick in the circuit of the heel as it is revolved, prick in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the toes, then prick in the circuit of the heels on each knot and on the pin of the foot.
And if the pains rise near the joints to the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize the joints of the whole part of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done good regimen and the flaccidity is evacuated with this cautery, it is healed, God help.
Chapter .xlv.
Of cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines protrude before the hernia, and this begins to approach, then you command the patient to leave his food on his day and to use lenient causes so that the wound descends from his belly.
And after, follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his leg inside until the hernia is thrown or the intestine appears.
And after, return that with your hands and feel with your fingers the rupture on the bones of the pelvis with the sign that the extremity of it is similar to the majority of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And after, ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
until it is very hot and throws sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And after, place the cautery on that sign with your hand with cautery straight, and get that inside which you manage the bones of the pelvis into the middle of the groin; and repeat with that another time if to you that has not succeeded in the first time into the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine so that it does not come to the patient with death or other great harm.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, do not confuse your operation.
And know that the cautery of children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then care for the place of the cautery for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
And then care for it with the other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the place and the plague are sealed.
And know that you should pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his healing, the one who stretches his belly, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer him decent nourishment, and keep him that way for another forty days.
And he should be exempt from work and repletion of food and drink, and of violent voice, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
And you will say the cure of ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want them not to pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a rounded cautery according to the quantity of it, and it should be that which is exhumed from the codena as the third part of it; and then care for that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first ones say that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
and it is placed a line that goes through the latitude in the widest part of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the cauterization of a twist.
When in some members by chance or by percussion pain occurs and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And be the cautery of every member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its virtue and weakness, and location of the twist and its pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then repeat on it the cautery; for it is customary for those pains to be pointed in the member adjacent to the one which approaches it, so that you know that you should cauterize those until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosy is sometimes cauterized with great benefit, and more so if it is the kind of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and that cured with what we have said in the division and not, and it is, and you fear that the corruption will encompass the whole body of him and the whole composition of him, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second further down from it, and the front to the end of the hairs; and two on both sides; and one behind, on the nape of the neck or service.
And lastly, place your hand with the cautery a little while until it imprints a small impression on the bone, and from it the scabs are dislodged, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is needed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you should cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two cheekbones, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the toes of his feet; and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the hollows of his hands.
And guard yourself from the nerves which are on the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penile and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more it is beneficial and more conferrable; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, as they do in the flesh, because for that the body of him is already stupefied.
And know that the cauteries should be large or few according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the kinds of instruments.
And then carefully apply the cautery with a mixture of flour of wormwood mixed with honey and the other cure while it is healing.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the cauterization of stupor.
When some member is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to what merits the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the point of the member a little. And then carefully treat it with an enema while it is healing.
And sometimes it is cauterized, some stupor that comes from the spine and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and it removes the numbness of those nerves that cause that member.
May no presume about this, but only he who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the egress of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that are mortified.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal enemas, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, a little bit according to the quantity of the point of the member, until the whiteness and color of it are removed, and the color of it is changed.
And then carefully treat it with a mixture of flour of wormwood and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and the blood of a dove or the blood of a round, each one part, and all mixed together, and then apply a linen cloth and place it on the location until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of crabs.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it is rolled.
And some wise men say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle location; but to me, it is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more correct that it be cauterized in its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Chapter LI.
Of the cauterization of buboes.
When some bubo is delayed in maturation, and so it is because of the superfluity that causes it, or because of the state of the patient, who is old or decrepit, of little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the bubo; then cauterize it in its circumference with small pointed cauteries; and then let it be left so that it will hasten in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place it in the middle location of the bubo until it penetrates the point.
And if the cautery in that location that is farthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then carefully treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of corrodents.
Corrodent is a corruption that walks in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in a location that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite small pointed cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that location where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize it from all parts until you eradicate all the corruption and no cause of it remains.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized locations a cloth soaked in oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
And then treat it with enemas that generate flesh.
But if after three days you see that the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which is rotten in the corrupted locations.
And corrodent is medicated some times with sharp medicine, which that is placed in the location of the cautery. But however, cauterization with fire is of more light help.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization of claws and of other similar things.
Many times there is a disease in the parts of the foot that is called a claw, and it is a big, deep cause, which bends the foot; and cauterize in those is in two ways, so it is cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery concave resembling a vulture's feather, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw from all parts, and be of subtle margins.
And then place that ignited one on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. And let him rest for three days before he begins to wear a bracer. Then apply a poultice of wild herbs crushed with salt to it, and leave the poultice on it for one night, for this will eradicate it from its roots.
Then cure the area with a gargle of generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauteries to those with water, and that you take a small piece of lead or iron or a vulture's bone, and place it on the boil; and then pour a small quantity of water into the container, and hold your hand, and you roll it with compression of your hand, and press the edge of the container into the root of the boil, and the water will flow into the root of the boil; and wait for the patient a little of the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove it, for the boil with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do this to those and the other until you come over all of those which are on their body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the boils are eradicated with this of the gargles which the flesh generates.
Chapter .liiii.
Of cauterization of tremor.
When someone has a tremor due to a fire in the nerve or from a fever of a fiery cause, or from another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with a cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with an olive cautery.
And the tremor of him will rest and hasten the health of the fiery illness.
Chapter .lv.
Of cauterization of white accidents on the body.
When on the body are white spots, and are pustules that are made of gross corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning as it appears, that it be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken and they do those, and heal from those.
But however, this must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi.
Of cauterization of blood flow accident by incision of artery.
Many times there is a flow of artery that is incised, the wound which must be closed, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you must immediately cover with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place over it your finger, tightly pressing it many times until the flow of blood stops from your finger, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number many, and exhale over them while they are hot.
And then take of those one small or one large according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, upon that vein, quickly pressing that which you have removed your finger, and hold the cautery until it is abcised and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery well heated from the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another evil.
And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not in one of four ways: or with cauterization as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of him are much burned and the blood is restricted, or that it be tied with thread or with a ligament for strong structure, or that medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the blood be placed upon it; and be tightened with a pillow with decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction of him with ligament and with structure with cloths or by position of causes comburents and similar, do not confer but short.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then cover with the placement of the finger indicated on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the wound, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and more sew in that which must cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Of incision and perforation and ventouses and of phlebotomy and of plasters and of their likenesses.
We have said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the use of a cauterizing fire is convenient and of medicinal burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in those necessary with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the sovereignty of the head among the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the one who wants to know this may be helped, about that which he will have demanded.
And before that I begin this, know, my sons, that in this chapter it is about terror that is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that which you must have great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is a dangerous evacuation which is with blood, with which the life of man depends, the sprinkling of the vein or incision upon the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the plague or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their likenesses. And of all those there is accompanied fear and trembling and in the minds of them the danger of death.
And I admonish you that upon you may not fall that which is in this state, because sometimes there is a danger that you must handle men with many kinds of illnesses. And of those there are some who will go with their illness and it is lighter of them the death, and thus by the vehemence of that which he finds of his illness, and by the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which signifies death.
And of those there are those who give to you their hope and word, you expecting with that health, and their illness is pernicious.
And therefore do not allow that one who comes to you of this manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause about this unless with certain knowledge which verifies this, and to which by succession there is praiseworthy success.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication of them to which health is converted, because in that is to you an aid over the acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
O, sons, God in you inspire his understanding and no harm to you direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to that which preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head among the feet, so that it may be to you alleviated that which you demand of this and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of the children.
Know that this illness many times happens to children from the moment of birth and when the midwife tightens the head of the child, it lives.
And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, they died, and thus it is to me the work has been left in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not rise over himself by the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased that fire died.
And this humidity or is added between the bone and the skull, or is added outside the bone upon the skull.
Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the bone and the skull and the abscess is small, then you must do in the middle location of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure as two nights within that the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is outside the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand to the parts of it and it is not that to you hidden. You must do in the middle location of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And then with the incision extract all the humidity; and then tighten the fissures with cloths and cotton; and then embrocate that above with wine and oil within the fifth day, and then untie the bandage and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and tighten the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which you consider to be according to the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the repletion of the water, and do this according to what is best for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and it becomes flowing of blood and the patient dies by that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When a catarrh or wound occurs in the feet or toes, and this becomes old, and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the following cure is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those [arteries], the patient should raise their head, and then press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then consider where the vein lies; and the places of each on the places which are near the ears are depressed, and so hidden unless in some men.
And then press upon the artery with a tent, and then incise each one with the spatula of each sharp part with an incision reaching into the bone, and this for the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions at the upper parts.
And the length of the incision should be two fingers' breadth, because when any vein is incised, the blood is issued with a pulsatile egress, which leaps forth by frequent leaps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then press with a tent, and then go into the bone.
And this that you should get from the blood is the quantity of a wine ounce. And for little more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
And then consider the plague, and therefore if there remains upon the bone any cause of the cephalic, then incise this so that it does not become a suppurating caut.
And then strengthen the plague with wadding and with bandages of cloth from it, and then cure that with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When a certain ancient migraine or catarrh occurs, due to humidity of the air and the quality in the lacerations of the temples, or a very vehement old and similar to those, and it is medicated with the ways of curing medicine and this does not respond, then we have resorted in these ailments to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the hair which is in the temples; and understand the artery appearing in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden in few men by the vehemence of the flesh.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be tightened with some cloth; and then press the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears to you manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the bone with that with facility until you reach the artery; and then put in it and extract that at the superior parts until you extract that from the bone and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the onion, and then incise that of one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not bring a flow of blood, because if it is not incised it will not raise the blood of all.
And then evacuate the blood of a wine ounce. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you should tie that in two places with a double strong thread of lead or with long cords, and do not tie it so that it putrefies before the consolidation of the plague and becomes a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this in that hour or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cautery cutellar until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in the place of that mettle work.
And it is a better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And cover the extraction of the arteries that you have placed the area of the incision, and let it be placed on it poultices decently made, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh rise and with compresses until it is healed.
And if while you are working another bleeding becomes from the artery, then you must take care to restrain that blood, or with cauterization, or that which you place the area of the incision, and tighten your hand until the blood is restrained. And if for any cause of those is not to your present, then pause your finger on the area until the blood is coagulated, and embroca the area with water of vehement coldness until the sharpness rests, and tighten according to what is necessary.
And what is lighter in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a probe, and then pause for a while, not ignited, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it, which are not consolidated by all means with this cautery, be elongated.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles is at the same time. But however, if it is less sharpness that two handles is better, because if it is sharp with two handles it approaches each burn, and does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is slightly severed.
And this work is better in all works and lighter.
And the spaces which are between two handles the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
Of the cure of the body of acute and acid humors of the heels.
When the humors are acid, and it is the body of those veins which are on the test of the head of the fore, and does not comfort in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in their forehead walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid in such a way that already the hairs of theirs are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the old remedies mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on their forehead, and then cut three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle location of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the lachrymal glands which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
And guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are in two parts, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if a piece of sponge dressed or cloths dried with which you dry the blood.
And then place the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the side of the temples into the second incision. Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the chip which is on the bone, and then do that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then scrape with this spatula and place in the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
And pause the side of that sharp from the flesh annexed from the flesh, and the side of it lean within the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then do that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And because it runs from the blood a quantity equal, squeeze the places of the pieces of the congealed blood.
And then pause in each fissure calgua of old cloth, and pause on those powders mixed in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and vegas that it does not become pus caut.
And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a large infusion of boiled water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of basilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of lagremas by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts within the head.
When it happens that a certain catartz is sharp and continuous, and sometimes the heels of the patient are exhausted little, and already the regard of theirs is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and from their case the hairs, and in the preon of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but from a few veins of the inner parts proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and then cut in that one fissure in the middle location of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begins with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the lachrymal glands of the temples which are bad from the mastication), until it be the bone uncovered.
Dry all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then place between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with linen rags. And then tighten above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not become pus caut.
And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then cover the wound where it begins to grow flesh, and take care of it with a drying regimen that causes the flesh to grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and of this make a poultice and administer it in these wounds at the birth of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure of that which catz in the ears.
Every cause that catz in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral or a cause similar to mineral, such as iron and lead, or it is of a plant such as ceze or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when lead or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or grow in the ear, and pause the ear in the sun, and if you see the lead, then distill in that some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient sneeze with a condiment, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of sneezing. And then place in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides, for many times it is pushed out with these causes.
And if it is not pushed out, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtle of which this is the form:
And if it is pushed out with the gesti, well is; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a subtle onci of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not pushed out by this, then make a cannula of brass and insert the extremity of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that it is not open except the cannula. And then extract with your wind with strong attraction, as many times as with water that we have recounted.
But if it is not pushed out in this manner, then take of a halka illuminated or of a vecz appareled with which the birds are taken a certain quantity, and place that in the extremity of ray, and then envelop over that well-placed. And then insert that into the tract of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of the humidity.
And therefore if it is not pushed out with all the causes that we have recounted, then you must resort to cutting that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lance the patient from the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cezer between your hands and turn the ear to the sides, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear above the grey of it in the well-pressed place. And let the fissure be of a lunar figure until it reaches the lead, and, the lead being reached, remove that if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and cure that while it is healing.
And if the cause catz in the ear is one of the fats that grow and swell, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if you do not obey your advice, then you take a subtle spatum according to this form: and administer with that the abscess of that fat which is catz in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in many pieces, and prop extract those with the oncis or with a subtle gesti, or with an incision as we have said, for the extract of it is alleviated.
But in the water which is entered into the ear, cover that the patient uses sneezing with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is pushed out, well is; and if not, then take many small stones and lead according to the length of the finger, and calve those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is pushed out.
Therefore do not cease this with stone until all the water is pushed out. And already the water is pushed out so that you take paper or of gonc. i., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned the most of it.
And prop put another gonc and do this as many times until all the water is pushed out, and straz that with a cannula as we have said of the lead extractor.
But in the extract of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as a little and similar to it, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes to appear at the edge of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is more lighter of all the other causes that catz in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your cure, then you must watch the ear in the sun.
And therefore if there is here any cause of the worms, then extract that with a gentle or subtle instrument, but if there appears no cause, then take a cannula which is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, of which this is the form: And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and then suck with that by strong suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if it does not obey you in this way, then you plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been described in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatment of distillations.
And this is the effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form: And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole, and flat at the top.
And therefore, as it is necessary to fill the cavity of the cannula here. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it at the end decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing, or juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the reed with cotton underneath and express with your hand that with temperate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear be already scalded with fire a little. And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear be not too cold, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter .vii.
Of the cure of ear opacities.
Sometimes, some children are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this happens to some men, opacity in the flesh of the ear due to plague or to flesh nothing in that; and this opacity sometimes is made in the preon of the tragus of the ear which does not perceive the vision, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the preon of it, which does not comprehend the vision, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that in which you can perceive the vision, then you must place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it. And therefore if you see opacity appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If the extremity of it in which the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula be of two lengths so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in the flesh of it, then take that with subtle instruments and cut it with great facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the opacity is in the preon of the ear, then take a subtle reed long and scald that with fire a little, and then put that in the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you have sensed opacity with that which the patient finds with facility, by the gravity of hearing, strive the oppression of it with facility; and guard yourself that you do not damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a cloth according to the amount of the width of the tragus which you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put that in water and pulverize over it, following the advice of the wise, and use of it; and if you see the ear already being suppurated, then you must extract the pus and replace that with another which you have enveloped in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the suppurating pus yields; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there happens a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use of the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatment of distillations.
Chapter .viii.
Of the cure of atheroma which develops on the eyelids.
Atheroma which develops on the eyelids of some people sometimes is humid, sometimes are dry.
Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with an instrument, and you incise those with a spatula of their roots, and then place over the location according to the advice of the wise.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cautery.
And the best cauterization is to place it on the incisions and many times return when there is some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Cure of a swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Many ailments happen in the eyelids of the eyes, some of which are assembled to a swelling in its firmness and hardness, and by its size it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you consider it when the swelling is proceeding in it, that apart from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make an incision on it along the width, and then drain it from all parts with ease until it is empty, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, to you it will not come to harm by that, because the ointment of it restores it and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, then you scrape the inner surface, then you cut the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, other than which you have made an incision, and press it from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then you do not notice it in any cause.
And then the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and care for the place with water that heals until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the cure to be made in the upper eyelid of the eye.
This is the grayness which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly happens to children, it aggravates the eyes of those and causes them a great deal of catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of that, for the tears stick to those.
And because of this, they rub their eyes on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, the ones which already have covered inflammation, and the imminence of a cataract appears in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel a cataract within those.
And some manner of operation is in that one who the patient places his head in your lap, and then you place a cloth on him and make a poultice, and make of it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and then you place that on it and press with your fingers from all sides so that it is united arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision along the width, and the incision is not larger than the incision made in a fenestration.
But in the pressing cover that you make the incision altogether until you reach arcernach, because in the most favorable processes arcernach is cut by incision according to the form of white cataract.
Therefore, extract that with cloths the ones which you have enveloped between your fingers to the sides of the fore and revolve between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the incision so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and scratch it.
But if you do not see arternach at the beginning of the incision, but that you adjust in the incision a little with ease until it processes arternach; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and wine and place them on the place and strengthen those with powders.
And if some that grind salt and place it in the concavity of the incision so that that which is remaining of that humidity.
And then care for it until it is healed.
But if it happens in the place an abscess caut, then care for it with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are due to the adjusted below the natural hairs and they are antiquated, then those touch the eye and make become manners of illnesses as such as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and film until that is the cause of destruction of the eye that is called touching of the eye, and care is made in four manners: or by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to that it was said before in the chapter of cautery; or it is made touching by incision and suture; or by canes according to that I have said.
And therefore, cover that you place the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into it in the place where it is the most distant from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread below, and that be — near the edge of the eyelid where it grows the hairs — near the hairs, and pull the thread to the lower parts with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
And then make in the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with a spatula incision from the larger lacrimal into the smaller lacrimal; and then extract the thread and place below the eyelid small powders of cotton or of cloth, and then cover the eyelid with a tent, and so as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
But however, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this is already diversified in men, for some of those who are indigenous that it should be incised of the eyelid a large quantity according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then with the spatula on the two lines which you have made, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as it is the thickness of the king.
And then put the ounce in one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that whole, and then adjust with the scituras the two lips with a thread or a fine wool thread, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere that which superfluous of the threads over two eyebrows with some causes envisaged, if you want to do this, and if not, do not care.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then care for that.
And if you want, leave the plaque its suture, and care for that with what dries and constricts, for the eyelid is elevated deserves the sealing of the plaque and the aggregation of it; but suture is better. And therefore, I say so, those ancients of taxanir.
But however, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another manner in taxmir, and it is that seniors over the eyelid figure as a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three uncis segregated and congregated according to this form:
But if it is not possible, have the uncis, and that is not equal, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between those two threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole code on which it is marked as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture, and care for that until it is healed.
But if an abscess happens from your incision or your fissure, cauterize that abscess with cerot and to its semblance, and with enguentz.
And some times it happens that the eyelid that its hairs be converted, then it is necessary that you use in that of what we have said of incision; but suture in some is more artificial.
To taxinir with canes is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is indented according to as I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle astelas of which length be according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of them be smaller than the latitude of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each parts, where you have the fils.
And then add each one with subtlety above what superfluous of the eyelid of the heel, and constrict the canes of each parts with a strong stricture, and leave that for some days, for the code by the stricture will die and be denied and will be able to enter until by itself it will fall.
But if it is late, then break it with the toroyras, and then care for the plaque until it is healed.
Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not grow.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form: And have the quantity of the length and of the latitude neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of elevation of hairs growing in the heel with an awl when the skin is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and growing in the heels, then the operation in them is that you take a subtle awl and put in that thread of cedar subtle and lion, and then that you adjust the extremities of it and knots in a way very subtle. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that if you want to.
And then place the patient his head in your knee, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then introduce the awl in the root of the hair adjusted which has need of engen, and make that penetrate into the eyelid carefully until you extract that from the natural skin.
And then pull the hair down and introduce that into alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair be outside-coated with alixolati in the eyelid with the natural skin.
But if it is thrown alixalati and the hair is not thrown, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until in it be thrown alixalati of the superior trau.
And see that with the vision of the heel, for then you will throw alixati and the thread, and grotan some and close the heel, and leave the clamps for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and is born above that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a longer skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you let it enter so that it is lengthened a little space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the cataract which comes in the upper eyelid.
When it comes in the pupil and is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted upwards, or on the right or left side, by bad consolidation of plague or section or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this cataract is either natural or accidental, and it is made by the consolidation of plague or sections or cautery, or by things similar to their malcuratz.
The way of the operation in it is that you break that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and you put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth of linen, and you tie those together so that they are healed.
And no cover that you use of cure of it of the causes the ones which dry, constrict; because if you do that it returns cataract worse than no time you had not.
Use in that of causes that soften as such as fenugreek, and embroca with the water in which they are cooked altea and its seeds, or enguent dyaquilon, the one which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submergeys in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of cataract which is made in the lower eyelid.
This cataract which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly named cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
More accidental is made by plague or by scissura or by cautery or by other similar things.
And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and you put that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal right, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and inscribe with a wide spatula. And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid according to what it was, well is; and if not, take the ray and put it in the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the lower eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and be of their made angle until when they meet be made figure of theirs.
And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
And then place the flesh that by the amount that is the edge of it acute below of it, that which seizes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and of the poultices until it is healed.
And if cataract happens because of fissure or suture or cautery, then cover that you make with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid according to what is preceded. And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that it runs in it operation, according to what is prepared of the form of cataract, and that it is in form of motas diversity.
And the artificers wise all times prepare engine in any manner which is possible to it so that it makes return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to what it convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is more above with the album of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore cover that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards, or extend it with the unci.
And then you inscribe the adhesion with a subtle spatula, the one which is not with the sharpness of the incisions, having obtuse a little so that the patient is not troubled during the operation, and remove the spatula that it does not damage the eye with its sharpness.
And be your incision that it exfoliates that adhesion with facility so that it be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that it be healed all the adhesion.
And then you put in the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of linen, and put on the eye wool infused in album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidating causes until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimals.
Know that the nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard, fine cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture congealed, which when one touches it, or it is forced to take on a cut, it is severed and the cut is not placed in it.
And both kinds do not begin but from the larger lacrimal within which goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in the low, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with a knife of little duplication and extends that to the upper parts. And then takes a needle and inserts into it a piece of horsehair or cow or water, or of similar, or strong thread, or doubles the tip of the needle little by little and places it in the middle of the nail, and penetrates it with the needle, and ties the nail with thread; and extends that to the upper parts, and excoriates with the skin the side of the nail which covers the pupil. And thus you follow that with the skin until the end of it.
And then you incise the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the lacrimal be natural so that through the incision of it there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
And some times the nail with the sole knife extended or with thread, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a spatula lion of which this is the form of it:
And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea tunic and that it becomes a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
And after the incision, put a little bit of salt or a bit of chief made of  sinar into the eye, and leave it in for another day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it placed in it the knife, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommend in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle spatula lion of  acute shape according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and is confused and pressed in that root, then distill of your own hour in the eye of chief made of siniar or with chief rog or with salt trissat, and close the eye for another day.
And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all that is of it, otherwise that the contrary abscess may be in the eye, for then you leave it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye for great harm, be suspended with a knife; and incise it from that one part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not incise the flow of tears.
And then distill into the lacrimal chief rog and made of siniar until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the incision of algodon and of that which is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh red is born, and it is over-placed until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and firmly compresses the eyelids at the sides and is assembled to a rose of balustrade.
But the operation in it is that the patient places his head in the low, and then opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with convenient knives to water, and take water with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the eye that you do not damage it during your operation.
And be your incision with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which is collected ascebel according to that which will come the form of it in this chapter.
Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt trissat, or distill into it powder rog and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and place over the eye before a cloth with album of egg until it is assured of an abscess caut.
And if there remain any cause of algodon and it is saturated with blood caut, and you fear an abscess caut, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that it cede that abscess, and then repeat over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which accides in the eye of this kind.
But however you cover that all cure of the eye frail by natural way or by accidental way, work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of pus in the groin.
Pus appears in veins that are swollen on the groin and are prohibited to clothing from their operation, and the groin is lengthened for days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the groin in which pus is present is strong and in it there is no other ailment besides pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or with two, according to your prudence; and let that bandage be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two bandages gradually in one body according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and remove the blood hour by hour, until those veins are removed from the groin and are rolled up.
And guard yourself that you do not lead the groin with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the afternoon facing the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then you distill in the groin chief green or red so that with its sharpness corrodes that which is removed from the pus.
But if that is not possible for you, collect everything in that hour, and then you plaster everything with what gives relief from the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain is subsided and it is assured of a cautery abscess.
And then repeat over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
When you cure arizati with cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is preceded by the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not generated in it unless you make over the abscess the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is uncovered the bone.
And therefore, when it is uncovered the bone and sometimes in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named of sharp cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the head rounded as if it were to grasp it, which is made pointed by the point of a file or aliskalfati by subtle point (as it is in the following form).
And pause that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
And this is done several times, and then restore the place with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and the body of the wound is separated and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not suppurated and there is no accident in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is not generated in it but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and as soon as the bone is uncovered, then you take three according to this form:
Let the extramitat of the iron be triangular, and the shaft of it be first attenuated towards the extremity as sometimes so.
And then pause that on the bone, and it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the groin, and then revolve your hand with the three until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient as soon as it finds air coming out through it when your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with styptic and drying medicines as you have been taught.
Therefore, as the flesh grows and the place is hardened, then the matter which flowed to the parts of the fore returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
Of the reduction of the eminence of the groin.
When the groin emines with its totality and there is no accident in the garment nor diminution, then it is necessary to relax the patient, and then you follow him, and then you pause windy in the cervix its scarification and suck by good suction; and then pause on the groin liniment which is made of acatra and aloe and ensis and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the groin with soft powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take rags of soft lions, and each rag be duplicated in four folds; and make of those soft.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the groin needs. And then strengthen over those with hard cloth with strong structure; and repeat the cupping with suction its scarification; and then remove the cupping and leave the groin straight the day and the night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then it is necessary to be very straight.
And then remove the ligament close to the day and night as we have said.
And if you see the hernia already reduced, good, and if not, then repeat the poultice with powders and stricture and leeches until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a grain of rasim, and the form of man is seen by this, and you want to cut this, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the side below to the side above, and then place the other needle with the double thread from the lacrimal side, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with that the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that knot.
And then extract the needle and place it over the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
And then cure the wound with this that comforts it until the ulcer is healed.
And sometimes, in addition to the whole part with a circle of cloth around the wound, adjust the prominent eminence, and then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes to the bottom of the wound, and let the albuminous moisture run, and descend the wound and enter quickly.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of alconati.
This disease which is called alconati is nothing else but the one which is adjusted in the wound seeming like water descending and it is not that.
But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient lie on the prepared and straight saddle, and then take his head in your hands of two parts and hold it so that you see the sania coming to the lower parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as if he were seeing.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared the descent of the sania with water that we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a fine spatula and fen it on that over the pannicol, carefully severing the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the corona (in the place where it is vacant), until the sania is discharged.
Therefore, as it is discharged, then you distill into the wound water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the descending water from the wound.
We have already said the kinds of water in the division and which ones it is convenient to pierce with a serum, declaring, then this according to the health.
Now, you must make the patient lie between your hands on a board and tie his wound shut, tight.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound if the wound with the water is the left one; or on your right hand, if the wound is the right one.
And then with your right hand, take an almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
And then place the extremity of the almond near the corona for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the side of the lacrimal gland, and then peel the almond with virtue and roll your hand on it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already arrived at the vacant cause.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the almond to the bottom is the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the corona of the wound; because you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the tunic cornea.
And then place the almond into the place where the water is, and then you throw it down once, then another, and then if the water descends quickly, then you wet the patient's wound with water over which he looks quickly, and almond in his wound.
And then rest for a while; then if the water has descended, then you remove that other time until the almond is thrown.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound carefully; and then place outside the wound cotton or a stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
But in those who are of our time, place on that commi trissat with egg white.
And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound because of its hardness—because it is some men whose wound is hard very much—then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
And then pierce with that that conjunction, and do not finish your hand in the track, and it is not if you do not make a way to the almond place subtle.
And then introduce the almond according to what we have said.
And you must compliment the work, be prepared to the sleeping patient, made in a dark room, in which he sleeps on his back, and be prohibited from all movements.
And keep in nature to him so that his nature be cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And be the bandage according to his disposition on the third day.
And then untie that in that dark room and expose the cold sight, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not cover that which you have done at the hour of the cure or soon after the infusion. You must cover that so that the water may gently flow through great and vehement regardment.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must untie the wound before the seventh day, and rectify that with water that yields the abscess.
Then you cover the sight of him and place on his face an oral for which the movement of him be regulated, leaving him for some days, him existing in the dark room.
And then be withdrawn from that room gradually and converse in his causes.
And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from vision some times, and then you be bold on the operation.
And already it has come to us of some of those which are in Artach, and some said that they made fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which the water is sucked.
But however, I have not seen in our land any who had perfected water, nor is water written in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it may be upon those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or properly of iron, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity as this is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of flesh nothing in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse flesh growths, of which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of moth weight, or a polyp weight; and this malady is called polyp because of the resemblance of that weight represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, pale, of dusky color; and of it is that flesh lion not of dusky color.
Therefore in that which is in these flesh lions not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient be between your hands and placed in the sun, and dry the nostrils of him, and prick your finger in those flesh. And then extract that to the outer parts, and then incise that which you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part, as long as you know that all the flesh is gone; that if any cause of it remains, of which the abscission is possible, then you root that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, as long as none of it remains. But if it bleeds or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him that which you must; or if it is of malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that as long as it is cut and the cavities are all gone.
And then be put in the nose after the incision a little wine and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it must, then you know that from it is flesh nothing in the pus sobiras bones of the nostrils to which it has not reached abscission.
Therefore then you must introduce a thread of silk into him of which there is some thickness, and weave in it moth nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nostril with the ray or with another cause which is to him possible.
And because that this has done, that it may be thrown its odor until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and be spit upon his throat, because troops of times the resemblance to this action do the children at the schools, and it is lighter cause to him who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that escapes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the nuts that are in the thread, and do this as long as you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and place in the nose after the abstraction of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the engorged corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead pipe for some days until it is healed.
But if you are in need of a cure that requires it, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which are distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And make a silver or copper instrument, which is similar to a small open lamp, thus like a small bowl, and the meat seemingly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument to be a purging maker and be flat, uncovered; to which there is a handle at the back of it, with which you have that when you heat it in oil or water that you want of the suckable causes.
Chapter XXV.
Of the eels' nats in the limbs of the nose.
Many times the eel's nats are found in the limbs of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned on certain days within which one reads the regard of it.
And for that cove that you inscribe that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of that. And then place over the area the cautery or medicine comburent which was in the place of it.
But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of dusky color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron for it is a dangerous abscess; for many times to him who incides this abscess, there falls great malice upon him who had it.
And if the abscess is of lion touch and is not of dusky color, and times that incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and cure the area with water that exsicates and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblances.
Know that when accidents happen dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, when it is necessary to have some cause of those, that consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure it until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you excoriate each part of its visible code until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over those pulverize blood of dragon and incense, and place over the powder a patch of diaphynicon plaster, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then untie that and change that plaster and leave it until the threads are by themselves abscinditz, and then cure with an enguent until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the dissolution of continuity with thread as you and have done know.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts of the teeth.
Many times it is necessary to many men in the parts of the teeth of their lips some abscesses hard resembling fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fendas each of those hardnesses from all parts, and then the abscess incision, fill the place of sage incense until the blood is restrained, and then be washed with wine and be cured the place with water that is stipticitat, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Greatly of times nay on the gum flesh adjusted which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with an onion or that you have that with the forceps and incise that you must remove its root, and leave the sania to run or the blood.
And then place over the area sage incense or other stiptic or excicative powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise that secondarily, and cauterize that, for then the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
Of reason of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the teeth and of the mouth and between the gums are adjusted rough, ragged, and some times are of nigras and are made citrinas or vertz until the gum comes by that corruption and are made the teeth ragged.
And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place the head of him in your knee, and scrape the teeth in which appear those roughs and causes resembling sand until of them no cause remains, and that you do of the blackness and of the citrinity and of the others until they are modified.
Therefore, if this is what is in the beginning of the reason, it is good; and if not, then you repeat the reason on those the other day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of various forms and figures of instruments according to how it is prepared for your operation. And for that the razors which the tooth is razored from the tooth's part is different from the razors which is ras between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you must prepare those which you will see forthwith:
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Extraction of Teeth.
Care that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and take your time in the entire extraction of it, for there is no cause that should supplant the healing of it when it is extracted, for it is substance sublime while it is excused in the extraction of it.
May care when the patient is forced that tooth to be extracted, that firmly you must be certain which is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and leads you to believe that it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and aching tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, as you must be certain which is the aching tooth, and that you know well, then care that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums of all parts, and then pull that away with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that you succeed.
And then apply a strong hold with large pincers for good communication or great stupor, and place the head of the patient between your teeth that you hold well so that it does not harm, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break that one, nor to the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that one under it of all parts with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then care that you compress of cloth that broken and tighten that with the extremity of a subtle ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon that with pincers.
And care that you work exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gums and guard much your strength that you do not break that and remain a part of it, and return upon the patient by the malice that it be greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fisting and audacity about the extraction of theirs, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they make come upon the men maladies great ones that are more difficult to be broken, and the roots of theirs remaugged all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones of the jaw as well as many times we have testified.
And after the extraction of it, the mouth be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
And if it should flow blood for that, as many times it should, then apply some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle pincers with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you must work with those.
And be as well of thick handle so that when you tighten with those they are not bent, be short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron, descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some introne in the others and tighten by strong constriction descent, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird the which has name ciconia, so it is gaunt, and are of strong constriction.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the Extraction of Teeth and of the Extraction of the Bones of the Jaw Broken.
When you must the extraction of a tooth which is broken remain some cause, then care that you place upon the place a poultice with border for a day or for two until the place be mollified; and then introduce some pliers or pincers the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or gaunt, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of those be made of flint as well as a file or rasp.
And if you do not obey to your easement with these forceps or pincers, then care that you dig upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by that the root is fore-gotten, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of a more subtle extremity.
And now you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the shape approaching the following: And with other instruments which precede in the shape of teeth; for the scraping is done with this instrument which is assembled like a large onion, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which is some thickness, and not embedded so that it is not twisted.
And other know that the instruments of the teeth move so and similarly the other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artificers in the art, find for themselves according to what to them signifies the operation and the diverse ailments; for they are of the ailments to which the ancients did not say nor put proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if it may, then it be cured over that in its place with what is to it convenient of the instruments and the forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help thee with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And let it be in it some thickness little by little, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all be set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to that.
But if in the bone is a small puncture, then root that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it be healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of the prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, then the shape is that, and more so when it befalls women, and more so to the venerable ones; therefore, as you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment it, then root that; but that it not be annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and be made of Indian iron of a sharp extremity.
And let your incision be with which you incise that in too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be damaged another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
And let it all be of Indian iron and the margin well-made; and let it be of small, pointed points as with a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth be damaged and broken. And then line that at the end, and root that with some razors.
And if the tooth of which a part is fractured and it pricks the tongue, then as you file that until the sharpness of that fracture be stayed and smoothed, and be filled so that the tongue does not prick it and the speech does not break.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When accidents happen to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot strengthen over that which he eats, and you have cured that with styptic medicines, and it has not availed your cure, then for so that it does not break, it is made in those that are strengthened with gold filings and not with silver, for silver becomes green and as soon as possible, but gold at no time is changed.
And let the filing be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the straight is that you take the filing and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and then as you grow with two tortuosities of the filing between two damaged ones, or if it is one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the testament into the part from which you commenced, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it not be damaged.
And let your plier with which you strengthen the filings be the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then incise the extremities of the superfluous filing with the forceps or pliers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not make lesions to the tongue. And then leave that so straight as a Roman.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another filing in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as well as these tied:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the fall of each one, and they are regrown as we have recounted, and that they are re-damaged.
And this is done only by skilled and wise artificers.
And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of cow, and it is made as such as the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes from under the tongue some times or is natural with which man is born, or accidental and happens by plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevates his tongue, and then incisions that ligament nerve according to the latitude within which it is loosened the tongue from its recess.
But if in that there is any hardness or knotting, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you put an ounce and split that along the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and it is loosened the knot.
And guard yourself that no fissure be made in the flesh of the preon and that you split here artery and comes flux of blood.
And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with vinegar or with hot water; and then place under the tongue a licini; so is the which holds the patient under the tongue in any night so that it is not consolidated another time.
But if there happens flux of blood, place on the location vitriol trissat; but if the blood vents, then cauterize the location with a cauterizing cautery which convenes to it. And then this cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes a boil happens under the tongue resembling a small lump prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified within which swells the mouth.
And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient sensing before the sun and considers the boil.
And if you see it of dusky color or of black, hard, to which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that for it is a cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the ounce in it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and incise it from all parts; and if blood comes to you in the hour of your operation, then you place above it vitriol trissat, that is, vitriol, within which it is restrained the blood.
And then return to your work within which you had treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure this with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of boils of the ears and of that which is nothing in the goiter and of the other boils.
When in the goiter grows, so are the glands which are assembled with cotton, which happen outwards and are called boils of the ears, which when you cure them with water that we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the boil is hard, of dusky color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flux of blood; abandon it within it is matured, and then either you will extract that, or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is that which is to be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the boil has already rested it with a complete rest or if it is diminished with any diminution; and then make the patient stand before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of him from under with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle with a knife.
Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the boil, and catch upon that your eyesight, then take an ounce and put it in the middle, and pull that to the parts outwards as much as you can. Other water that you pull any cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Other water that you pull any cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is assembled to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the straight of the other, very sharp, the which is of iron indi embedded.
But if this instrument is not to you present, then incise that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And since you have incised a furrow, incise the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient guard with hot water
But if there happens flux of blood, guard with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to that of the stiptic causes within which the flux of blood is restrained, and then cure this within which it is healed.
And sometimes there are born in the goiter other boils other than those of the ears, and incise those according to that which I have said in the incision of two furrows equally.
And I had once treated a woman with an abscess which was located in the throat, which abscess had a brownish color, of little feeling, which had already closed the throat, and the woman was breathing with tight meat, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she had already arrived at death if she had remained for one day or two.
And the abscess had already grown so much that it had two chambers inside that burst through two openings.
Therefore, I cut it surgically and remained in one of the openings, and pulled out that part, and thrown away a large portion of it, and then I cut into that from where it understood the other opening, and then I opened the mouth of it, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the opening in that abscess.
And then I abscessed a large portion of it, and it didn't flow from it except a little blood. Therefore, the throat of that woman was completely opened, and she began to drink water immediately, and then I ate food, therefore I did not cease to cut into that abscess many times for a long time, and abscesses succeeded in its place, which incision extended as long as that.
Therefore I put a needle and cauterized the throat of her, therefore as much as an addition; and then I walked around and I did not know what God had done to her from then on.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision of a boil when it is abscesses.
When a catarr develops in the boil, and it is abscesses and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and it does not compare to your cure, and then you see that the abscess has already been cut and is subtle, then cover that which is added round; and if it is to that length, and it is bloody, of brownish color or black, and it is not feeling in it, then cover that incision of it, because in that there is fear on the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its shape and then place the opening in the navel, and pull that down and cut it with one of the two instruments which are said in the incision of two mills.
And cover that you do not cut it but what is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you cut it more, you will harm their speech.
And after the incision, use that which has been recommended in the incision of two mills, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, cover that you use of a needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in your se, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and compare with that living cause, and place that no thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Be the extramitat of it concavity in which the medicine is placed as well as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient yawns on their side so that saliva or mucus of the mouth of that by the intrinscequa medicine, so that no deyssenda of that any cause over the throat of it and that it descends that.
And then take your hand with the medicine, and express that on the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that it is blackened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cotton and envelopes that over the tip of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cotton into a tube of over until the cotton adheres in that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that because it dries and falls about three days or four.
And if you think you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and after the cauterization, remove it in the circuit of the uvula with cotton soaked in border, and modify with that what is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured for the time being with embrocation, and give it gargles until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and less long of fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with fumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origua, ruda, sicados arabic, chamomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a pot, and they be submerged in boiling water, and the pot be well washed with decent lut, and be in the middle of the pot a hole, on which be placed an instrument concavity of iron according to this manner; be made of silver or iron.
And the extremity is introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above the pharynx, until the uvula is somewhat obscured.
And then iterate over those moist veguadas until it is dry, and guard yourself that you do not do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would too much tighten the abscess, and not the cove that you do this, but you must declare the abscess of it caut.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then take a cane and compose in the extremity of it a cup of  wood, so that the mouth of the patient be covered, because the cup of wood prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good with health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Moist veguadas adhereys in the throat or thorn of the foot or any other cause.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what of those appears, over which the cat's gaze, because you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that to you is declared what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because very strong the cause annexed the throat is thrown-out by vomit; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or of the root of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or  chew a piece of sea sponge dry leon, and tie that firmly with a thread, and then the patient swallows that, because when it arrives at the place in which the thorns and are extracted, then so are thrown-out. And more take an eel and tie it with a thread, and it is placed and  sucked out; or take a porr and suck the ends and suck the in-between.
But if they are not thrown-out with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is thicker than a ray a small one, and in the extremity of it is a concavity which you introduce into its throat with ease.
And hold its head elevated upwards, and guard yourself that the touching of its bone of the throat, so that it may be dragged to its body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the physician with his hand.
But however that the patient that is introduced is better, by its science of the place of the cause annexed and pushes down, and pulls its hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is to it prepared before it is thrown-out.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of the extraction of sanguisuga annexed to the throat.
When the medicated sanguisuga with that which we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you may have comprehended the tongue of it with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the sanguisuga, extract that with a small one or with a subtle gesture decently.
And if it is not to you possible to extract with that, then take a concave canula and introduce that into the throat of the patient, and place in the concavity of the canula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the sanguisuga is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day of water.
And then chew a berry full of cold water, and work the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of that cause and evil the water one hour after with its hand, because the sanguisuga as soon as it feels the water catz.
But if it is not thrown-out with that which we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cimet or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it falls.
And it is another manner of operation in the subfumigation of that, is that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let go from below the subfumigation; and place the patient its mouth at the extremity of the canula, and close its mouth so that the subfumigation is not thrown-out until you know that the subfumigation has arrived at the sanguisuga, because the sanguisuga as soon as it falls.
And if it does not fall, then you iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty causes and herbs, and do not drink water, and thus necessary is that with this regimen be thrown-out.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the sanguisuga of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, unless that in it there is some curvature: Which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is gaunt, in which it is aspired of lime, so that, when compressing any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their section.
Abscesses are certain special kinds, of certain manners, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their piercing and sectioning by two manners, of which one is by the species of abscesses in themselves; and by that which we understand of the humidities.
And the second manner is according to the places where they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is another from the abscess that occurs in the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place is another from the abscess that occurs in the joint; and to each of them is its own play by operation.
And more than abscesses are some of which it is necessary that they not be perforated, but until the maturation of the pus in them or the completion of them.
There are other abscesses which it is necessary to lance when they are ripe, and not until their completion, such as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its being is prolonged until it can reach what is in the circuit of it, and then its ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes a contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is ripe, it will harm the main member; or it is near the buttock, therefore perforate it before it is ripe; and do not perforate it crude, for lack of proper digestion, but that which is near the buttock, so that you do not pierce its prepuce and make it elongate to the parts of the buttock, and make a fistula, or that it is done at the edge of it that it is not healed. But you must know the hour of the abscess's perforation, and that is when it is ripe.
And you must know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and near the diminution of the heat and the pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And that you must know the perforation to be done in the place pus after the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And the perforation should always be done along the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the limbs or the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all equal places in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use the perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, it prolongs the course of its power and a lot of dirt, and then the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or the body according to necessity, or according to what the limb needs.
And you must administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large perforation and many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And others are of abscesses in which it is necessary that the wound be concave and be inclosed, when it is done so that it is like bread and is done at the edge that it already sticks, as those that occur in clusters of boils and buboes.
And of those there are that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those there is one in which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those there are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
But that one to whom there is no such as his abscesses are superficial, you must perforate that with a superficial perforation, or flat only.
And you must, when the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, perforate it and do not try to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part, and then close the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and so do this several times according to the degree until it is completely drained.
And most of all if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is often resolved with the egress of the pus, and then the patient dies easily, and you operate on them.
But guard this chapter with great care, and in the perforation of these abscesses, you must cleanse the wounds and consider therefore whether the plague of the abscess is little, or a flat section, then you administer the poultices of it or of a counter-poultice; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must place a bandage on each one until they meet.
And if in the abscess a part of the wound is abscised or has been concaved in the circuit, then you must cover it with a poultice of old cloth or a thread made of linen of it, as when you have treated loaves or roots, its moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and then process that and cure it with what is necessary until it is healed.
But if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and wine in which you have soaked a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer regimen and cure, and powders as I have recommended in many places in this our book and division.
But if it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must cover it with powders in wine and hot oil, and place them on the spot.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil, and all that be hot until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and cleanse it and administer to it what is necessary for its healing until it is cured.
And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of all abscesses in what manner is the way of their cure by chapters individually.
Chapter .xli.
Of the incision of abscesses which come in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck small abscesses, and so of species of nodes which contain tunics that are to their making; and the species of them are many.
And of them are pimples, and of those are those which contain humidity resembling lime. And of those are those which contain humidity resembling powder, and resembling them; and of those are those which are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the exteccio of those does not make contrary artery.
And the operation in incision of those is that you probe those with an instrument the shape of which comes near thus, which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Because if that which contains is humidity, then you split that with incision according to the length by superficial incision according to this form:
And begins in the incision of the line of .B. into the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops many times return, if there remain of that any cause.
And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian poultice, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the sore and leave it for another day, because with that you corrode all that is raw of that pellicle.
And then iterate over that wound with Egyptian poultice second and third times if you judge it necessary, until that you are confident that there is no raw any cause of that pellicle; then cure the sore with poultice until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that according to this form: with incision having the shape of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the incision and scrape that from all parts, and exert your strength in the extraction of the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery makes contrary, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do in the stony abscess of incision and cure according to what I have told you; and incision over stony abscess is easier, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with whom there is no humidity at all; the cause of which is because I incised over an abscess in the head of an old woman and brought back the abscess thus as a hard, rough, white sore, which could not be drained, and if someone was struck with that, it would cause them a plague.
But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other than this is not this chapter, as the abscesses which come to the heads of children and you must the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these is superficial incision.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body be relieved of the sania in the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is necessary for their cure.
Chapter .xlii.
Of the incision of scrofulas which happen in the neck.
Many times these abscesses become in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they happen in the other parts of the body.
And they are those that happen in the neck, and they are many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, because of those some are stony, and of those some contain humidity, and of those are malignant the ones which do not obey to cure.
Therefore in that which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is mauled to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pre-owned, then you must incise that with superficial incision from the lower part to the upper part of the body of the line of .G. into the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that you do not cut your hand, or that you wound the patient, and that you cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then put in the place a trite vitriol or other powders that cause the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave that inside which rests the sharpness of the abscess and the wound is softened and begins to be pus. When the blood is drawn.
Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of other small abscesses, therefore cut those and cleanse them.
And if it is at the root of the large abscess, then cover it so that you do not cut that abscess from its root. Cover it so that you place that with a strong folded cloth and let it rest until it falls by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut that abscess entirely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as pus is released so that there is no superfluous residue.
But if you see that there is superfluous residue due to the size of the abscess, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
And those of the abscesses that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and place a perforation that lets the pus flow from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation,  ointments and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the section of the abscess of the pile within the gullet.
The ancients said this section in the pile, and no one in our land has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having a hernia, cover that it be avoided the extraction of the pile, as for that it is not well done because all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the canal, cover using the section of the pile to escape the destruction which is done by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, cover that they cut the pile below three circles of the circles of the pile, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be in the flesh, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the blood vessels of it are there.
And if the doctor is fearful, cover that he extends the cord of the gullet with an onion, and then fends the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause of them.
And then cut the flesh as we have recounted; and it is signified over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that issued with that which is of its disruption and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is remaugded in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew that alone as the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make flesh grow until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recounted, the exposition is not but to see that some of these abscesses have already opened the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the throat of it is dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that, we command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then cover the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in her gullet and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of it, and I returned the woman as she was moaning of the dying, and I uncovered the wound and returned the blood which was issued from the wound small.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind was issuing from the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if she did not worsen in the voice, and after some days, she returned to the improvement of her dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the ephialtes there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of incision over an abscess which occurs in the throat outside, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is made by a blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And no one should make presumption about it as if it were iron, but only in the one that is small. And then you should examine that one with the finger, and if you find it similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it like the nodes, and extract it with that which contains it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you should scrutinize its entire being, and then care for the place with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
Of incision of the species of nodes.
Of nodes there are many species, and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I should recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as if making a doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the superfluity is subdued; and it is completed by putrefaction that at the hour the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that which is a lion's head which is in the u sac proper.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cyst and is made so as a vase, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the cure of a node, that you should examine it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument which is called intromes, according to how it will come to its form in the chapter which is near this one.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And then lastly, your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is emitted in the trace of it.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you should know that it is fatty.
And make a dry incision over it having the form of a cross according to this form: as I have taught you, and suspend that with tweezers, and excoriate the core from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that sania with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it must be so, and then you extract it in pieces until from it there remains no cause.
Because if from it remains no cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it remains any small part, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over it which sits abscess caut, and cure that of the other healing until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you stitch the two lips of it and cure that with what encases.
But if a pulsating vein is to it contrary, or non-pulsating, then you coat and moisten the place with zegi trissat which is vitriol and leave it straight for two days or three until you can pierce the wound and that the boiling of the blood rests; and then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and of those one is medium, and of those one is small.
The form of the large introme is this:
The form of the small introme is this:
They should be made of iron, of lead, of extremities well-shaped, so that they fit the entrance into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experients, and they are called albereds, and one of those is called berid.
And it is of three kinds, for some are large, some medium, and some small.
The shape of the large one, the shape of it:
The shape of the medium one, the shape of it:
The shape of the small one, the shape of it:
Convey that they are for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes because they are from bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, long, like large needles with which the stitches are sewn, and they are made of citrus bronze, or of copper or of iron, and the best are when they are made of citrus bronze.
And they are made of black plum, the ones which are agreed that for those the fistulas are opened in the concavity of which are reflections, that they are reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three species, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Shape of the large plum instrument:
Shape of the medium plum instrument:
Shape of the small plum instrument:
The shapes of the probes are of many species, for some of them are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
And of them are curved probes, and they are of three species.
And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of them are having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple probe, the shape of it:
Shape of a large probe having two curvatures: Shape of a medium probe having two curvatures: Shape of a small probe having two curvatures:
Shape of a large probe having three curvatures:
Shape of a medium probe having three curvatures:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for some of them are large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that it may be made gently in the scraping of the nodes, the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and for those, the disease may be healed and peace be restored a little by the burning which causes the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you see.
They are made of bronze and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
And it is in the pointed extremity hidden with a spatula and in that it runs to the inside and outside parts, when you want, as you see.
The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of the suction cups with which the flow of blood is separated, and they are of three species; large, medium, and small; the shapes of them:
They are made of citrus bronze, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And because these species of suction cups should be large, medium, and small, so that for those, the flow of blood is separated with speed in need, and then when to you first of all, there is no medicine.
However, do not use those to separate blood in every location of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy locations, such as in the armpits of the arms and legs, and in the armpits of the breasts and belly and groin, and similar to their fleshy, moist armpits.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments others small, similar to scrapes of fish according to this form; by which the blood is separated when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter .xlvii.
Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Sometimes the nipples of some men become inflamed due to sleeping in a way that they begin to be hairy, and then the nipples become inflamed, and the nipples become assembled from women, and they are pus-filled, far away.
And to that one who sees this, he who incisions those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then excoriates the entire thickness, and then fills the wound with a carnation medicament, and then adjusts the two lips of the wound with sewing, and cares for it until it is healed.
But if the nipple declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should to women, then it is cut in two of its parts, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one is contained in the other, as long as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then excoriate the code which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suture and the poultices, what is necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not comply with the incision of that which must be incised because of the restlessness of the patient, and because of the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until that which corrodes is removed from the gray, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from below the nipple.
These abscesses that come from below the nipple are of the species of scrofulas, hard, which contain a skin that is thick.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as soon as everything that is in the abscess is evacuated, then you fill it with old cloth and leave it for another day.
And then the cloth is removed and it is cured with a suitable ointment to that, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and of scrofulas, then you dissect it as we have said in the section about scrofulas, equally.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is a poultice, then administer cautery to it according to what we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the tissue that is on top of it is consolidated, then often abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: that when an abscess is due to the artery, it is long attached to the front of the body; and that when you pierce the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of stridor.
And that which is due to the vein is round and manifest on the front of the body.
And the incision on this abscess is an error, and most of all in that which is below the armpits, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore, that its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
But over that which is of them due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, dissect in the tissue a long incision; and then scrape the incision with forceps and then the artery, and deliurate of the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to see the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then pierce the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until the blood that is in it is removed, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which it is generated power until the ligaments fall; and then care for it with suitable ointments to that until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to the section of a vein, then you must have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the tissue, and then introduce the needle below the place which you have had below your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of uva4 of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then introduce the thread with that needle below the entire abscess, with the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle place of it until when it is emptied of what is in it, then you dissect the superfluity of the tissue, and leave what of it is tied.
And then place on it the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with calques and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of nerves.
Thus as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or worked too much, and similarly.
And it is made most in the places of the assistants or the talus, or in any place where the joints are sore.
And it is a serious abscess, and it is assembled to the color of the other body, and in the majority of its dispositions, it is surrounded by them, and when it is squeezed with violence, the patient feels in it a semblance of stupor.
And it is not an abscess added in the front of the body, and for this, the chain is left, and it is sore in every part and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be enveloped with iron, for it will certainly cause contraction.
But the one that is in the head or in the front, close the chain with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take that with the forceps and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an anchor, and excise it, and then cover it; and adjust the bandage with sutures, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter .li.
Of the section of an abscess which occurs from a boil that occurs to the belly.
And it happens to some men, boils on their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, of which some are called fungous because of their resemblance to fungi, of which the root is thin and the head is thick; and already the lips of these are turned, and some are small, and some are greatly magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him there were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine root.
And already the lips of those were turned inwards and were splitting, and humidity was running from that all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and extracted in one about eighteen ounces. and the other about six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of fine root; then you incise it with a spatula wide, and be in your presence with cauteries in the fire, for many times the blood of the section of it is expelled; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a lead foil recently made, and press it against that boil, in the manner of which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then, adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease pressing the lead greatly on the boil, until it is excised and falls by itself.
But if the boil is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of fear, and more so in the one that is in the belly.
But it is possible that you incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise the boil which is of dusky color, of little feeling, of slight regard, for that is a cancerous abscess.
And I will come with a remembrance of cancer, then.
Chapter .lii.
Of the cure of eminence of the navel.
Eminence of the navel is made for many causes; or by fissures of the fascia which is over the belly, and yeys of it the cloth or bowel according to what it should in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from the vein or artery according to what is said before, or by windiness contracted in it.
But if it is by fissure of the fascia and by the protrusion of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is leon ses pain, and then appears from different situations. And if it is by the exit of the bowel, then the situation of it with that which we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and when you press it with your hands it is concealed, and then it returns; and very much is felt in it, and it is magnified much by the entrance of bath and vehement work.
But if it is by humidity, then it is leon and is not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess in black declining.
But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
But if it is by windiness, then the touch of it is leon.
And the operation in it is that you consider then if the eminence of the navel is by blood of artery, or of vein, or by windiness; then you should be prohibited from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the hernia or the cloth, then command the patient to hold their leg, and be standing extended; and then send a probe into the circumference of the entire navel, and then command him to lie between his hands on his two, and then surround with a spatula wide in the circumference of the navel over the place which you have marked with the probe; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large hook; and then tie it in the circumference with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
And then cut the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce your finger into that point and try the hernia; and if you have found it or guarded by the ligament, then you extract it and impel the hernia to the parts of the inside of the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, then take it with a hook; and cut the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce two needles into the circumference which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until you can feel the skin extended and it falls by itself; or cut that when it is thinned and you can, and then cure that with water which cove of the enguentz until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then command that you hollow the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that with water which cove and that consolidates the place.
Chapter .liii.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is to the cure of it with medicines, and that it is squirreled in it the cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the mayra and caution of the cure of it.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the members allocated to extract all that, and most when it is beginning small.
But when it is antiquated and is great, do not command that you be proper to it, because I have not been able to heal from that illness nor have I seen another, nor that it has been able to come to that.
And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black cholera sometimes, and then bleed him, if it is found manifest repletion.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is located with operation, and then prohibit in the tract hooks which command to that; and then concave from all part with the codena good per excrutiation until no remains any cause of the roots of it. And let the blood run, and do not cut that lightly, and express the places, and absterge the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which is at your disposal of the instruments.
But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flux of the blood be ceased, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Of the cure of hydropics.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropics of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of yposarcha, because that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydropics tympanistres with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if to the patient has already been achieved weakness, or is in that other illness other hydropics, as if it is in him cough or body of belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is upon that.
But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him is no other illness but hydropics so only, and not a child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, expelling the water to the part below the navel, and then take spatula spines according to this form:
be of two parts acute long, of acute extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some brevity small by small, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the hernia, and that you lead that.
And then consider if the generation of hydropics is of part of the hernias, because then command that you with the section you be at a distance from the navel for the quantity of three digits to the parts below, in the right of it over the navel.
But if the generation of hydrops is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And make sure your incision is on the side opposite the one where the patient wants to make the incision so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
And then, with the instrument, perforate the entire chain, and then insert yourself into that incision, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you will scrape that; and if the quantity is about one fingernail or so.
And then perforate the siphon until the spatula reaches the desired location, and that is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument whose shape is: And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or lead or tin, and on the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is made blunt in the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
And at the end of it, which is the most sovereign, there is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately rises on the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that in an hour, very soon the patient will die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or will suffer five-pi that is close to death.
But evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient's illness signify to you from the virtue of its pulse and from the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause because it is immediately retained by the chain which retains the hole which is on the siphon of it and remind you that you should perforate it in that manner.
And then repeat the instrument the next day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for some days with caution, and guard yourself from error so that you do not remove all the water.
But if you fear for the patient, and let out a large quantity of water, then cure him by burying him in dry sand, and bathe him, and wait in the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, the spleen and the liver after the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter 65.
Of the cure of children who are born with the urinary tract unperforated.
Sometimes some children are born this way from the womb of their mother and the head of their urethra is not perforated (or it is a straight hole or not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to correct it with perforation as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
And place in the hole a fine lead nail and ligate it, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when it wants to urinate, it will be obstructed and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes on the place, will not leave that opening.
But those whose urethra is straight should be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is widened.
But those in whom the urethra is not in its place, are led by it, because of those, the one who is born with the urethra is deprived of the end of the head of the penis because it cannot urinate to the sides; and it is not due to their generation because the sperm cannot reach the mother in a straight line, and it is a very bad illness.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be placed on his back, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand with vehement extraction, and incise the head of the penis from the place of the prepuce with a sharp spatula, as it is incised of a feather, or that you do not remove any part, so that the bottom of him comes to resemble the head of the penis and that the hole falls in the middle place as it should.
And guard yourself in your operation of blood flow, because many times accidents happen with water; and keep it to you with water that you have separated the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of the white spot which happens in the prepuce on the head of the penis and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce of the head of the penis.
Many times this white spot happens on the penis and it is a prominence of bad flesh.
And of that one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
The non-malignant one, it is necessary that you suspend it with a fine thread and excise it so that it all disappears; and then place over it a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure it with diaphicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a livid color, then you should administer cautery near its edges and its root.
And if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside at the beginning before it is consolidated; and then you care for the one outside, because when you care for the one inside at the same time as the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And if blackening and corruption occur in the genitals and the foreskin, then you should cleanse all that which is already blackened and which is about to become corrupted or which is already corrupted; and apply a liniment over that with honey, which is mixed with flour of the rind of millet and of herbs finely crushed and sifted.
And care for that with the other cure until it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
Because cautery is useful in two positions at once, so it is for a flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed all at once, then you should introduce into the flesh of the foreskin a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that of whom the foreskin is whole, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or abscess) you should excoriate with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them exquisitely, then you should excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced through its thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a draft of the thin, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be cured with a vi stiptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the purification of infants and the cure of that which occurs to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: but since it is of our operation and our will, and it is done to those of infants, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way lighter loss to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the reason for which is that I have found the majority of the artificers and barbers use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and with tweezers; and they use ligature with thread and incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and have not found better purification with shears, with ligature with thread than with purification with the nail, because many times the thread escapes below, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic remains deeper, and it is very easily forced to another incision and certain pain. And with purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the butchers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not guaranteed, because very easily it enters into the furrow of it.
But in the operation with the nail, very easily it obscures iron and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of the infant is short by nature, and many times it stays in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
But of the purification that is done with shears and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience describes to me, because the shears are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharpnesses, and you incise accordingly by comparison in one time; and it is done compression of the thread with a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down most if he is of those that understand a little, that you do nothing but you tie the thread on his penis alone, and that you leave it in for another day.
And then do that with all that manner that is to your possibility of that which receives his intelligence. And then make him lie down between your arms, prepared, and do not be seen; and conceal the shears in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then introduce your hand to his penis and puff into the foreskin, and pull that in until the head of the penis is issued, and then purify that of what is attached to it of dirt.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Let one pair of limbs be non-cutting and the other cutting, so that the ram of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points be like the length of two equal hand spans.
But the error in modification is that too much the buttocks is driven inward, or a part of it, the incision is made.
Therefore, as you extend that with your fingernail before the inflammation of the place and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot have it with your fingernail, then extract that with a pin and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and that which is inflamed remains, the vessel, then you let it enter until it is ceded the cautery abscess, and excoriate that with facility, and cut it according to what is prepared for you.
And guard yourself from the head of the vessel, for it would not be good for it.
And therefore care for that with the ointment that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is cut from the buttocks beyond measure, and it obeys the parts above, it will not be good for it.
And but care for that with the ointment that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is made by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by pus or by flesh, and similar to those of which we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the ointment that we have said and vehemently is made the cause upon the patient, then you must administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: Be of silver and be a subtle lion's cone, as well as a tube of bird's feather with the subtlety of a long ray in similarity of a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle canal at the head of it.
And the manner of the ejection of the urine by this is that you take the needle bent and lies in the middle of it wool or thread for good binding; and introduce the limbs of the needle in the part below of the syringe, and cut with the forceps if superfluous any cause of the wool, but introduce it into the tube with vehemence and then introduce the syringe with board and with album of egg.
And make the patient lie on his back, and embrocate his bladder and the vessel with moist oils, and olive oil and water.
And then introduce the syringe with facility until it reaches the bottom of the vessel; and then double the vessel above the part of the navel; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient be arrived at the cause would, and it is not made according to this order, but the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
And then extend the needle with the wool little by little, for the urine seeps the wool.
Then extract that and make for cure urine, and use syringe, do not cease to do so and use syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient recovers relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are according to this.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or congealed blood in that, or it is constricted by a protrusion, and you want in that to distill waters and medicines, then it is made with an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
But in the middle of it is deaf, so it is closed. And in that there are three tubes: two from one part, as well as the other.
At the beginning is the concave place, in which is the thing that is poured, and according to the quantity that it fills, it is added, until when any cause is pulled by that of the humidities, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with water it is pulled, and when it is expelled long, according to what does clampcedra with which is phicat naptha in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you wish to expel humidity from the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and draw with that water which is pushed to the upper parts, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
And then introduce the extremity of the clamp into the urethra as we have recounted in the tongue; and then push the humidity with water, for that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels that.
Form of the cristeri subtle by which the bladder is cristerized, and that is the form:
And it is made of silver or lead, of which the head must be like a small feather, and below it a tube is inserted.
And then take the bladder of a sheep, and place in it the humidity that you wish to cristerize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligament, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the cristeri into the urethra.
And then press your hand over the bladder with the humidity and structure descending until the patient feels that the humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that throughout its entirety; and then introduce a strong thread into those holes, so that it is revolved; and then add the circle so that it is attached to the soft part, because you put in that water that you want from the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of the extraction of a stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have said the stone in which catz operation with a hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is located in the bladder.
And you know that I am narrating this with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is passed from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it sand; and the patient feels his urethra, and often it pains, and then it is straightened; and with water you see a hole in the anus in many of those.
And it is easier the healing of children of those who have attained fourteen years; and it is difficult cure in the old. But in the young it is milder because it is among those.
And of that one of which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we come to the cure of that, we must at the beginning of that modify the patient with the cristeri which extracts all the wound that is in his bowels; because that wound sometimes prohibits the introduction of the stone, and the inquiry of it.
And then place the patient on his feet and be seated and make him groan so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it jumps from the place or sometimes.
And then make that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it be below the things of him, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the lower parts.
And then pierce that and all of it through.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you cut immediately with a section upon it.
And if you do not catch all of it with your touch, then you must that you anoint with oil your said index of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said middle if it is a young complete, and introduce that into his anus. And pierce of the stone until it stays below your said. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that with your said, and expel that to the outer parts ves the place of which you made the section.
And command the minister that presses the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand re-moves the codpiece which is below the genitals, in part of the place in which the section is made.
And then introduce a spatula, well incident of which this is the form of it: And divide in it water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but to the left side of the vagina; and let the section be on that stone and your said be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section outside be wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that comes out of the stone, be possible, and no more, because very hard to compress your said which is in the anus the stone and it is thrown by its defect.
And know that there is some pain in the foot which has an angle and margins, so that its treatment is made difficult by this.
And of that pain, that one is like a gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light treatment.
Therefore, if it is that one which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus formed, then cover that with what you have on it, or what you hold on it with a gentle hand, the extremity of which is like a file with which you hold on the foot, and do not remove it; or introduce a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot reach it, then you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it with a strong hand with vitriol mixed.
But if the foot is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it; and then push a little towards that; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
And if the foot is very large, then ignorance is that you cut it with a large incision, because you inflict on the patient one of two causes: either death or that which causes the continuous distillation of urine, because of which the place is not entirely consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it while it is formed, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps while you extract it in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place on it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in roasted oil and water, so that the abscess may be softened.
And then turn the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you have untied it, embrocate the place with water and a little oil, and then cure it with a diaphanition gargle and a diazalition gargle until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs a foul and corrosive abscess, and of that appearance as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and by it urine is forbidden (and this is known by the emission of blood with urine), then introduce your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all species, with what you deem appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
And cover during all the hours of the cure that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are placed on the place.
And if the foot is small and is in the middle of the vagina, and it is stuck there, and the emission of urine is forbidden, then cure it with water which I recommend before you reach incision, because troops have been accused of incision by this cure; and I have already explained this, and it is that you take a wrought iron borer, of which this is the form:
of triangular extremity, sharp, fitted into a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie it with that the vagina below the foot so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then introduce the iron into the vagina, perforating with ease until the borer reaches that foot. And revolve the borer with your hand in that small foot little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand over that which is broken from the foot of the part from the vagina, because that is broken, and it is formed with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not to your liking for any reason which prohibits it, then tie a thread below the foot, and another thread above the foot. And then cut into the foot in that vagina between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then untie the ligature and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the foot, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, for when the thread is untied, the foot returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary for you when tying the thread above, that you elevate the foot to the upper parts, or that you return to your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
Of the extraction of a foot from women.
Foot in women is rarely engendered.
But if a foot is seen in any of those, then its cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by troops of manners.
One of them is that the woman, if she is strong, is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well-versed who describes herself to the physician when she is chaste, or is of women having husbands.
The third is that you have not brought a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision on the hip in women is longer than the place of the hip, because you must make an incision in advance, and there is fear in that.
But if necessity compels you to do so, then you must take a female physician who is well-versed, and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a skilled and subtle physician, or present a woman matron well-versed in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has a share of the art.
Therefore, make that present, and command her to do everything that you order her, from the examination of the hip to the beginning; the reason for this is that she must regard whether the woman is a virgin, then she must put her finger in her anus and want the hip.
Therefore, if you find that, force that, and then command her to insert herself into that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the hip, because she puts her left hand on the bladder, and comprehend that with good understanding.
Therefore, if you find that, then command her to gradually withdraw that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until she reaches the root of the vagina.
And then insert herself onto that position of the majority of the vagina to the root of the vagina, of which part she is stopped and feels the hip in that part, and the finger of her is not removed from the hip, short of her.
And the incision is little at the beginning; and then insert the ray onto that incision, and if she feels the hip, then adjust in incision according to the quantity which she knows that the hip is thrown from that.
And know that the kinds of hips are many: for some are little and great, and long and rough, and long and round, and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many kinds are of it for what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissat and take that for an hour until the blood is abscised, and then return to your operation until the hip is thrown out.
And do that you prepare with you of the instruments the ones which are said in the extraction of hip in men, so that you be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then you put powder on the place and tighten that with poultices and stricture descent, and do not repeat that; and leave the hip and do not extract that, because very soon the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood is ceded after some days, and the place can be closed, then you return to your operation until the hip is thrown out.
Chapter LXII.
Of incision on hernia.
Hernia ayguoza is nothing but an aggregation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the huou, and it is called ciphac.
And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared it nature in the part of the huou, before it is cuyat that already is another huou; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is for weakness which happens to the genitals, for that into those is poured this matter, and sometimes happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
And this humidity is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or red, or is black feculent, or is aqueous white, and that is the most.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is this: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the apostema is round declining a little to length thus as the figure of the huou, and appears the genitals, for the humidity contains that of all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the apostema is round with part of the huou and by this one estimates that it is another huou.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then it catches below the centiment.
And as you want the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you probe the color of the humidity in the apostema with a  catheter of which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the residue of the catheter, judge of what is within it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then command the patient to be flebbotomated if that is to you possible, and times the body of him full.
And then he should be resuspended on his back over some cause a little high, and put many cloths below him.
And then set you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, the one which extends his finger to one of two sides to the codena of the genitals and to the part of the mirac of the belly.
And then take a spatula and cut the tendons of the genitals of the male patient along the length towards the pubic bone.
And make the incision according to rectum equally distant from the line that runs along the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white head encompassing.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut that; and your scraping with which you scrape by part so that it is suspended with the most and subtlely scrutinize with the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible to you.
And then perforate the head full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the incision with a hook, and extend the head to the upper parts; and do not touch the tendons of the genitals encompassing, and make an incision in the head in that manner that is to you possible. And make an incision in it with its entirety or in pieces, and mostly its subtle width, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not made with certainty that the water does not return.
But if the fluid proceeds from that outside of its tendon during the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the incision of the head, return it inwards, and then adjust the two labia of the tendons of the genitals with suture, and then take care of it thus as the other plagues, until it is healed.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by another malady, then you must tie the vessels which are on the suspensory, and extract the fluid, and then take care of it with the water that we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts simultaneously, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore make an incision in that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your view that it is one operation, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the blood, and introduce into the incisions wool immersed in oil or in rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread that over the genitals and the miracle of the belly; and place over cloths folded and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then take two cloths and be filled with carded wool according to this semblance; and be made the extremities with which is pressed of cloth or of humid wool, and be added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the anus into the two, and the second presses at the part of the pubic bone, and two extremities over two cushions left and two other extremities over two pillows, and all the structure be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and that you make an incision with that the tendons of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted until it is discovered the white head containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form: and it is assembled in the Greek letter.
And then perforate with that head, and it is ignited until all the humidity is ejected.
And then extend the head with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and make an incision in it according to what is to you possible until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself of the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than operation with incision.
But if to you causes contrariety abscess caut in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then you must cure that contrariety that it does to you for that, with cure which convenes to it according to that it is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not await the second operation for its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have recounted here; and it is when it is certified you, for that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then you must make the patient lie on some elevated cushion, then perforate the abscess in the lowest part of it with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the aperture be wide until all the water runs out.
And then place over the location cloth and tie that and leave it, so that it runs the remaining of the water. And then take care of it until the plague is healed.
But if contrariety is in the ejection of the water in that hour you perforate that: and this is not done except for that which the white pannicle in the orifice of the plague causes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water, then you must put in the plague pain or instrument with which is extracted the water from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the plague a small.
And know that the water returns, and is aggregated again about six months or in about those; and as it is aggregated, then be perforated according to that same manner, for the patient thus will pass his days.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of the section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of losing to harm in the greatest dispositions; because to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And you remember the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and this is done for many causes: either by acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not troubled in it pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And very hard is the abscess lapidified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is done by knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those so that already it is perceived the recollection of it, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and do not cover that which you touch.
But that which is done by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from it by any cause of the compression with the fingers.
And it is already possible that on this species a section is made and on the other flesh; and it is that you incise the code of the genitals, and then extend the bowel to the parts above, and extract that from the white head, and deliver the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory as much as you deliver that from all parts of the bowel.
Therefore, if the bowel is already in those carnations consolidated, then you must extract the bowel and incise it.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the head, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it by a round incision.
But if it is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the bowel as we have said.
Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is of the womb.
It is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is by fear of that which is preceded by recollection.
However, it is necessary to say operation on it according to how I did the first.
And I say that you must make the patient lie on a raised stretcher; and then pull the suspensory of the testicles to the lower parts; and then take the code of the genitals with your fingers with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other ministers that you, and extend those with vehement extension.
And then incise with a broad sharp spatula by transverse section in the right of the vessels while they are the vessels uncovered.
And then excoriate of all parts as much as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle which is double-pointed, and tie that in the first of the places in which it accidies vit, and tie that other time in the rear of them. And then incise those in the middle place by a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated of the putrid and corrupt humidities.
And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you want to heal to be engendered so that the vessels which annoy one of the genitals, for it is not evil for that.
But if it accidies vit to all the vessels, then the testicles must be extracted or that the testicles for that be tied with the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be established, or that be tied so that it be not helpful to them.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The advent of this hernia is by section that ends in the head extended over the belly of part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, for that sending the bowels of that rupture ad to some of the bowels.
And this rupture is either of the head or of excencio of it, and these two species accidiessso for many causes: either percussion, or sautz, or clamor, or elevation of any cause heavy, or semblance.
And the signal of that, when it is by extension of the head, is that it accidies little by little in long time, and it does not accidies suddenly, and it is an abscess equal within ves the preon for so that the head compre the bowel.
And the signal of it is when it is by section of the head, for at the beginning it makes accidies vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess diverse apparent below the codena proper apparent, and that is for eyssiment of the bowel, and the body of it to the parts before the head.
And sometimes the intestine is forgotten in the hernia, and this intestinal hernia is called a strangulated hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by wind, and sometimes it runs into the hernia opening, and here it is retained, and this is a great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the varieties of this disease, there is fear with iron, because it is necessary to avoid the wound in that.
And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the parts of the middle of its cavity if he obeys its return, and then it is placed on his bed between his hands, and the legs are elevated.
And then tighten the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the parts below, and cut the cord of the testicles all along; and then fix the two lips of the section with pins according to how you indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that is possible to you that from that the fluid be forgotten.
And then scrape that skin which is left of the cord of the testicles, until the white hard skin of each part is uncovered.
Now you introduce your finger into that which is the testicle, into that which is between the white skin, which is left of the cord of the fluid, and between the second skin, and dissolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the fluid.
And then with your hand, the cord of the testicles to the parts below, and with this extend the white skin up with your left hand, and elevate the fluid with the skin to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the fluid upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And search with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard skin. But if you find any cause of it, then you push that into the belly below.
And then cut in the part below of the cord of the testicles by section of which blood flows and heals as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and sometimes the white skin is cauterized, which we have said near the incision out of fear of blood flow, because many times those occur) and leave the ligament so that by itself it falls.
But if the wound of it is late, then of hot water be embroiled, and place it on that so that it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with the other cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvi.
Of a Wind Hernia.
In this hernia, no one has been seen to have been bold in the cure of it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over that with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opened it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
Of the disruption that is made in the groin.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the groin as we have said, and it emerges the place.
And do not give to the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they give, that is little; and return it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with that, it is adjusted fissure in the skin so that the intestine descends into the skin; and this occurs because of the extension of the skin which is in the groin as we have said, which cause is that the skin is extended, and then it is softened and the place is suppurated and emerges.
And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies on his two between his hands, and then dry the place of the rupture of the suppurated emerging with section by the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then gently stretch the white cloth that is below the waist until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it on the prominent area of the cloth, and press it to the front of the belly.
And then stitch the two prominent areas on the edge of the ray of the cloth, and adjust with the suture one to the other.
And then pull out the edge of the ray, and do not cut into the cloth at all, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause like this you shall know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of the wounds, and as you cut the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the cloth is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more proper to health.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of softening the scrotum of the testicles.
Many times the scrotum of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is felt in regard to it.
Therefore, it is necessary for that one who is requested in the cure of it to make the patient lie according to his two sides, and cut all the scrotum which is softened upon the natural scrotum; and then adjust the two lips with the suture.
And if you want, stitch at the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter .lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excused, but for cause it is brought to mind to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary the remembrance of it unless for two ways, of which one is that that it be in the science of the doctor when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our use for those, as well as of goats, and of sheep, and of pigs, and of similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be seized in warm water until its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang. And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear after the touch.
But in castration done by fissure and section, cover that you have the beast and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then lay the suspensory, and cut above each testicle with a section between two testicles processed.
And then cut those as much as you will have each excoriated. And do not leave on those of the cloth any cause, but the subtle cloth which is over the veins.
And this way of castration is better the one which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the one is that it appears in that which separates the space in the scrotum of testicles, in that which is between two testicles figures as a woman's vulva in which it is felt.
And sometimes from that core urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the vulva of the woman over the pubic bone is as two testicles of a man a little of all diminished to the front part as well as the prepuce of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women. And it is that whenever you cut those tight flesh until the impression of it escapes, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other wounds.
And in the second species of men of which yeys urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of lenting and of prominent flesh for causes of the women.
Lenting, strong as it is, is adjusted over natural causes while it is stretched and is made light of its regard; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it spreads as in men and interferes with coitus.
Therefore, whenever you have the superfluity of lenting with your hand or with an instrument and cut it.
And do not cut in the last incision, mostly in the front of the radit, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then take care of that cure of the wounds until it is healed.
May flesh born is flesh that is born in the womb of the mother while it is full, and very strong it is produced in the parts before according to the resemblance of a tail (and for this reason, the first ones call this “caudal disease”); therefore, when we cut it as we cut the intestines, and cure it while it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is that the cone of the woman is not perforated, or the tract is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and that is made either by flesh poorly adjusted or by a subtle or thick ciph.
And it is made either in the front of the mother, or in the ribs of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and prohibits coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and very strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examining the metrona, if the opening is apparent, promptly; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with your fingers or with the ray.
But if the opening is by a subtle ciph, and it is present to the two lips, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you place on the two lips powders, and then place your fingers indicated of both hands at once.
And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two lips with force until that subtle ciph is broken and the opening is opened.
And then take lanolin and imbue it in oil and place that on the location, and jagua with honey the day so that the location incised is not consolidated.
But if the ciph is thick and thick, then when you cut that with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the opening is by carnada, then suspend that with an unci, and incise that.
And be with you the medicines that cause to cease the flow of blood from bites, such as hacathia, and dragon's blood, and incense, adjusted with the album of a cow.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound is not consolidated lightly.
And keep that for some days and administer calgua of the lily.
And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's nativity of other flesh, and then when you cut according to this manner. But if this is by a carbuncle, to the carbuncle which is in the mother be not made contrariety with iron in any manner.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that happens in the cone of the women.
Hemorrhoids are the appearance of the orifices of many veins through which blood constantly flows; and as they are old hemorrhoids and are made they swell.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and swellings when they are in the front of the mother and do not appear to the touch, then in those no cure be made with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother upon which cats feel, those are the ones that are cured.
And then when you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the swelling with the forceps, or with rough cloth, and incise those with the razors.
And then pulverize upon those of the flows of blood of one of the incised powders bites, such as acacia and similar to those.
And then apply her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the flows of blood persist, then make that sezer in decoction of sumat and of the peels of millegrains and of guaias and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and mix that with honey and wine and make a poultice with water on her back.
And if the blood is severed, it is well; and if not, make adhere to two blisters, and to the nipples their escarification.
And then take wool and submerge that in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of guaivier with wine and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of perforation of eyssedura accident in the mother.
Many species of abscesses happen in the mother, such as carbuncles and abscesses lapidated and ulcerations and buboes and eruptions and hemorrhoidal fistulas and varicose veins and swellings and other abscesses. And I have already said these illnesses and the kinds of them and their symptoms, and their cures in the division.
And now I tell you in this treatise of abscesses the cautery which comes in the main when abscesses that are festering heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it catarrh upon that feeling, then do not touch it with perforation of it, and cure it with that which helps on maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And then consider that you make the woman lie on a bed which has two beds; and recline upon her two and adjust her feet to the part further behind the belly, and her thighs be expanded, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie her with a ligature to that which is convenient.
And then the midwife follows from the left side and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the womb is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done afterwards.
And consider when you want to administer this instrument that you put it with the ray on the pubis of the woman, and that which of the instrument is entered into the womb be no more than the pubis and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the pubis, then consider that you place powders on the texture of the pubis so that the instrument be prohibited from all instrument in the pubis.
And consider that you place the vertex that runs in the instrument from the left side and that the minister has the instrument and revolves the vertex until the orifice of the womb is opened.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched with the hand and is lion and moist, then consider that you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
And when the sania is evacuated, then consider that you place in the wound a medicament submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which there be some stiffness; and place the poultice in the section in the pubis.
And place before the womb and over the pentalin clean wool submerged in water in which there be boiled mallows.
And when it is cured in about two days with gargles which are convenient to that until it is healed.
And some times the womb and the wound are washed in such a way that it is christened with water and honey, and after with water in which the root of lily or of long aristolochia is boiled, and after returns to the gargle.
And if the wound is deep in the womb, then consider that you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have cure it with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos be medicated when they are according to a unnatural figure.
Necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of the natural birth by the signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express in the parts behind and desire to smell the air, and over that it is relieved by that which is over her of the birth, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of it over its head, and the second with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then consider that the belly of her be compressed so that the embryo descends slightly, and when they descend over its head, they give to it the second, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good modification.
But that which is another this birth is unnatural and not laudable, because when the embryo is emitted over its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and its feet, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it. or it is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its neck, and resembling of the figures of it not laudable.
Therefore, necessary cause is to the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard herself from error and from deception.
And I have shown all figure of those, and what engen is in those by so that it be signified by it and be state upon it.
When the feyt is emitted over its head by natural egrecio, and that is vehement over the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that sezer, or what the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fenugrec coyt and with humid oils.
And then introduce the metron between its said spatums small and fenda with it the second, or succeed it with its nail until it runs that which is in it of humidity. And press the belly of the woman until it descends the fet.
But if they do not descend, then consider that the woman be christened of mucellage of ptilli and mucellage of fenugrec with cizami.
And then command him, to the cristeri, that he be compressed and make that stir with condiment; and take his mouth and his nose for one hour, because the fat is forgotten quickly.
And if the two hands of the patient are forgotten at the beginning, then when you reduce those with facility little by little. But if he does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a  cella and raise his legs, and then shake the sella on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall during the shaking.
And if the hands are not distinctly returned and the patient dies, then cut those and extract the entrails of the patient or tie the body of the patient to his hand with a cloth and extract it with equality, because that is forgotten.
When the patient lies on his feet, then you must push those upwards, and then convert the patient little by little, and then that you equalize it, and then that you take one leg of him and extend those little by little.
But when it is emitted between the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that stir with condiment, because it will be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then you return the patient little by little until you place it according to the natural figure, because that is then forgotten with light treatment.
And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take of althea and gum dissolved, and beat all in the mortar with good percussion, and then line with it the cunt of the woman, at the lowest part of her belly. And then make that censer in boiling water, until you achieve the hypocondrias.
And when the parts of him are softened, then make to him a fumigation of myrtle and sub-place that to him. And when the fumigation for an hour, then you make him lie on a sella, and then make that stir and extract his mouth, and take from that, and press the part lower of his belly with light compression, because the patient is quickly forgotten.
Treatment of the patient laterally while holding one of his hands. It should be engineered in the reduction of his hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make that go.
And if it cannot go, then make her lie on the sheet, and shake her thighs with vehement concussion, and then administer liaments which I have and recommend of mucillages.
And if it has come the childbirth, then make her lie on a sella, and then study on the reduction of the hand, and equalize the patient according to the natural figure, and make stir the woman and command him to compress himself until he is forgotten.
Treatment of the patient on the neck with his arms outstretched and the fascia of him is on the side of his mother. You must have the midwife hold the hand of the patient and then turn that little by little, and that with facility.
And when it is and as much as it is equalized, and then place on his cunt what we have recommended of oil and mucillages.
And then command him that he move little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a sella and command him that he be inclined on the right side, and then command him that he be compressed; and make that stir with condiment. Exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When they should give the horrifici of the mother according to this manner, consider, and then you cut the second one with your nail until it is evacuated of the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of him, then you cut that of the navel, so that it not be retained and die.
And then push the fetus to the distinct parts until you place that second one which you cover, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be forgotten with light treatment, if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four, but that is strange and hard to endure; but it is from natural causes, and not alive.
And counting those, whether they are multiplied, a second one, and separated by a circle, distinguish those among the ligament in the navel of each of those, and some times they are formed as it is a natural light emission, and they are emitted some times by a non-natural emission as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to the birth and reach what we have said of the unnatural figures, then take care of those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife skillfully and makes what is done with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all figure according to what is prepared for her by the art leading to health.
Remembrance of it that is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten, and it has already been verified that one woman aborts six, and another ten, all of which is caused by the measurement of the glorious wise.
And all this cove that is in the science of the midwife, because it is very useful to that appearance of this, and therefore it is paused to this as much as cove.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not outside emitted, and you are forced to use of operation with hand, then cove that you consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and is not with any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Then cove that the woman be laid on the sheet over her two, and be the head of her inclined downwards and the thighs of her be elevated.
And the minister have those of two parts or be tied in the sheet so that the body of him no extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother of him with humid oils and with mucellage of altea and of fenugrec and of seed of lily.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucellages, and then introduces her hand with facility in the mother, and then seeks with the hand in the place in which the fetus lies.
And convenient places in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends over its head, and then you place the uncis in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or behind the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or behind the hypochondria.
More if the descent is over the feet of it, then in the pentinilh, or in the middle of the back.
And cove that he have the unci with the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place the which is between the fingers of the left hand, and introduces the hand with facility and place the unci in some of those places the which we have said, until it reaches the left cause.
And then pause and place in the opposite position of it another unci, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be extension according to its rectum only.
And be maugut to all part, so that the emission of it be alleviated as it is done during the eradication of it.
And cove in it that which is between them that the extension be mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then cove that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces those expertly and revolves with those that are retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is out-gotten, then the uncis are changed into the place which is most high; and do so until all the fetus is out-gotten.
But if the hand is issued before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then cove that a cloth be enveloped over it; and then extracts it until all is out-gotten, and incides it either in the junction of the hand or in the groin.
And thus cove that you do in the other hand and in the two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is constriction in the emission, or there is water adjusted in the head of it, then cove that you introduce between the fingers of the scapula and split the head and extract the water, or what describes this with an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next to this.
And similarly do if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then cove that you incides it with the algematu, or that you press it with the alunda as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is issued and is constricted by the fork, then it be split until the humidity which is in the feet be poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obese, then you cut the head as soon as it is possible to you.
And if the folds of the belly are abscesses or are in it hydrophic, then you must pierce that within which flows the humidity that is in it.
But if the fact is on their feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is constricted of the belly and the foot, then you must extract that with a cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and that you make the belly and the foot within which runs that which is in those.
But if the other members are held and the head returns, then the metron inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is closed, then she inserts her hand into the preon of her, and seeks with that the head, and pulls that with her fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then inserts into it a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an abscess caused by a cautery that has fallen on it, then you must not tremble over it; rather, you must administer an infusion of humid fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fact is on their side, then if possible, it should be lanced; and it should be administered with the water that we have said in the living fact.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
And you must not leave any cause of the second kind.
And when you will have completed all your operation, then administer the water that we have said of the cure in the cauterized abscesses which have fallen on the mother.
And if there occurs a flux of blood, then send them down in styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of which was a dead fetus, and then above that fire another pregnancy, and then the dead fetus is another. It happened to a man a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated so much that it opened, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Then I placed on him some causes of strong attraction plasters, and extracted from him a bone, and after passing some days, and extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I continued to treat the abscess, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her usual dispositions, and already living in that manner for a long time, cured of it a little pus.
And I do not affirm that this is strange, but that in this there is science and help to that which the physician performs with his hand for the cure.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a vertigue with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of a stretcher in which the boards are joined, to the joining of which are two vertigues in two extremities of two boards. But however this vertigue must be more subtle of strictori, and be made either of ebony or of wood of boys.
And it should be the width of each stick two fingers, and the margin of each one is one finger, and the length of each one is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two sticks are two adjustments of that same stick, which are already finished, of which the length is the majority of one palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it may be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed vertigues.
Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ebony or wood sticks according to the resemblance of forceps. But however, at the extremity of it are two additions as if it were, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And as you want to open the mother with those, then you make the woman lie on her back with her feet dangling, open that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as if you were doing with forceps, accordingly to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the metron makes it so that you want.
The form of vertigue which the ancients said:
Form of impellent with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of amisidat2 with which the large head is contained
And it is assembled to forceps with teeth at the extremity, as if it were, and some times it is made long as if it were forceps according to this form, as if it were, to which there are teeth as if they were teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained. Way to mediate a little:
Way to treat a person with a spine:
Way to treat a person with two spines:
Way to make a spatula with two extremities with which the head is severed:
Way to make two spatulas wide:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the kinds of them and they are prepared, the artificers are lighter in their operation and more useful to men by their quantity.
And in the works of those instruments, whatever kind they are, you should always be prepared, because the need for them is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, then you command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her to strain with condition, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and over her nostrils, and if by this it is brought forth, it is good.
And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate in the cover a hole and place in that herbs burning in the mouth of the mother, thus as calament and rue and anise and chamomile and sicados arabic and cinnamon and centaury. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make her to strain as we have said, and the secondine is ejected with velocity.
But if this cure remains and it is not brought forth, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the vagina and search with that for the secondine, and when she has found it, then she takes it and extends it little by little. But if it is attached in the perineum of the mother, then she introduces her hand as we have recounted, and when she has found the secondine, she extracts it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not suffer violent traction. It is necessary that it be changed to the right and left sides with facility.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with straining and with medication of the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not brought forth with all the causes that we have recounted, then guard yourself that you do not tire over it in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is brought forth from it to the mouth of the mother lies on the cloth of the woman, and then sterilize that with an enguent and tetrafarmacon; for this will cause it to rot a little after a few days and it will be dissolved and it will be brought forth.
But when it can be done, it is elevated to the head and stomach, and this is what the woman feels; and therefore it is necessary that fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
But some of the Ancients already were using fumigations of mastic and dried figs.
Way to make an instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menstruation and of the secondine:
It is made of  wood or of iron.
And it is placed with the subtle extremity in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep that inside so that the fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
Of the cure of the un-perforated child's anus.
Many children are born and their anuses are not perforated, those which are very subtle and opalescent. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perforate with her finger that opalescent; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and guard yourself that it does not touch the sphincter.
And then place on it wool infused in wine and oil; and then cure it with an enguent until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is opalescent, then place in the hole a tube for many days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And already accidents opalescence of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; therefore, it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then it be cured with what we have said of the cure and of the lead.
Of the cure of fistulas that come from the bowels.
The fistulas that come from the part of the bowels, low, so knotted and thick, those that come from near the anus outside or in the space of the one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And as that knot is ancient and flows from the humid white or subtle rot, and sometimes in these fistulas some penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what is brought forth from them by the egress and by the windiness; and sometimes the woman of egress, and very often it is brought forth from them worms.
And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space, into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some of these penetrate into the junction of the groin and into the knot of the hip.
And in what is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you try to insert a thin probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no blockage.
But if there is a blockage in that, then you insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you don't feel that at all, nor does any cause of stool, worm, or wind come from the tract, thus as we have said, then you know that it is not penetrating, and then you turn to its cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the groin or into the hip and there is a feeling of pain in the area, then the sign of it is that the probe penetrates here if there is no blockage in it into the hip, and a feeling of pain in the area of the groin; and that it always brings a discharge; and that it doesn't work in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with rinsing.
And in all of those fistulas, there is no cure for all, and the cure for them is the work and variety of the physician's leaves upon which it is based.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected according to what I tell you, and what I have already tried.
And it is that the patient lays between your hands on his two and elevates his legs into them, the thighs being inclined to his belly, and then you insert a probe of lead, or wax if there is a blockage in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe penetrates.
And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that you insert your finger inside the buttock.
And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself penetrating, or another that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore don't work on that, for it is not in that healing, as we have said.
But nevertheless, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
And of the medicine by which healing is expected in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all of those flesh adjusted to the fistula, that are similar to the feather quill of a bird, are already cauterized.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border until all of those flesh that are cauterized are covered, and then cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well is; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is veiled with skin or flesh, and sometimes the fistula in that which seizes the surface of the buttock, then dry the buttock from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe it is liberated and caught.
And then purify those fistula-ridden flesh, which are assembled like the feather quill of a bird, and do not remain any cause from them.
But if a flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are cauterizing those flesh, then the best that is, and of the lightest instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those flesh adjusted, and the abscessing of the blood, the excretion of the humidities.
And then cure that with poultices wrapped in border or in tripe until the place gets braced, and then cure the plague with rinses of hard flesh-generating and consolidating.
And so medicines in which there is astringency and excretion; when then it is restored, it is already healed and you fear no iteration.
But if the fistula already reaches into the front of the buttock and is elongated from its surface to the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire with that.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is veiled with flesh or skin, and it is proper to penetration, then it is not an operation in it but according to your trust and hope.
The which cause is to administer in it one of three ways: or that you cauterize it as we have said; or that you dry it until you obtain the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert the probes and the proper cure; and do not proceed to cut it so that you do not cut the ligament containing the buttock, and which happens over the patient in the emission of the stool by his will; and then cure that with what we have said that strong leeches heal; or that you lengthen that veil and cleanse that pus that dries that within the buttock, as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then purify those fistula-ridden flesh which are in the incision where you can make a percussive; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague with incision, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus light remains for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the place of the anus around the surface of the body with the chain and on the edge of the anus, then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is like a needle of preparing the hearts according to this form:
And introduce it into that faithful envelope of v threads or around those; and then introduce the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it is penetrating in the edge of the anus near the entrance, then you extract the thread from that tract so that you introduce your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two extremities simultaneously, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have incised the thread deeper into the flesh, tighten well that which those flesh parts are incised between the two extremities of the thread and that they join.
And then cure the plague while it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared, but not that it is moved in the groin, because it is not to you that you should do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then make it with that until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula spines with which the fistula is cut: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Of stitching hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, which are between the anus similar to those that are of carbon, or which those are like the fat of a raisin. And of those are small and large, and that the blood flows from those always and is one, and are many, and are outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the little moisture, of which flows a little water or a little blood with a continuous body, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of those that are inside the anus is that you command the patient to squat and to squeeze until the anus is empty and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with hooks or whatever you have those with your finger, and then cut those deeply to their roots.
But if the hooks are not held in those because of the moisture of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with wool fleece, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut those and pulverize upon them some powders caudas near the incision, so that they are applied to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the egress, then cauterize the patient with cauteries in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and that obeys the egress slightly when the patient is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your finger, or that you take those with a hook, and cut those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
And that which you have incised, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take thread enveloped and introduce it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and encircle the two extremities of the thread in the part farthest from the needle, and it is laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of those and do not stitch it, so that the superfluity of the blood flows from that.
And then place on the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it heals; and when it is healed, cure those with poultices or with other cure until it is healed.
And as they are ancient and do not work in that medicine, then you must scrape those with the point of the spatula or with your finger until they are made humid and there is a host of those the pus below, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you open those with a reason of pus vehement that the first one until there is much blood and they are excoriated; and then cure those until they are healed.
Know that almesamir, it is called, and it is nothing but a red knot according to the color of the body resembling the head of a clavicle, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and in the fingers, and therefore by those pains the ailment.
And therefore, the one that is incised that which is in the circuit of the key, and it is held with the forceps or with an awl, and it is eradicated from its root; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second that precedes in its chapter.
But of wart is a small, rough, fistulous, round eminence on the surface of the body, and many times they come in the hands of children.
And the cure of it is that you extend and cut that, or that you tighten that with a thread or with a needle that is put inside that. And if you wish, cauterize that, according to what we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
But the ant hill is a small, fetid or fistulous eminence on the surface of the body, going to the pain, and when the ant finds that it is felt in it, seeming like a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And the cure of it is that you take a tube of hawk feather or of vulture feather, and it is strong, and you place that over the ant hill while you contain it the circle of the tube from the parts of it; and then you turn your hand with the tube while you cut that which is in the circuit of the ant hill, and you place that in the skin of the flesh, and that you eradicate the ant hill from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a tube of brass or of iron according to this form:
Let the part above the tube be drawn to subtlety, deaf (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that over the said, the apprehension of it be abated and the revolution of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant hill according to what is said before in the cauterization of the boil in the chapter of cauteries.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Sometimes christening is made of silver or of laton or of brass melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made of those instruments small and great according to those to whom they are administered, that the one that is administered in the cure of the small children be small; and of those whose buttocks are sore or painful, the christenings of those are small.
The form of the large and few christening:
The head of the tube of it above in which the bag is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it the distinction the one in which the bag is tied as well as sometimes.
And the extremity of it more down, the one which is inserted into the anus, be deaf (so it is not open) much lion, drawing to subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and in the other side one hole, and be the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and more thick a little.
And be the bag in which be placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag, be tight in the head of the christening between two distinctions with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, that it be scalded according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient be supine on his back, and elevate his legs up and place below him a cushion on which already are the men or a cushion; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with egg white or with mucilage of fennel or of similes; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the bag and expresses that with two hands and at the same time with vehemence until it be evacuated in the bowels all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that as well as, have the as much as it can; and if it sleeps with that for a whole night, it is more later in help.
But if you cauterize that in the illnesses of solution of belly and the expulsion of it the coity, then you iterate the cautery until it be healed.
And if in the anus be hemorrhoids or abscesses leading, then be the christening much subtle and lion, of the christenings with which the children are christened.
Of the cure of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was convenient to the book, and I say thus the cure of those with my hand and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what in which they are made the plagues and according to the place on which fall the plagues.
And the causes for which many times are made the plagues so as by a blow of a stone, or incision of a sword or of a spear, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similes to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the places of the body are like the plague that falls upon the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the arm, and resemble those of the limbs.
And you are considering the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
And you begin with the plagues of the head simple, because the remembrance of the composed will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a gem or a similar thing, and the bone has been broken only slightly and it is a large plague and you fear a boil on that patient, then you take care and immediately perform cephalic flebotomy, and do not delay this; and extract from that of the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, if no other cause prohibits flebotomy, especially if the blood that is drawn from the plague is little.
And it is the flebotomy of the opposite side of the afflicted part; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from heavy food.
But if from the little [amount of blood] some cause prohibits, then let the food be lessened and do not approach meat nor wine.
And place on the plague, if a boil occurs there, a cloth infused in rose oil or in wine in which is stippled.
But if it is certain of a boil, then place on the plague, if it is recent, its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recommend soon.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on [a poultice] of herbs until it is healed.
But if the plague is large or is due to a cut of space and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by sutures, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recommend of the sutures of them.
But if the plague is already uncovered of the bone and skin, and it is not a retention of it but a small suspensory, then incise that and then cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to the place of the bone, and command the patient to be cautious of foods in which there is heaviness: caps and forms cooked and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if it rots in the bone and does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that pus and throw it out, and then cure that.
But if in these plagues an artery or vein from which blood flow can come, and it is not severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that not incise, then you incise that with a spatula, or cauterize it; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize until the blood is severed.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light;  in this way that you pulverize on those this powder, because consolidated that before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: receive olive oil, one part, of dragon's blood, two parts, of cautery, three parts; all be ground and sifted, and of this, fill the plague, and be constricted by good constriction until it well adheres on it, and be coagulated with the blood.
And then strengthen that with poultices and leave it, and do not unbind it while it is thus, so that no medicine is extracted from it until it is healed.
And some times do this alone cautery, when it is not to you in present olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it convenes that it be placed on those and they be tightened, and so plagues recent with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, in this way that you place on those some digested herbs, or that you place on those powder of barley flour with water and honey until they get a poultice; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if a plague occurs with a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with a  [surgical] instrument.
And I say the cure of the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or the artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in it, but that its cure with what does vehement cauterization is avoided, like ziniar and zegi that is vitriol and similar to them because they are harmful to the nerves and contract that. And do not place on the plague any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most delicate of all the members.
And if it is cured with medicines light, such as it is washed with sweet water, some herb infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and thucia when it is washed with sweet water and the other herbs minced according to this manner, and humid herbs.
But if the wound is large, then administer suture, or tie the lips of it, and then care for it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or an accident has occurred in it to the lower part, then perforate that in the most depressed location.
But if in the wound an artery has already been incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to stop it.
But if the thyroid cartilage has already been incised or all of it, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the larynx with suture over the trachea and do not touch that; elevate that and reduce it to its natural form, and then strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for several days; and then care for that with ointments in which there is styptic and excitation until it is healed.
But if the wound has already been made in the bone, then strike that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can; and what to you is not apparent, leave that until the wound is purified, and it is separated and the discharge from it is relieved.
And if the wound is recent, then pulverize over that the powder which has been recommended to you. But if a fistula has been made in the wound, then cure that with the water of which the remembrance will come about in its chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or from a sword, and sometimes from it the depth, then consider more if from the wound there is a puffiness when the patient is leaning; then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then you put in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that it is not the blood retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it kills the patient, but put in it an attractive ointment, and loosen that twice a day.
And if the ointment is not to you present, then you put in the orifice of the wound a piece of old cloth so that it sucks that which is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
But if of the wound have passed three days or more and does not occur to the patient spasm nor tremor of heart nor stricture of the ale, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you know that the wound is saved; and therefore cure that with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that already a fistula has been made; cure therefore that by its chapter.
And if the wound is by incision of a knife or of a sword, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with water that is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if already a fracture has been made in the bone, and already from it incisions have been made, then you turn the wound and try to extract those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound is purified, that the extraction of them is relieved.
And of the other wounds accidents in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of water that we have said.
Of the wounds of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or medium.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and if you see that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the intrusion of them to their place soon, because it opens and is thickened for which the entry of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium, for in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And you know that suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient in sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper communicate to the others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is issued some cause from the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then water is in one of two manners: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the intestine has come inflammation because of the coldness of the air.
And therefore when water is thus, then cove that you cleanse that as you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in tepid water, or that which you squeeze in water with squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embrokes with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is done with a liquid in which there is a coagulant, and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
And therefore, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is added alum and mallows, because by this it is relieved the pain of it with little cause.
But if the pain of it is not relieved by this cure, then you split the rupture a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better, when it is owned that it is not a section, and it is not occupied to dry it up except by necessity and weakness.
Of the instrument, this is the shape of it:
One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is fine, and it is not as fine as a spatula, rather it is blunt a little.
And therefore, when the hernia is amplified and goes out the intestine, then cover that its reduction be according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if it is possible, because it is better.
But when the rupture is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then cover that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then you place his head and feet higher than the parts in between.
And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and your consideration always in this way so that the part in which the hernia is is higher than the other.
And thus cover that you administer this in large hernias and in medium hernias.
And in small hernias, place that which is prepared by you, and have it ministered between your fingers, which have the rupture all with its hand and adjust the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which sees the suture any cause to another.
And this is the manner of common suturing: one that you take the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the hernia; and then lay it from the extremity of the rupture of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, or another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the chisel that is below the cord of the parts, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the chisel, and so are made four orders.
And then strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the hernia by decent addition; and then lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as you tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the whole constriction of the hernia.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and fineness, because the fine needles lightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entrance in the cord, and therefore by this cover that they be medium in fineness and thickness.
And do not cover that the needle be placed in two extremities of the cord properly not, so that the flesh not be lightly cut and that the hernia be healed before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged sutures so that the hernia be not prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not lead the patient of his sleep; and place over the suture powders expanded of all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the hernia is already consolidated.
And this kind of suturing with needles in this manner is most convenient in small hernias, because it suffices in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the chisel, in one time, with a needle in which thread is enveloped equal in fineness and thickness.
And when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part from which you commenced, so that the thread retracted is drawn from the most superior part of the hernia, so that the suturing be according to the suturing of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suturing saves the men.
And with this suturing I cured the hernia which was afflicted to a man in his belly which was plagued with a knife, and the disruption of the hernia was greater than a palm, and it was issued from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and therefore I reduced that after the bowel had been pierced by the hernia for 24 hours.
And the hernia was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured that one and he is healed; and then that is visible for many years, and it is converted in its dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle fire, because I did not cure that wound with an ointment, because it was in a place where the ointment was not found nor any medicine, but I placed over the wound a clean cloth twice a day and constant washing with honey water until it healed.
But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of Scripture.
And that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and introduce the needle from the front part to the back part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the tendon and in that middle laceration according to rectum and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the thread in which you have introduced the needle; and make it penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the body.
And therefore, as you have made that penetrate, then you make that penetrate another time in that same extremity of the body from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the thread that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make it penetrate with that one the penetration with which you make that penetrate in the thread in the extremity of the body which is in that part while all that penetrates.
And then, as you begin from this same side and sew with the extremity that is of the thread in the other place, and extract the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that tendon and body the extremity of the thread that is in the other side with this extremity of the body; and extract that one from the tendon which is of that part.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time next another until you sew all that is in front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with suture of the skin with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the thread one time from the part of the extremity of the tendon, and that you leave that other time within while you make it complete.
But the second kind of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of the service of it and by it recommended, is that you sew that one according to similarity with which some medicants sew that one, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the body to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what you to me recommend.
Since you put the needle in the extremity of the body to your own from the front part, and make that penetrate to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the thread; and then you revolve the needle and make that penetrate from front to back in two extremities of the thread.
And then you revolve those each one, and make each one penetrate from the back part into the front part in two extremities of the body others that are in the opposite place.
And this manner of suturing is better than the common lighter suturing, and is the suturing of which I preceded memory.
This is the service of Gualia
And yet some, they say, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so that you introduce in these each one a thread, and begin with introduction of the needle of that which you owe to you, and make that penetrate into the other place according to suturing of those with which they sew the skins equally.
And know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of medication of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
Which cause is because when you obtain the plague recent with its blood before the air alters that one, and reduce the intestine and sew that one and fit that one decently, then you pause on that carnation powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then you pause on that some ointments which are to your presence while they make hard and break the threads, and be consolidated thread and body; and then cure that thus as is the cure of the other plagues while it be healed.
But if to you are not present the medicines, then you pause on that immediately, because it begins to throw brac, clean cloth, and change that two times a day, thus as to you and taught, while it be healed, because you do not indigested of other medication in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicate in lesion to the principal members, then you must submerge linen leon in oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and pause that one in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the aysselas.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their bowels, because many times that one must, then cauterize that one with black stiptic wine, and more so if the perforation is arrived in the bowel and is made exitura penetrating into the concavity of it.
And know that the one which is of the large bowel is of less healing than the one which is in the subtile bowels.
And it is difficult to heal because the hernia, which is called “gegunu”, does not receive healing from the plague that comes upon it from all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your prescription, with which you reduce the hernias equally.
But if it has passed into space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with a file on the area that is discolored from it, so that blood flows, because in the cloth are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the file pending from the part where the plague has departed from it, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it, you must the removal of the cloth and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Memorization of the plagues when they occur in the hernia.
When a rupture occurs in the hernia and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, because thus I saw one who had been plagued in his belly by a lance thrust and the hernia was on the right side of the stomach, and the hernia was old and made a fistula, and it was easy for him to manage and windy.
Therefore, I thought about the cure of him since he was not confident in the healing of him, but I continued to subtly treat him until the inside was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should not fall again into the accident of evil in his belly; and do not fall into any evil accident and remain in his usual dispositions of eating and drinking, and then enter into baths and he is exercised in his limbs.
And already some experienced ones have said that when a hernia occurs in the belly, and it is small, then it is necessary that it be tied according to this manner: and it is that you take splints of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place a splint of those that has the mouth open on the two lips of the hernia; therefore when it takes over those and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another splint near the first one, and do not cease to do this with splints one near another according to the quantity of the whole hernia.
And then reduce the hernia and keep those annexed heads in the belly until the hernia is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
And it is already possible that the hernia may be tied with a subtle file which is made of the skin of an animal annexed to it, because it is more in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of those files of skin, and it be well skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a file of linen, enveloped, and then introduce that file in needles and go with it into the hernia, and reduce it in the rupture.
And this manner of suturing with splints is nothing but according to a way of trust and of hope.
But if the hernia is large and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle hernias, because then it is not born but subtlety, and it is not healed of it at all.
Of the cure of  fistula and abscess.
Know that every hernia and abscess when it is inflamed and gets old, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and throws out pus all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula and we call that one a zuchem.
And fistula according to truth is a fibrous, hard, white nodule, with which there is no pain and which has a concavity like the concavity of a bird's bone; and for this reason, that one is called by some "rizatz", that is, bone.
And it is in some men moist, the one that throws out pus; and very quickly the moisture is cut off in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and their symptoms and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And therefore I want to make you know the cure of fistula which is done by the way of operation with the hand.
And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some of these are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the joints composed by composition as if from the hand and the foot; and of these, those that give to it proximity of the principal member and of resemblances.
And therefore of these fistulas that are according to this manner are of the diseases of difficult healing, and no receive cure, and occupation with that is work and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas some the depth of which does not reach these places that have been said, and you wait and trust in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take the attempt of the thread or of iron, and if the fistula goes according to rectum, and inquire that with it.
But if the fistula is tortuosity, then investigate that with a thread of subtle lead, for lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved of its tortuosity.
And if the fistula is having moist horrors, it is not to you possible that you signify upon it with thread.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice by its orifices, for the humidity by which you cleanse it should go from the other orifices and run from them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner to you is it possible that you know if here has the bone or the nerve, and is the concavity of the fistula distant or proximate, or is a fistula to which there are moist orifices and this over all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you must compress it with your hand over the place, and resemblances of the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
And as you will have stood upon all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula apparent is proximate or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to that which has been said before of the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the heel and of resemblances, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is according to rectum, then cover that which you have incised in the preon as much as to you is possible, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with that some times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the concavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore that with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize that according to that which we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is due to you to certify that, then you inquire about it and dry it according to that which we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you cut that until the corruption is hosted all; and then cure that with that which it encarves into it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and casts a brac as it was doing, then know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover over it secondarily and exquisitely do the reason of it and the purification of it with the posterior strength of your, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well is; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not achieved, and therefore in that you can only engender to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to pull that, then you pull it with subtle forceps which are convenient to that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those leave no cause with your strength.
But if to you makes contrariety any cause of the humidities, and in them incision there is no fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if to you is not preparation to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that which you can put on the plague that, and leave it until that is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the plague that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
Having, if you fear, pause over it a cloth submerged in sopre trissat with oil, or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments, for when they will putrefy those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those attraction is eased.
But if it is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface of it, then remove that with a scalpel only as far as the blackness and corruption remain, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large portion, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut into the area where the corruption has reached, and then cure it from within until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you make a man in his thigh to place that as an example and assistant on your operation.
Take a young man around xxx years old, who has an accident in his thigh, and from the parts of his body, the badness is on the matter of the body until the matter has reached the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not from an external cause.
And therefore take the time with that for the error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and there appear many materials from it, and its cure is then stopped until the thigh is fistulated, and make in it many horrible wounds which all throw out pus and the humidities of the body.
And therefore the cure took many years of doctors for two years, and in those I was not wise but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that ran from those horrible wounds for a great body; and already the body of that man was all stiff and the color of it was yellowish.
And therefore I inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone with it.
And then I examined all the wounds and found that they reached to all parts of the thigh.
And then I cut myself and incised upon one of the wounds where I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the thigh was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed that which was discovered to me and prepared of the uncovered bone.
And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed, and I had already removed it.
And then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated and discovered upon the bone secondarily upon the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I sewed that which appeared to me of that corruption, and then I was perforated making the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered upon it another time and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perforated the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm of it, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and the section of him, but for the disposition of the frailty of him and for the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because to him it happened in all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
And therefore he was healed by entire healing, and nothing was in place of bone, hard flesh; and good disposition was made of him in his body and returned the virtue of him; and he was converted in his dispositions and did not do to him contrariety in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in the place of the body already, then when you cut that according to this manner: and that you take a ligament and strengthen that in the extremity of that prominent bone, and command to someone that extends that upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a board or table below the bone decently, for when you do this it is not forbidden that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And cover that it be the sawing upon the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and force the sawing of it another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it abates one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the sawing is continued of the other part.
And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but ingenuity.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, since you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible to you, and in case it is rectified to you, when it does not cause you contrariety vein or nerve.
And know which are the saws and the instruments to cut these bones are very according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that whenever you prepare for every kind of operation instrument convenient to that operation.
And know that that operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument of which you indigeysses; when with you is great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of diseases, for the hours you already have by you yourself that which is convenient to them of the instruments to every disease.
And you so to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments the ones which you will put as simple with the ones which you will proceed to your prohibition the one which you will experiment on the others. Shape of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a chisel: Let the head of this chisel be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient except that with that [the chisel] the heads of the joints be confricadatz when they are corrupted, or it is the wide mouth.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a flat razor:
Shape of another decent saw: be made its arc as high as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of boy dagger decently made. Shape of it:
Shape of a razor which has a concavity:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another razor of curved extremity:
Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another incisor; this one resembling a chisel, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Shape of a chisel which is convenient for the ratio of that which is perforated of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of an acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the serration of the bones.
The extremities can be severed either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes from the limb which you do not strike any cause, then when you incise that limb into that the hon, the corruption, so that the patient escapes through that of death or malice which is a greater defect of the limb.
And the sign of that to whom it happens, is that the limb is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or it can be said the blackness before the putrefaction of that one enters into that limb that seizes it and that nourishes the whole body; and therefore you should take care to incise that.
And similarly if it is a cause of corruption by percussion of some venomous causes as well as from a sea scorpion or from a viper or from a rutula and of similar things.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the arm, then you incise it from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may nourish in the forearm of the arm.
And if instead of that, then you incise the arm into the armpit at the joint.
And if instead of that, the corruption passes and sometimes encircles the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer another cause another for the cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do of the foot when corruption envezeys the toe of the foot, then you incise it into one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then you incise the whole foot. But if it may enter into the thigh, then you incise the thigh into the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the limb or of sawing it is that you tighten a ligament in the part farthest from where you want to incise, and tighten another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, a lat spatulum until all the flesh is uncovered; and then incise or saw.
And cover that it be placed cloth of it from all parts so that it does not touch the place, and that it comes to the patient lesion adjusted and abscess caut.
But if blood flows when working, then you cauterize the place carefully, or place on it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the affected limb to the one convenient, and cure that until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his foot, this same accident which I have told you, which is that blackening occurs in his foot with a burn that was assembled to the burning of fire.
And that corruption occurs first in his toe before it extends to the whole foot.
And therefore that man prepares for himself to put pus that the cure may go to the member with the vehemence of it that throbs with pain and burning of it, and the incision that foot into the joint, and fire heals.
Long time occurs that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
And therefore it comes to me, and so I am pierced to repercuss that superfluity with what I place on the hand of the medicines, then the purification of the body of him; and it does not repercuss the superfluity and it begins to go to the other toe before it begins in the hand.
And he begs me to cut his hand, and I do not want to do that, hoping on the repercussion of that superfluity, and more that I fear the incision of his hand would be dead, for the virtue of the patient was over the case.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it reached me that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and it healed.
And I have not added this narration except so that it may be an assistant on that which catz of this illness, and that its signification for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of sinews and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is issued from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it as if it were fine cloth, and it has not reached the back corruption, and it has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerve or on the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
But however, if the space is prolonged until the corruption impinges on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as if it were turned over, and mostly when it is fine and made like cloth, and comfizas that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres and that that corruption has not achieved further consequence, and in the skin has passed through a face, then you cure that with clysters.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of a fetid odor, then you clysterize that with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and wine and vinegar receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And some times it is clysterized with water of ashes, when the medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ashes of vitz, and put water on it; and then boil that and clysterize with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
And if the patient does not have tolerance on the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clysterize that with water and honey and that it be mixed with vinegar, and clysterize that with wine and honey mixed, for by property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is superfluity of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already healed, then clysterize that with water that makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of  dyadicon and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize with it some medicines and other gargles that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of gargles.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster's tube is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron bit by bit, and place in it a poultice wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave it in the quantity in which between the clyster its addition.
And if the orifice of him from which the arm comes is elevated to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place that is in him so that the arm runs below, because when the arm is contracted in the depth of the sinew the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew within the environment of the bone as low as you want, then perforate that which prepares the member with the preparation by which the arm runs lightly as it is to your apparel and that no cause of the arm be retained in it.
But that which is on the orifice of the sinew, the which you remove at every hour so that that which is adjusted in it of the arm may escape. And so that you know if that which runs from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinew, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is thrown on the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or approximates adherence, then the third day you untie it, and when you untie the bandage, then change the cloth for another and renew the enguent.
But if from the sinew a proper space appears virus subtle, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it approaches, because in some men in which slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and of those so in which is done the contrary of it.
And if from the sinew after many days is issued arm indigested, then know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as in a diaphana enguent, when in it is adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
And the last of which is cured, is that you take of diaphana enguent and be dissolved in rose oil, and be on it poured vi antic in its substance, and then mix that with it, and use of that.
And already it seems in that action, when there is no arm, diaphana enguent, honey when it is boiled until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind all and pulverize on the honey when it is on the fire, and then line that on cloth and stretch that on the sinew; and line that with the honey which you have boiled until it is thickened, and pulverize on cloth and stretch that.
And some times are administered with it aristolochia long and roots of celestial lily (and is celestial lily) and flour of errs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust, grind those and sift and pulverize on the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
And if the sinew is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in the depth of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as above is said.
Of the cure of panaritium and ingrown toenails and finger incision and section.
Panaricium is an abscess that arises from beneath the nail of the finger or foot, and it often arises in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or is an abscess of abscess caut, or is corrupted, and throws out pus while corroding the root of the nail, and often corrupts all of it, and often conveys its corruption to the bone until it is a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is made lame, and the color of it is made dusky.
And therefore when you have that with the water that we have said in the division and do not mix your cure, then cover that which you have incised with iron all the superfluity that is remaining of the nail and then cauterize the wound with water, because cauterization is very useful in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already encompass the flesh to the sides of the finger, and begin to prick it and let that go, then cover that which you put a fine ray beneath the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and impel that up and incise that flesh with ease, and place on that which remains of the flesh of the corrosive burning medicines until it is all removed; and then cure that with enguent until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then cover that which you have incised the bone and extract it, because no time is healed that which is in it the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corruption and putrefaction going into the wound, then you cut it in one of the nuts according to how the memory of it is pressed, and then take care of it while it is healing.
If the nail is bruised or scratched, and there is pain in that area, then when you first begin to treat the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful that the section does not reach into the flesh that remains under the nail, because you will cause the patient to have severe pain, and it will cause the birth of superfluous flesh in the area; and then take care of that area with water that soothes the pain.
But this adjusted flesh, which is born in the hands of some men, is very fleshy, and it is very fleshy in the bones, or very fleshy in the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the fingers. But the one that is born in some nuts of the finger does not hurt, and the one that is born in the joints is very painful.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and that you cut with a spatula flat.
But the one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from the abscess of it.
But in the one that is born in the finger, when you begin, cut the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those saws suitable for water, and then take care of it while it is healing.
But consolidation, which happens to the fingers between their movements or by birth of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, therefore, when you cut that consolidation while the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between their cloths of the infused in olive oil so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead while it is consolidated as it should be.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient to the figure of the limb.
Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and they are thick veins full of melancholic superfluities that come in motion in the limbs of the body, and the greater coming of them in the legs, and most in the legs of the travelers and the laborers and the carriers.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purgatives of the body of black bile some times with forceful expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and that the black blood be thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein be elevated and all of it be extracted.
The incision of it is according to this manner: at the beginning, embroil the leg with warm water so that the thick blood be resolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the thigh, and then to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with a wide section, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part below the leg and up, and down, until the amount of blood that you want and that you see is enough, and which will take the virtue of the malady.
And then tie that, and command him that he abstain from the foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you that raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are motions, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of it with warm water until it becomes reddish and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if the bath is not present, until the limb is warmed.
And then cut the vein in the right of it, by incision in the long or in the back of it of the knee, or in the lowest part of it of the ankle.
And then open the vein with pincers and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it is of the appearance of it that you see that black color declining.
And therefore when you evacuate from the vein, you see that white which is cord.
And then you put below that the ray until it is elevated and it is thrown from the vein, and suspend that with a lion's orp onion.
And then cut another incision near that one for three fingers, and then scrape the vein from the part below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and cut that in the back incision of the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it until it is gone through the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above that.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, until all is gone; and then cut that.
And if it does not obey to you to extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and extract it, or introduce behind it the ray and revolve your hand to all parts until it is ejected. And guard yourself that it not be incised; for if it is broken, it is made difficult to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient by that harm.
And when that whole area is moved, then place on the location of the plague wool submerged in wine and oil, both rubbed and unrubbed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the gut is contracted having tortuosity in its wrapping at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then cover that which you do on all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks until you elevate that whole thing.
And guard yourself that your section does not cut the vein and that you do not harm that, for it is difficult for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence in that.
Form of the incision with which the gut is dried:
It is not to it acute as with the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility leon, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is engendered in the legs in hot lands as in the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little fertility and in which there are no herbs nor aybre.
And very much it is engendered in other places of the body other than the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom is spread from the serpent's body and worms and scarabs and worms engendering between the bone and the flesh.
And the sign of the reception of the coming of it is of this vein that accides in the leg inflammation vehement; and the place is vesicated; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that vesication which seems razit of plant.
And therefore, when the extremity appears, then you must wrap around it a piece of lead of which is the weight of a drachma, between two drachmas, and then tie it and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as ye see of it any cause to the parts outside, bandage that in lead and bandage that. And if the part is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and envelop the remnant; and do not incise that of razit until it is issued outside, for if you incise that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes happen an abscess and poredness in the place and ulceration evil.
Because whoever is treated should be extracted gradually, until it is moved from the back of it and no cause of it remains in the body.
And from this vein is issued in some men that is in its length of five palms and ten and already has come to me that it issued one of twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the hour of its medication, then introduce the ray into the tract of it and perforate that with a long tract with the body, until it is evacuated all that which is in the matter, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many ramps, and most when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and it is issued from some orifice ram.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is said below.
Of the section above worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine ailment.
This ailment is called in some lands  "bovine ailment" because it often happens to oxen, and it is a worm, few in number, the one which is born between the bone and the flesh, and goes in all the body up and down, and is shown in the feeling of its movement from limb to limb until it disrupts the bone and appears outside.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if they were worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and has reached the skull, then very much it breaks in it and enters and destroys the skull, and this happens many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by its ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then cover that which is above it and that which is below it with a bandage and constriction strong, and then dry above it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and not the other way around, then you pause cauterization with fire on the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If you see that being reached to the head near the eye, then tighten over the eyebrow with strong constriction, and then press over it, and extract it; and because the patient uses modification of his body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard himself from foods generating putrefaction.
On the section for the ailment of nafir.
This ailment is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes in certain limbs, and then it is changed from limb to limb.
And I have already seen that, as I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflation in the vein of the arm, and because it was warm for an hour, I saw that inflation go as if a worm was pushing it, but more lightly than being felt, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
And then it moved to the pain of that place and it felt in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it moved to the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to her that she should turn herself over her whole body as I had seen; and I was too amazed by the mutation of it and the speed of limb to limb. And I had already seen this before in my own eyes in that manner, however, I have seen many who suffer pain being changed from limb to limb. But I did not see this in the eyes as in the woman.
And I did not think that this was anything but because the woman was old, on whose dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance, that mutability was felt.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with moist bodies of well-covered veins.
And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent in the eye as we have said, then you tighten over it and leave it lightly and press over it until that mutability is constricted, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see it with your eyes, then you cure it with the shaking of the body and with that which you expel the mutability, and charm it with pills foul-smelling and with pills of serpent and the like.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they strike, because their diversity is that of those that have large tips, and small, and concave, and blunt, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
And of the signs of the neck is when it strikes in it an arrow, and it pierces the bone, and it is issued from the cyph of which is above the brain, because it happens through it with a vehement soda, and scotoma, and vertigo, and roaring in the eyes, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very much the word is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and it is issued from the place of the wound a white moisture similar to dust, and tears from it resembling the moisture of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels with that which it is fixed in a hard cause, and it is not a hollow cause; and very much the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the running of the wound black blood, and seizes that coldness of the extremities, and sweat chills, and syncope; and therefore you know that death descends all over it.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are so much blood sputtered from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and he expires great spirit, and demands the suction of cold air.
And if it strikes the arrow in the ligament which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it is made great pain with vehement pain and sigh, and not bad all the members of the muscles.
And if it strikes the arrow in the stomach, then very much tears from the wound food somewhat indigested.
And if it strikes the arrow in the belly, and it is fixed in it, tears from the wound some of the fabric, or the intestine, which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of it the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine is expelled outside, and something processes from it to the outside parts, and there is a lot of pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
But the other members like the face, the neck, the throat, the shoulders and the helpers, the vertebrae of the back, the clavicle, the hip, the leg and their likeness of the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I recount this to you that I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify it for your cure.
The cause is, that in a man a shot arrow in the lacrimal of his eye in the root of the nose, and you extracted it from the other part, leaving the gray of the eyelid of him, and it is healed, and it did not cause any harm in the eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was shot in his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's iron in which there were no eyelids.
And the Jew healed, and it did not cause any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has eyelids; and therefore I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I subdued it with that, and then I extracted it, and the Christian healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, because forty days had passed and nothing had changed about him from his dispositions, I incised it on the arrow and engineered it, and he healed, and it did not cause him any harm.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot in his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and because it was about seven years, he pulled the arrow out from the root of the groin.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her belly, and the wound was consolidated from within her, and it was not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and the wound was consolidated, and he broke the arrow, not feeling much pain, and many similar things happened to this one.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was shot in the middle of his nose and it had already declined to the right a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his cure after the shooting of the arrow entered three days.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow very carefully; and then I inquired about it with a subtle touch, and I did not feel it; but I felt a prick below the right eyelid, and therefore I suspected that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place with a plaster in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place would be apostematized so that it would appear to me the location of the arrow, so that it would dry out on it.
And it did not cause any harm to the location significant that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and it did not cause any harm; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and he broke the ailment of the extraction of him for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recounted this to me.
And then I placed on the wound medicine acute corrosive for many days until it opened, and with the touch I felt it, and I examined that, and extracted the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
And then I adjusted it in the appearance of the wound with that medicine acute until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and passed to me time with that for the space of time within four months.
And then because the wound had been amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with forceps in it, and remove it, and not be able to do it with that, then I did not cease to subtly and engineer it with manners of ingenuity, until one day I began on it with manners of ingenious hanging it with forceps skillfully made, according to how they will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the ailment healed completely, and it did not cause him any harm in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood with narration nor do they understand them in the book.
And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument of the descent of the foreign causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not thrown out of the limbs in which they are placed except in two ways: either by traction of the place where they are inserted; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that one that is thrown out by the place where it is entered, or the arrow proceeds in fleshy place, and is thrown and thrown out.
And if you do not obey the easement of the hour in which it catches, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it can heal, and the traction of it and its exit are relieved.
And similarly if it is stuck in bone and you do not obey the easement, then leave that for some days and repeat that with traction and movement every day, and it will be thrown out.
And if you do not obey the easement, then after some days, you must drill into the circuit of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a subtle drill until the place of the arrow is amplified, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire that with a probe, and if you feel that, then pull that with some instruments which are convenient for its traction.
And if you cannot over it because of the constriction of the plaque and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone nor nerves nor vein, then you cut on the plaque until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears in which it is held, then you deliminate the flesh in which it is stuck from all sides with all the ingenuity that you can do; and engineer over that, if you cannot over the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with a twist of your hand with forceps in all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly with subtle dexterity that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult to extract it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot over that of your hour, then you leave for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can heal, and then repeat that because then it is relieved. But if to you makes contrariety flux of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingenuity in all manner a way to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I have to you recounted.
And therefore that you may make contrary the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you must the placement of the arrow in it, for it is more useful. But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible by the figures.
But the arrows that are thrown out by the contrary of the other part, or that already from it proceeds some part to the parts outside, or makes difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part plus above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut on that; and be the section according to the quantity in which the forceps take; and then pull that, because it is made lighter to easement.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for some days, and then repeat that until it is extracted.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel that with it.
But if the shaft is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel that with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you impel that with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is intoxicated, then you must concave all the flesh in which is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and is proximate so that you touch that with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut on that, then cut on that and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract that, and close the wound if it is indigested, and cure that until it is healed.
Shape of forceps with which arrows are thrown:
Let the extremities of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these, many kinds are made, large, few, and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
As a ray so that the entry of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is impelled with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize about .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., There are two pulsatile veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two bones that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and— these are the veins that are called algelic—; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; because of those is one cephalic, and it is the wild latz; and the people call “the vein of the head”, and blunt, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and that one the people call “vein of the whole body”, and basilica is the vein that is placed in the domestic latz, and it is called “citillar”, and they call that one the vulgarians “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it is placed above the focil, and it is that one in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that one that appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the little said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild latz; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild latz; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The benefit of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigration and sahafati and ancient bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that it be scraped the head of the patient, and it be rubbed the head of the patient in the occiput in the place of both the veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage until the two appear and the places of their being near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and you want that one with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here send a attempt.
Then you take the sharp lance, and it is that one that is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then you raise your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and you cut the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do as much of the blood as you want.
And then tighten with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already it has been preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient emigration and bad and obstinate ophthalmia and acute superfluity effused to the bones.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck tightly until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and be demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you send a attempt.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicating, and introduce the phlebotomy incident below, and elevate the vein upwards; and cut that as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood run according to the quantity of your need.
And then untie the constriction of the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, and then put on that coat and poultices and tighten that above with strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And already is preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the traction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is about the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the old ailments of the face and emigration and rigor and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is according to that which I recommend to you; so it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a phlebotomy lance, the shape of which is:
Place the point prominent which is at the head of the lancet over that vein and strike upon it with a pen or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the puncture of the patient and tighten that until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomy lance, but however the flebotomy should not be of acute extremity as the others, rather it should be of blunt extremity, and flebotomy that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong, it would break it with the flebotomy when it is subtle.
But the benefit of the two veins that are at the lacrimals of two heels by scabies of the heels by rheum and sebum in the heels, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you being standing over the head of him.
And be made the phlebotomy according to the transverse in longitude a little with phlebotomy a little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, very likely the extremity of it is broken.
And then make run of the blood as much as it is to you necessary, and place over those cuto, and tighten those for a night, and then untie those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the diseases of the face and emigranea and rheum that accides in the face, and more when it is old.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient tightens his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the subtle long phlebotomy and place that in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make run of the blood according to your necessity; and then tie that for a night, because that is restored lightly.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the two guidegui to constriction of ale and to beginning of leprosy and to many maladies and impetige and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpotromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightens behind each one in his neck with a bandage; and stay the artifices over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
And then phlebotomize the vein at the long with a phlebotomy ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to temperate quantity or according to what times of necessity that is to what; and then make semblant of the other vein.
And then untie the bandage and tighten the two veins with a middle stricture so that the patient not be prefabricated, and leave until the morning when the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the algerich veins, confers to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that make seize the patient before you, and tighten the neck of him with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of him and regard the two veins of which the one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this is more because in the circuit of those there are small black veins; and therefore inscise each one by incision incision.
But if doubt is of you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand to incision of the major of those, and of the most manifest of those.
And make the semblant of the two veins that are in the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue the benefit is to the phlebotomy of the cephalica to prefabrications that are in the guolayro, to the malady of the uvula, and to maladies of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and regard below the tongue, of the one side of it vein and of the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And therefore phlebotomize each one; and guard yourself that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those there are arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are in those which run custom in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is made according to two manners, or put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive to subtlety declining; or secsar with phlebotomy cutellar, and calls it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Let the latz of him be so as times, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full proceeding apparent gross, and to those that contain thick, clotted blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to make phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle, citrine blood.
But the judgment of the phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extrates the blood of the maladies that are left the guolayro and the neck, and from which the feet and the belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that, to guard well that and be over-fear in that, because below it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will pierce that artery and will occur a flux of blood, so that he who performs that phlebotomy with phlebotomy pungent, should raise it with incision.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you phlebotomize in the place of it, the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut that one with phlebotomy incision as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of the metacarpal vein, then it is necessary that before the stricture of the arm, you touch the place between which you know the place of the wrists, and then press upon it with your hand; and then lay the arm and cut the vein with concave incision with phlebotomy knife as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, as strengthens the ligament, inflammation in the place that you have pressed with your hand, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore, avoid that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as such as gold of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is of the blood of the artery; and then you cover and put your hand over that for a long space; and then stop your hand, and if the blood is abstained, because it has been abstained many times, then you strengthen the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the moisture of him, and be over-fear of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not abstained, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is abstained; or that you take a scorsa of fistic, and apply that, and take the one majority and strengthen that over the place of the vein at the stricture descending to the ligament and to the pulvils within the other day.
And then if the blood is abstained, well is; and if not, then cure that with water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the polveras abstaining flux of blood.
And the abscizio of the blood of him is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But of the fusca vein, the phlebotomy is a judgment that extrates the blood of the superior part of the head and to the part below the body; for that because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist that one be over-fear in the phlebotomy of it, because below that one is a nerve; and therefore, if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, it will occur to him stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and for a long time, it is not healed at all, And this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and is not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with incision of the knife, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you fen the vein in the longitude.
The judgment of the phlebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and comforts to the maladies of the heels.
And it is necessary in this properly, if you want that the phlebotomy be performed with phlebotomy of the olive or with phlebotomy of the myrtle; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not below it the artery nor the nerve.
But however, for a long time it is apostemat in some men, when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice in that apostema.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and for the hope of it and the prevention of diseases, and that it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic and median cubital; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of repletion.
And it should be performed phlebotomy on the third day or at the first hour that three hours have passed from the day.
But phlebotomy that is administered, more when it provokes convenience and necessity to it, either at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And you should know that a child should not be phlebotomized before they have fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
And since someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, you should make them cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a laxative enema, if in those there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not throw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are cleansed, and that they do not harm the principal members.
And they should not be phlebotomized patients nauseous, acutely sick, or drunk, nor evading illness or drunkenness until it is removed from them, nor those with dropsy, but rather that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and of any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporal or animal.
And before it, consider in the subtility of humors, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to it.
And before it, introduce into a bath if no cause prohibits it, or exercise by any exercise so that the blood is made more subtle.
And pause the phlebotomy of it in the afternoon of the day, that is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforsa te that the patient's foot be guarded on that day from all evil accidents, both animal, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporal accidents, such as labor and superfluous pain and coitus and similar things to them.
And to his bed, make it present the causes in the use of which custom of men with aromaticity and odor and with balsams and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist upon a cushion that is softer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, and rub it with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and then stretch the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
And let the stricture be temperate, for the stricture when it is not equal, or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body of blood from rising.
And before the stricture, you should know that the one who is to be phlebotomized rub their hands together while the veins are inflamed, and are declared to the feeling.
And before the phlebotomist, anoint their phlebotomy with a little bit of olive oil properly; and place their left hand index over that vein, below the location of which the phlebotomy is desired, so that the vein may be a little pushed out, and the percussion be seated, for of the veins is the one that is throbbing as the heart flees, and of those is the one that is full of vitality, and when you place the phlebotomy upon it, it is contracted, and the phlebotomist is revealed; and the phlebotomy does not pierce the vein, and if it does, then that is constricted.
And therefore, for this, the phlebotomist should be halted and be solicited in all these causes.
And after the phlebotomy, but if the vein is pierced in one go, then it is good; and if not, then repeat it another time below that location a little, or upon it with a little pressure, if the location is not inflamed.
And if the location is inflamed, or the patient becomes frightened, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not stretch the ligament, because forcefully pulling it will draw the abscess outwards, nor enter into a bath.
And after, repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the incision is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood you desire, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the incision a little, and do it with pressure before the location is inflamed, because the location is inflamed in many men of little incision.
But if sometimes that is already inflamed, then do not repeat upon it, because it excuses you no cause; and place upon it some part of the incision of olive oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer a wound of oil in every phlebotomy with which phlebotomize the veins that are forbidden by the body of blood, and do this tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed on the spot, for the blood is subtiliated and is revolted when it is thick.
And if in the spot of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many times it happens, and mostly to those who have not been bled but that time, or at the opening of the vein few, and then you cover, and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen that for an hour, for it is dissolved.
And cover that it makes this about the emission of blood from that vein with compliment of it or of another vein.
And if there remains in the spot for some days some blackness or greenness, do not notice this; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calament or similar to it.
And many times abscesses and prominences happen after phlebotomy of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand on it, and if then you feel softness due to your compression on it, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore guard yourself that you place on it any cause of what has been said, for it will flow forth strongly from the artery blood.
And make a poultice with water in which it is stipulated, so that the place be endured, and then cure it with the other cure until it be healed.
And cover that you extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color appearing on the blood according to how it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is ropy; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is subtiliated; and similarly if it is acute, until the acuteness of it is stayed.
And cover that to one who is full and strong and has need of the extraction of blood in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
And in that one who is frail, let the contrary of that be done, and cover that you extract that one in troops of times, and that the tract be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flux of blood and incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is customary to happen syncope due to the phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of bread soaked in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from it a little of the blood in three or four times.
And if it is a cold complexion, then prepare before the phlebotomy pa soaked in essence of myrrh or in essence of honey aromatized with spices as well as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in essence aromatized and with a good odor.
And if syncope happens due to the phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of much blood, then cover that you prepare to drink water of meat and essence much odorant subtle; and use of aromaticity with algualea, and be the foot of it rubbed with it.
And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And whoever wants to vent his arm and dissolve his blood according to the second time, cover that to him whose phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But whoever wants to vent his arm, and give his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours of the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to draw the blood from his body contrary to the direction in which it declines, cover that it be vented on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, cover that it be given from it blood in one time and that a great quantity be given and the opening be amplified until syncope happens, because you will have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand on the wrist of it due to the blood of the body, so that it does not become death in place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And cover that when you want to vent the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult the emission of the blood, that you press upon it with vehemence and curved it slightly extended, because this is too bad.
Have that the blood be let flow until it be phlebotomized secondarily; or remove this with the acuteness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place upon it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress this with lighter compression until the blood be out.
And if the vein is suppurating, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is settled.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then you bleed him in that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is flebbotomated in place of the fusca or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the flebotomy of him is that the patient puts his hand in cold water until the focus reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
And then it is tied above that ligament with a stricture bandage; and flebotomy is made according to the transverse small one, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And whether the incision is wide or whether your flebotomy is with the one that you flebotomize on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the hand in cold water and leave the blood to run in the water until you achieve your need.
But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the less is placed the body of blood in cold water in times of winter.
And the flebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it leaves no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the flebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is pertinent to the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the flebotomy of this vein is that you tie the hand with a bandage or with your hand, because you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and is well demonstrated to the viewer; and then flebotomize it transversely; and if it is incised not at all, do not put water on it.
And conserve that you do not finish your hand with the flebotomy, because it leaves the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then put the hand in cold water and let the blood run in it, because if you do not put it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it will be prohibited from flowing.
And as the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you put on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be consolidated tightly; and similarly, it is advisable that you do this in every straight vein.
But the benefit of the flebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is pertinent to the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the flebotomy of this one as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein of the flebotomy is to the diseases that are in the part below the body, such as diseases of the womb, and to the retention of menstruation, and to the diseases of the bowels and ulcers of thighs and of old wounds, and to their likenesses of diseases.
And the quality of the flebotomy of this vein is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and makes friction upon it until the veins appear well; and tie above the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein, the talus appearing from the foot, and from that it is ramified into the surface of the foot with motz ramps.
And therefore flebotomize the widest ram or below the calf from the talus of the foot, because it is better and safer.
And if you flebotomize that vein on the surface of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and put your flebotomy with the one that you would flebotomize by the transverse, as if you would incise it.
And so the flebotomy is done.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you put the foot of him in cold water and let the blood run in it until it is evacuated.
And if the flebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the flebotomy in a little above, because the place is safe; and do not fear for him harm, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the talus of the part sinister.
And the benefit of the flebotomy of this vein is to pain of the hip when it is from blood caut.
And the quality of the flebotomy of this vein is that the patient enters into a bath, and fastens and tightens the thigh of him from the side of the wide above the talus above four fingers with a long and subtle bandage, so that it appears not by water.
And therefore when it appears, then you flebotomize that vein according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or cut that by section, because the place of it is safe.
And it is in many men well-hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then flebotomize some ram of it, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot opposite the auricular and the annular.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and make the blood flow in the amount you want.
Then loosen the stricture and place on the area of the phlebotomy incision and tighten the area, gently it is healed.
Of suction and the qualities of using them.
Suctions are of horns, or of wood, or of leather.
And suction is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is suction without scarification.
And this suction that is without scarification is in two ways, whether it is with fire or without fire.
And to the suctions that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen places of the body, of which one in which suctions are placed is the occiput, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and suctions of the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; and suctions of the two scapulas; and suctions of the hypochondria, and it is above the end of the rib cage; and suctions of the two armpits; and suctions of the two groins.
And suction does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch the virtue through them, as it is caught by phlebotomy; nor should it be that suction be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity provokes suction for illness or for continuous, administer it at all hours at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time.
And therefore when sometimes in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command suction to be done more than it has passed from the day two or three hours.
And the benefit of suction of the neck is that when that confers gravity to the head and to that which is effused to the eyes; but it is necessary that that be near evacuation of the whole body.
And this suction is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not light that use of it that one who is of cold complexion, or in whom is catarr, for it gives to that great harm.
And for that reason it is not necessary that use of that the old, and in the heads of which are cold diseases.
But to that one who over that is continuing over it is done oblivion; and for that reason it is necessary that you command the suction-maker to pause his hand a little with the suction to the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But suction of the elbow is in the place of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and of the basilica: and for that reason confers to asthma, and to the constriction of the ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to cough, and to repletion.
And it is necessary that the elbow suction be peeled a little, for if it is paused below, it engenders weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the suction of alhagdahan confers to the pains accident in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and prefoco, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And it is necessary that you command the suction-maker that he not press his hand with scarification for that it does not pierce the artery and happens flux of blood.
And suction below the chin confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and appearances to those of the diseases that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
But the suction that is done upon the two scapulas confers to caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
And the suction of the two parts of the armpits confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalic, for that one attracts the blood of all those veins more slender that are in the flesh, and those veins slender of the other veins more gross within that it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And command the suction-maker that too much he does not proceed in scarification, for the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a suction with which is suctioned upon the buttocks and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers below.
And command the ventor to be a strong ventor, and that it be of iron, for the place needs a strong section; and very fine and subtle ventor be scarified with a scarification.
But the ventors of the legs are less so by minutia, because they draw the blood of the whole body, and compare to old pains of the lungs and the womb, and the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and compare to both and a little; and they are in the place of fleubotomia of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
But they weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And of the ventors, the alahorcoben is proper to the alahorcoben of the two legs.
And the quality of the position of the ventors is that you pause the ventor at the beginning, and suck it gently, and do not prolong the position of the ventors, but pause them lightly, and move them gently, and that the humors come to the place by equal advancement. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated and that the color of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, you should scarify him once and no more, for that the place not be ulcerated.
And command the ventor to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and temper the suction with facility.
And if in the blood is thickness, then you should scarify twice, because in the first scarification is opened the way of subtilization to the blood and the liquidity of it. But in the second to the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then let the third scarification be made so that it may obtain the last.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it suffices us one scarification.
And if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with much scarification; and if we knew that the blood is thick, then we should scarify by pre-scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the code only.
And if that one whose code is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are strait, then the places of the ventors should be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, as is olive of aloe or olive of violet, or olive of double amygdalas, or olive of quince; and if it is in winter, then olive of narcissus, or olive of lily, or olive of chamomile, or of saffron, and to those resemblances.
And if the superfluity is thick, sticky, then the olive should be of amaranth, or olive of balsamita, or olive of aloe, or olive of aneth, and to their resemblances.
But if the ventor is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should have the places of the ventors near them be washed with water or with cold water of solanum, or with quince water, or with water of bordolaguas, and resemblances to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, wash his ventors with strong wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and resemblances to those.
And of that one whose superfluities are thick, wash his ventors with old wine, or with water of sansuc, which is marjoram, or of decoction of aneth, or of chamomile, and to their resemblances.
And the ventor should be guarded before bathing; bathing should be administered near the bath for an hour or two, and should sleep near the ventor.
What is what should be done to regulate the ventor before phlebotomy.
You should consider at the beginning: then if the ventor or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and has a sharp and inflamed blood, then they should be pre-treated with cold causes, such as vinegar, endive with strong wine and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and to their resemblances.
And pause their foods as much as possible, and birds' meats, and foods seasoned with acids, and to their resemblances.
And of that one whose complexion is cold, they should be pre-treated with drinking syrup of almiva, or syrup of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and wine very fragrant between old and new; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause the foods of his little and canary and sparrow and small birds and dove.
And that on the day of ventorization and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that some men should be given to drink in some hours tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, so it is muscata, or alcelita before the ventorization or before phlebotomy or near, so that the main limbs be comforted and the blood be subtilized; and that they should not take that scalfatz.
But the cuts that are made as incisions should be cuts that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the hip, because these members do not suffer incisions on themselves.
And it is not desired for those, but rather the attraction of blood from the limb, just as we place a suction cup on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the nose; and we use it so that the cold suction may dissolve from the limb, just as we place it on the belly and the navel; because it thins the limb and heats it and removes the pain by dissolving the suction.
And it is already placed on the boils when they occur in their opening or pimple, because by virtue of the strong attraction they open the pimple and eradicate the pimple from its place.
And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and spleen with suction in those enclosed places.
And these incisions are administered empty with suction alone; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the incision may be filled and be larger, so it is water poured alone or water in which herbs are boiled for the appropriate purpose.
Method of a suction cup administered with fire: its orifice size is two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of the resin is the majority of a palm; and it is in the middle of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the trough is small according to the amount that enters it a needle.
Let it be made of a smooth, hard, and thick, lemon, with large edges, lion, equal, and smooth so that it does not damage the limb of its position on it.
And in the middle of it, a transverse rod of copper or iron, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
And already this suction cup is larger than the one we have described; and the small one less according to the illnesses and the state of the one who uses it.
And the suction cups of the infants and the weak are other than the suction cups of the young and of robust bodies.
And the quality of placing this suction cup with fire on the limb is that it extends the fire with wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle place of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the part so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is on the trough that we have said, and when we have the suction cups and do not indicate that we show the finger and that it escapes the vapor on that trough, then the suction cup is dissolved instantly.
And properly ignite the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if you indicate it.
But in a suction cup that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse rod nor trough, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
And this is the form of it: And this suction cup, the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in most limbs, but in the limbs in which it is not possible to place suction cups, because of their small size, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in a limb devoid of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
And the quality of using those that you have found leeches that are in the waters of the muddy  ponds.
And then they are laid down day and night in muddy water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of them; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with suction cups; and then the limb of the patient is rubbed until it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
And as they are filled and case.
And if it is possible to suction the place with a suction cup, it is more beneficial.
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and then with a lot of water; and be rubbed and expressed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged after the removal of the leeches, and it is this result, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place it on top until the bleeding is stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied, then you pulverize on it tri-sulfur vitriol, or galangal and similar to them of the styptic causes, until the blood is stopped; or they are placed on the place the half of the boiled beans, and they are laid down until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is stopped.
And cover, if it is necessary, the iteration of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the place is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is left in the places until blood escapes; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood they immediately adhere.
And when you want them to cough, sprinkle a little bit of crushed aloes, or salt, or ash, on them, and cover them quickly.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Oh, son, know that these foolish doctors and the vulgar boast about this chapter and those who have never looked at the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
And for this reason, it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you must not forget this at any time; and I have not adopted this, but by length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until I extracted the science from them.
And I have directed myself to experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my best experience has been passed; because I have now abridged it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of elongation; and I have abridged it at the end of abridgement; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
First Chapter.
Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which a preface is necessary before we begin the remembrance of broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, I say that in the prologue of this chapter, the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning, the artificers are forced and stand upon the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others than you.
And therefore I say that when you encounter a fracture, or dislocation, or sprain, or wound, then you must, at the beginning, apply yourself to phlebotomy or to leavening that, or one of the two, if no cause forbids it, as the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom you encounter is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content in his food of fresh herbs and of bird meats and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and to fill him with foods and of all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a healthy cautery, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods of nourishment, thick and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of boiled wheat with water, and rice, and capons, and fish, and cow bellies, and eggs, and fresh poultry, and thick meat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture more easily and better.
And know that the broken bones when they are in the young men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
However, nature adjusts and binds over the broken bone from every part any cause seeming to glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is at the same time conglutinated and glued together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause forbids it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come with remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter from the other.
Many varieties of fracture in themselves. And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in themselves; for there is an arched fracture, another that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures of the saga, and stars, and additions proceeding and non-proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to every species is engendered or torment proper in its restoration according to what will come remembrance of it distinct in its places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by this is known the fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of it, and from that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that there is a slight twisting or fissure, in which case you must feel it with your hand and with compression of the whole; you must then place on it of the medicines of which remembrance is made at this moment, the one that is suitable for the place; and then be strict with a subtle bandage.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or otherwise that it does not happen in it, as it is remembered the whole part of its comparison, then you must begin from your hour to the rectification of it, having to happen to it a cautery abscess.
And if it happens to it a cautery abscess, then leave it for some days until the abscess ceases; and then bandage it in whichever manner that you can of lightness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and the healing of it is lighter than of the bone in which the accident happened.
And then strengthen it according to what will come the remembrance of it.
But if in the bone there are wounds, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be the position with which you place the limb, it is bandaged according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken limb, then you must perforate that you do make return those additions with ingenuity and in whichever manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that there does not happen to the patient by your operation pain nor injury; and perforate yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And you must in that hour profitably touch with your hand that, and if you see there any other cause, rectify that and bandage it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such as foolishly do some physicians who, in their operations, make abscesses happen by their action, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen happen by the operation of their foolish acts.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for know that broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then you must the envelopment be of very fine cloth.
But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then you must in those be envelopment wide and hard, for the wide bandage connects the great limb and strengthens it with equal constriction, so that in it no spot enters.
And then, beginning, your evacuation of equation, pause ligament convenient to this, over the place of that fracture with three or four envelopments according to that the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
And then see in that to the part more sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less so that you do not force the constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then lengthen yourself with envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and mollify the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other time over the broken place with envelopment, and then see in the envelopments to the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the envelopment and in the mollification of that according to what we have said in the first envelopment above.
And then pause between the envelopments of wool or cloth with which is equalized the twisting of the fracture, if in it is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then bandage over these envelopments stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or abscess caut, and then pause over it that which seats the abscess and that oses the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
And be the stars of the majority of wide reed cane, and well formed wisely; or be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and be the width of each star according to this form and this figure:
However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and a little wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how it fits the limb in size and smallness; and then strengthen over the splints with another bandage according to your first stricture; and then tie it above with a firm bandage properly according to what we have said of stricture, and it is that your stricture according to the place of the fracture more, and the more it is elongated from the fracture, the less the stricture.
And so that the threads are medium in thickness and subtlety, and they are of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some fools putting their threads of ropes of the flax, and it is a great error, when the bandage is outside equality.
And excessively fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to make a bandage with those that you want, and there should be no less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
And if the patient is said to be feeling pain at the extremities of the splints near the bandage in those places, then place some cotton wool or carded wool between those and the patient so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague, and accidents disrupt the bone, and I will come to the remedy in that in the chapter according to singularity.
And know that you should not immediately bandage all broken limbs with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that the limb, when it is large, should not be laid upon splints but rather after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the advent of an abscess.
And this is the manner of splints with which the Ancients restored, which were placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of splinting as commonly used for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it is of that which does not allow heat nor cold: and it is that you take of powdered meal, and it is the medulla of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And make it so, unless you sift that with egg white, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use that.
Another way to plaster a fracture, dislocation, and sprain: take asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of all ana drachma x; of frankincense and aloes ana drachma v; alochil ana drachma xx; all be ground and sifted and mixed with a little water or with the white of an egg if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and confers strength to many men.
Another way to plaster a fracture and sprain: take migrach and powdered white althea ana drachma x; of frankincense and aloes ana drachma v; of acacia drachma vi; of Armenian bol drachma .xx.
All of them should be triturated in a mortar with much contrition, and sifted, and comfitted with water or egg white and be administered.
Method of splinting to joints and separated bones in those places, and if there is pain accidental in those and in fissures and fractures: take wool felt and submerge it in strong wine and warm oil and place it upon the place.
More in this plaster is not cured, of abscesses caused and expelled pains properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of wild poppy; grind them all and make a plaster of them.
Method of a shortened plaster administered, it deserves the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: recipe root of althea, of chamomile and violet flowers, of wheat flour, of all ana part .i.; They should all be triturated and comfitted with wine, if the limb is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then make it with moistened coriander water or with water and use of it.
Another method of plaster, stronger in resolution than the first one, when an abscess occurs hard, it deserves the restoration of the limb: recipe of root of althea and of seed of flax, and of balanus, and melilot, majoram, violet flowers, of chamomile, of all ana part i engual; all should be triturated and comfitted with water of saunze or with sweet water or with wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the repose of the color of it.
But Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken limb, except for a mixture of wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it should be of medium thickness between thickness and thinness.
But Gualia is seen that they should be placed on the broken limb, and the causes in which it is dryness with a small amount of heat such as frankincense, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
A way of plaster that comforts the lesion and pain: take flour, of chickpeas, of human hair cut or feathers of birds, and of alum, and salt, equal parts; be ground and sieved and be cooked, and be made into a plaster.
But the quantity according to which it is covered that the wound remains and after it is bandaged, is that you consider if it does not happen pain or swelling nor the bone is broken, no harm of its place, then you do not untie for many days. And if it happens to the place violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you tie or untie that one in the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take cloth of linen and sea sponge leon humid, and submerge that one in tepid water, and with that wash the place until that swelling and pain are calmed; and after let rest the limb for an hour; and place upon it wool cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie over it for a night until you are sure of a boil cut, and that rests the inflammation of the limb, and is removed the pain of it.
And after repeat that stricture subtle and small plaster and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and more subtle with that until it is healed.
And if you see that the boil and the heat and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents already are removed of all, and indigested of plaster and of stricture, then you repeat that so as you have done at the beginning equally.
And if no accidents happen to the limb of those that we have said, then do not untie that one but after three days or four or five or seven; and some times all that is left for twenty days according to as it appears to you the unbandaging of the limb, so as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the stricture more than in your first stricture all, and adjust in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to as it is preceded the remembrance of him.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and extend more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to arrive to that; and therefore embroider that one with tepid water, despite all times that you untie that; and let it be so in all three days; and alleviate the stricture a little, and for this operation runs to the limb the nourishment, and it is healed slightly.
But that which do the foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to as it should, and it is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straight this one that increased the Ancients in their books and they would have written with this one operated.
And I have not seen to any of theirs that do this, because it is more reasonable that this one does not do.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for of fractures some is made by percussion of sword, and the percussion stops all the bone into the skull, which is left the bone, so as it does with the shaft, and for that reason this species is named ascial; or the sword incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the back of it; and this species of fracture is named levitation absolute.
And the plague of these two fractures or is great or little, and of fracture that is crushing or attrition; and cause of it is percussion with a stone or a fall on stone, and their similar.
And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches to the pannicle which is left the bone; or is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or little.
And of fracture is that which is meguated in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair small, and for that reason this species is named fracture capillar.
And is fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of stone and its similar, that makes enter some lamina of the bone to the parts within, and is made in the place concavity so as it happens to the payroles of ram when it happens to their percussion and is part of their entrance to the parts within.
And mostly this one is made in the bodies of bones humid, so as it is heads of infants.
And to all these species fractures satagias, so are their pieces as stars separated. And I come with remembrance of all that in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of them with touch and examination of corrupted flesh that is over them.
And especially the capillary is known by this that it is discovered over the bones, and it is cleaned, and liniment is applied to it, because the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, at the beginning consider the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification over pain, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and redness of those, and similar to those accidents in the major dispositions, it should not be cured.
And if you see non-current accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The reason is that if it has come to you the afflicted at the beginning as it is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study in the state of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must take care of the bone before the seventh day, because that which is left of the bone be corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted happen.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is with small parts and attrition, then you must introduce the fractured part and rub it, according to that I will recount to you.
And it is that you raise the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and manner to your possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flows of blood or pus, then you oppose it with what you have, and it is that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and olive oil, and make the patient rest until the abscess is settled, and if you are sure of the flows of blood; and then you begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the one way is that you introduce the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor this, a little more wide than that; and this is the form of it:
And then administer more the incisor wider than the second.
And it is necessary that you have a number of various incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor so that it does not strike the head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then you must perforate in its circuit before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-profund drills.
And they are not called that way unless because those do not stop the term of the bone of the test to that which is near it, because that the drill has a round extremity or margin on that which is left the head of it acute resembling a margin or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills a large number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone, so that it be to you present in all tests of the skull the extremity of which be acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill on the bone and revolve that with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another place, and pause that which is between all trace the quantity of the thickness of the ray or environ that.
And then introduce with incisors that which is between each tract of the bone, and do that as subtle as you can on that in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for that, as such as pincers and subtle forceps.
And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the cephalic.
And therefore, as you will have circuited the bone, and if it is continuous with it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary that you raise and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with other instrument resembling an incisor, but however it must be more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
And if there remain any pieces of the small bones and fragments, then take that with ease with that which you owe you of the instruments; and then care for the wound with lichinis and ointments the ones which we have said.
And the other way of operation is lighter, distant from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec for great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: necessary is to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of that incisor lent and happy of which this is the form:
And the lenticular incision is long and does not cut any cause, and the acute incision is from it in two parts forward in length, thus sometimes; that the lenticular incision be adjusted to the skull with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
And then strike upon the incision with a small mallet until you cut all the bone with ease as it is turned, and if you are sure of the panniculus that no accident happens in it in any manner, and if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Now if any cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in some places of the bone, cut that of it with the extremity of the lenticular incision, and deliver that of it with ease, because it is delivered of it its nuisance and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is cut off or is stayed from the bone is the face of it, and remains in it roughness and subtle satagias, then when you have scraped that roughness and eradicated those satagias with subtle razors by which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it be to you possible to administer of those in every place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are losing your operation that broken bone and its figure.
And then when you administer in your ratio with which razors you cut the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then use it near the most subtle of it, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most tenuous and the most subtle of all those.
But in each of the other fractures, small capillaries and subtle fractures, then when you administer care according to what you are losing to the rectification of it.
And it is cause that it is not guarded over all those who have studied in that art. And stick upon what we have written have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is cut when you eradicate the bone, then when you take cloth of it according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge that in rose oil, and place that upon the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place that upon the first cloth and do that as lightly as you can upon that, that you do not weigh the skull; and then administer upon that bandage lat, and do not tighten that but for the quantity that the wound has so alone.
And leave that with this care for a day or for two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then untie that and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, thus as roots of flax and flour of errs, and powder of incense and of aristolochia, and of resemblances to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that be pulverized upon the wound, thus as they are dried; and universally, administer in that all medicine of property of which it is that you abstain and do not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in it dirt of ointment nor other; nor do you leave to add virulence in it; because when it is adjusted upon the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and you can that, and it happens upon the patient that evil malicious evil.
And it happens in the skull of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most when it is less cared for, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious its whole dopte.
And if it does not happen blackness but from the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then when you take of honey one part and of rose oil parts iii., and in those lines a cloth, and then place that upon the skull; and then cure that with the species of cure that convenes until it be healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken of the nose but two parts together most sovereign, or one of those sometimes, because in it you have two bones, because the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and it does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
But if it is broken one of the two parts of it, then when you introduce the said small into its nose, and that you equal that fracture from within with your said finger, and with the said finger outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And be done that by you with ease, and guard yourself that no pain happens to the patient from that your operation.
And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to that, then when it be equal with the extremity of the ray in which it be little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
And guard yourself with the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then about the vii or x you owe the repose of the abscess caut.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the splint thickness of so much quantity that it fills the trough of the nose.
And some of the old restorers say that the poultices should be infused in water, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; rather, I think that the wound should be covered with a bandage of cooked egg white with powdered wool; and then leave it until the bone is set and the cartilage is healed.
And sometimes it is placed inside the nose, in place of a poultice, a piece of cloth soaked in the pus that is enclosed in a lion's skin; and it is used when the nasal fracture is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do poultices.
And if another time an abscess occurs, cover the nose with a plaster of cerot or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if an abscess does not occur, then you should plaster it outside with a mixture of sesame flour and powdered quince seeds with egg white; and then place a lion's skin over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then you should cut over them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the incision, and treat it with water that mends and consolidates, and with appropriate plasters.
And if a plague occurs in the nose, then you should treat it with poultices and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not accompanied by a plague, then guard, in this case, if the fracture is only outward, and not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its recognition is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and push with that the concavity of the fracture inside with ease to the outward parts, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and in this way gently equalize them.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated in two, then you should administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible the equation of it.
And if there occurs a commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and then place over the broken jaw cerot, and then place over it a doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a large splint made decently, or a piece of sole equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie that above according to how the ligation of it is prepared for you and how the application is convenient, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in lion's broth.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you take it off and untie it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered from it and plaster it with powdered wool, egg white, or sesame flour, because you will have removed the cerot from it, and place over the plaster lion's wool.
And thus, as it stands attached and adjusted that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a plague, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or splinters, then you must subtilize that you remove those splinters with what is convenient for it in the removal of them from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is narrow, then you enlarge it with the fleubotomist according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you will have removed those splinters, and of those nothing is removed again, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place over it one of the plasters that are convenient for it and embalm it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated in two parts, the other that does not occur splinters; and it is easy to the restoration of it; or it is so that it occurs splinters in it, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is so that the fracture is with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is with a plague, is that you make two ministers be present, so that one has the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
And then envelop the fracture with your fingers until the form of it is made according to what is convenient, and there is no eminence or concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then place a pad under the patient's leg with cloth or wool, and its size according to your need; and extend and elevate the shoulder and constrict the pad with your hand until you align the fracture as you wish.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the shoulder to the outside parts, because it has reached the armpit, then place the patient lying on their neck, and place a cushion of medium size on the muscle of their shoulder.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to the lower parts until the bone of the shoulder is elevated that is in the armpit, and then you rectify the fracture and align it with your hands.
But if you feel splinters of the shoulder and they are bad, then place those on it and extract those splinters with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, because you had placed under the shoulder the instrument that serves the chisels; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it be according to what is possible to you in the operation; that it have two extremities as well, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plaque which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is certainty of pus cauter, then you adjust the two lips of the plaque with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus cauter, then you fill the plaque with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the fissure of the plaque.
And if pus cauter occurs, then put a cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil and wine, and place it over it.
And all, that the wood be not harmful over the broken bone; and for so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you see the wood already be remauguda, then you rectify that and strengthen the binding.
And then place the sleep of the patient on their neck, and place under the leg of it during their sleep at night a small cushion; so that with that be elevated the support of it from the side of it, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the shoulder to elevation of the muscle; or be the arm of it tied to the neck of it.
And do not untie the binding unless you see in the place pus or an abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it is restored and coagulated the fracture of the shoulder.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the side of it and not broken of it but the edges.
And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known but by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of ingenuity which is to you possible.
And then place over the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then place powder of cloth duplicated; and then place over it a piece of thin wood according to the quantity of the spatula all or maybe a little.
But if below the wood is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with linen cloth, and then put the wood according to equality.
And then strengthen above with felt long with constriction decent and with firmness of the wood until it not be remauguda from its place.
And consider the binding every day; and every time that it is softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the wood if it is remauguda from its place.
And lay the patient on their side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And therefore when this number is complete, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the bone of the foot and place the bandage below, then you cut across it, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of the saddle, cauterize if abscess occurs here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and that is to be treated; but the extremities of it must be treated that they are cicatrized and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken, it is that it declines to the parts of it and occurs to it great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and cough, and fort leu and vomiting of blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and is not occult to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be supine the patient on their back, and place between the spaces of it a cushion; and then press to the muscles of it, and adjust the bones of it with the hands of two sides, and subtilia be in the operation of it and in the equation according to every manner that is ad this possible and that convenes ad this, until that returns the figure of the bone according to that cove.
And then place on it plaster and lint and place above the table a subtle of gauze or of caligi and of their likenesses in levitat, because that you envelopes that in cloth; and then subtilia be in lian that on the broken bone that it not be maugut; and go am liadure according to retonditat to the dors some times, and strengthen that am strictura decent; and then consider the liadura in all hour, and when it is mollified strengthen that.
And if necessity provokes the desliament of that, you must corrossio or pruziment, the pain, or the abscess that occurs in the location, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify that which occurs by that with manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if times to that the face; and adjust to it stricture until that it be sanat.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of the back when it is fractured.
Know that the fracture of the back does not catch but in places gross that follow the back; and of the extremities of them of the part front, it does not occur to those contricio but for that they are cartilaginous. And cognition of it is not amaguada to the feeling, it must the inquiry of it am the said.
And the restoration be thus that enguales the fracture am the said according to the manner possible, until that it be engulhat according to that cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone am stela, si indigeys of that.
And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of it, then occurs to the patient pain vehement and punctura, thus cum punctura that occurs to that one who has pleureci, and for that the bone puts the velament; and occurs to it difficulty of hanelit, and cough, and vomit of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients so engeniatz in that with motz engientz.
And of their so that diso: cove that you place viandas of the patient that engendered imflacio and ventositat, for that the belly be inflated and be extendut, and the fracture be impellida to the parts of fora.
But we would not avoreys that for so that it not be cause leugiera to generate apostema caut, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then it helps ad that.
And diyssero alcus of them that it be placed desus ventoza and then that it is sucked am fortitut; and it is semblant to ratiocinacio, but empero it is temut that the ventoza atire the superfluitatz to the location for the debilitat.
And diyssero alcus of them: cove that the location be cubert am lana that already is submersa in oli caut, and that they be placed pulvils between the costas entro that it be umplida, that it be the liadura engual when it envelopes that according to retonditat; and then be curat the patient am curacio of pleuresi of vianda and of medicina.
And if vehement cause constrenh the patient which no sufferta, and the bone puts the velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre the patient, then cove that they fendam sobre the location, descubram of the costa trencada, and then placem desobre that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the rememoracio of which is precedida, and that they inscidam the os am facilitat, and extraguam that.
And then that they adjust the two labias of the plagua, if it is gran, am cozidura, and curem that am emplastres entro that it be sanada.
And if it occurs dedintz apostema, then you cut and enfon pulvils in oli rozat and place sobre the location, and that it be curat the patient am that which cove to the apostema dedintz.
And he should be laid on his side on which he sleeps, until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and it is necessary to treat them, and similarly for the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider this: if the muscles are already softened and stunned and dead, and they cannot move them or extend or strengthen them, and when you constrain them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, they feel no pain, then you know that it is not healing, and in the worst case, it is mortal.
And if they move and feel pain with constriction with the fingers and puncture, then you know that the bone's neck is saved and that the patient will recover with cure.
And if you see this in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already softened, it happens to those who are affected in the muscles, and when you put your hand on his back, there is wind and expulsion of his will, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work on his cure.
But if you do not see any cause of these things, the cause is better and less severe.
And the cure for him is that you perforate the abscess with a cautery and place it on the fractured vertebra with oiled, rubbed, or with the application of warm poultices; place that on the area several times a day until the abscess is cauterized.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it on that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he not sleep on the side with which he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the bone is shattered or any cause that is already separated from it, then cover it with a splint and support that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then care for it with some poultice of the entrails, until it is healed.
But if the tailbone is broken, and it is the end of the spine, then cover that with your left hand in the buttock, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to the second equation; and then place a plaster and splint on it, if you need those, and then strengthen it.
And if you feel splinters broken in him, then cover that, and support it, and cure the wound with the cure that has been preceded until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the restoration of the shoulder.
The bones of the shoulders are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is nothing but a communication at the extremities of them and are incised in the length and decline to the sides; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the limb is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it while it is over the fracture as is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you align that according to how it is apparelled by equation align until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or which already declines to the sides, then you make the patient lie on his belly until it is prepared for you the restoration of that fracture. And therefore when you have aligned it, place a plaster on it, and then place a splint of wood or of splint on it, and strengthen by stricture on which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint.
And align the concavity with that which fills it until that presses the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess occurs, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is cauterized, and place on it what has seated it according to what has been preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as it is covered.
And if splinters occur or are comminuted, then you extract them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is what is between the shoulder and the hand.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a stick of moderate thickness according to this form:
And tie two bandages at both extremities, and then suspend it from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out his broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the stick.
And then suspend on it some heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the sides; and then the doctor and equal the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient be laid back on his neck and suspend the hand of his neck with a ligature; and then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the pus below him; and each of them extend to his part.
And if you want the extension to be more forceful, then you strengthen over the fracture with one ligature and over that with another ligature, and each of the two ministers extend to his two parts.
And therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it is covered that half of the ligature be placed over the  citillic and the other below the fracture of the thigh.
And similarly if the fracture is near the thigh, then it is covered that the ligature be placed over that place and over that thigh.
Bind that with ease and work, and as soon as it is bound according to what is due and applied for good application, then strengthen that if it does not happen to abscess caut.
But if it happens to abscess caut, then loosen the stricture within the seventh day, and place upon it wool cloth soaked in wine vinegar and rose oil until it heals the abscess, and then you strengthen that.
And the way of strengthening that is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand over his muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm be in place of stars, if nothing prohibits this from the broken bone.
And then use of stars.
And it is that you place over the fracture that star that be more wide and more strong of the other stars; and place between each star the width of the finger, and be the length of the stars according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers of all part.
And then strengthen over the stars with the stricture which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture over the place of the fracture be more strait. And as much as is lengthened the fracture be the stricture less.
And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the stricture as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its situation, then you do.
And if you fear abscess caut, then you loosen the stricture and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligature in all parts for three days so that nothing happens in the place proximate or inflammation; or it is prohibited the food to come to the limb by disposition of superfluity of stricture; and therefore rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are upon confidence that nothing happens from any of this, then do not untie the ligature until after three days or more.
And be the sleep of the patient on his back, and his hands on his stomach.
And place over the support a cushion full of wool, and consider in all hour of the night or of the day that not be untied nor dissolved the figure of the broken limb, or that be the ligature softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have before said, in such a way that the food be subtle at the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then it is covered that you make the food of him thicker.
Because of custom of the support and of the bed of him it is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then it is covered that they be untied and be administered bath and be medicated with unguents those which rectify that.
And if the fracture is laid rubbed, then you do not untie from that the ligature and the stars within the days or within two months.
Chapter .xii.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two radius; of which one is small, and that is the one that lies the thumb, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed below the small finger, from the side more toward the back.
And very often is broken the major radius alone, or the small one, and very often they are broken together.
And when is broken the small radius above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
And when is broken the radius of it below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small radius above, then it is convenient to the physician, it is necessary the restoration of it, that place a small extension with ease until that be bound.
But if the large radius is that which is broken, then it is covered that place extension more vehement.
And if the two radii are together broken, then it is covered that you place the extraction more strong.
And it is covered that you place the figure of the hand in the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more out than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower of the other fingers, and the patient be centered on a well-fallen chair.
And place a cushion in front of them in the height or upright position of them, so that the patient does not move or work.
Then the minister extends the arm of the party further back with his hand or bandage, and another minister extends it upwards seemingly.
Then the doctor aligns the bones as much as he reduces that according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bones there are splinters, then you must perforate to reduce all pieces in their place with your virtue.
And if there appears in it a splinter separated that pierces the tendon and it is not to your hope in the restoration of it, then you must cut over it and remove it according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is with a plaque, I have already made a singular account of this, and therefore take the cure of this.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerot made of olive oil and white wax, and it is midway between thickness and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth over it with a subtle structure so that the abscess is yielded; and then remove the cerot and place an emplastre prepared of powder of barley with the white of an egg, and then place stars; and let the star be the one which is placed over that fracture more wide and more strong.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm are six in the major dispositons, or whether the fracture is in one focus or in two foci together.
And then place your structure over the place of the fracture most strong and most vehement, and when more it is applied to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, place the structure a little more soft according to how it is preceded the remembrance of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are enveloped over the fracture should be soft and moist cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of its own proper thickness between subtle and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if there occurs any cause for which rectification is necessary, as if the swelling which occurs to the limb, and then you must immerse the limb in warm water until that swelling ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the structure is already softened and the bone is already remade and seems like those, then rectify all of it with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited to reach the limb by superfluity of structure, for then you must soften that a little and let it for a few days until it runs to that the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not occur any of those causes that we have said, then he must not be untied for about 20 days or thereabouts.
And then let the arm of the patient be suspended by its own virtue of movement agitation, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or at most it is restored in 28 days, and all of it is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the wrist and the fingers.
Know that at the wrist and the joints of the fingers, the fracture is rare, and it does not occur to them except for many blows.
And when a fracture or a sprain occurs to the hand, then the patient must follow the same as before, and place the hand of him over that extended one.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them until they are conjoined with good conjunction.
And then you must place an emplastre and cotton wool, if no abscess occurs; and then place stars above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped it in a cloth of it.
But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers of the palm, and then make a semblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen it with his fractured palm; then it should be strengthened with a long cloth.
And let the star be of leather with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what you must.
But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then you must place stars above and another star from the underside in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the structure, as if the hand is revolved to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if a fracture occurs to any of the joints of the fingers, then if the finger is put straight, it should be aligned as you must, and then it should be strengthened with the palm, and if you want, place a small straight star to it so that the fracture is elevated and not harmed.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle location, or in the index, or in the ring finger, or in the little finger, then it should be aligned and tied with the finger that is adjacent to it; or they should all be tied according to continuity, and it is better; or place a small star on it, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and around that, the disposition of abscess cautery and oppose — in your operation — to what happens when any cause of those occurs, according to how the story of it is repeated.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh, when broken, is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the part in front and the most sovereign pus.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is left below the fracture, and the patient is prone on their belly and face.
And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is proper to the root of the thigh, then the ligament is proper to the denolh to the part of the pentenilh, so that the extension is placed in its, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is proper to the denolh, then the ligament is made proper to the denolh, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone with both of its hands until it is reduced according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by a good connection; then cover that with plaster and constriction, if no abscess occurs to the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it, then you leave that for some days until the abscess cautery is yielded, and then return to your cure.
The constriction of it is made thus: cover that over the fracture a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove from it the superfluity; and then envelop the leg until it reaches the talo and the root of the thigh.
And introduce long felt between the thigh and the leg proper from the denol to the parts below, and the extremities of the felt come from the part most sovereign of the two parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
And then place over the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place from those a splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the vacancies between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is coagulated.
And then begin with strong constriction of the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as much as you go away with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your constriction be smaller and more lighter and softer.
And then extend the two extremities of the felt to the parts below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both extremities of the splints on the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the constriction on that, so that it does not occur to the limb corrosion or abscess cautery or inflammation and resemblances to those; and if any cause of those occurs, then cut yourself from it, and rectify what occurs all, according to what we have said many times.
But if in the bone is heavy of the bone which puts, then cover that according to what is possible to you; and if not, finish on it and remove that, and cure with what precedes the recollection until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is tightened another thing that are adjusted to it splints, as we have said in the adjutori and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of it in such a manner made, do not occur to the patient claudication; and if it is restored alone, another thing that is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he claudicates that of which it is always.
And know that the thigh is tightened in 40 days or a few months or a few less, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the thigh.
Know that fracture of the kneecap of the thigh is hard to endure, but it occurs to it many times attrition.
But if it occurs to it fracture, then it is not but fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with plague or ses plague, and over that all is established with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it is aligned what is broken of its parts with the ditz until it is aggregated and joined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then place plaster and place over that round splint, if you indigeysses of that; and tighten above with constriction to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as abscess cautery and semblance to those in such a way that it opposes to all accidents to what is convenient until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is named by the name of the tibia; and the other is subtle, and it is named fibula.
And consider the case of a fracture of this kind which occurs to the two bones of the arm, and by this, restoration of it is made as well as restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
And if the most delicate bone is broken, the leg is converted to the parts in front.
And if the thickest bone is broken, that one is left behind, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
And then administer extension and equation and ligation of the splints according to that same alignment.
However, keep in mind, if the fracture of the leg is slight and has many stages, that the extension be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you align the stars and that completes your whole operation, then you will take pieces of wood of pine, which is placed under the causes which are placed in soles, and are made from branches of palm; some of those which are of small thickness, and not of the hand, and the length of them according to the length of the leg, and from the bone to the very end.
And then envelope over each piece in two envelopes according to their length, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and be from the bone to the very lowest part of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places of two extremities and to the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left part, and it stands for good station.
And now a splint of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on it so that it preserves that movement.
And most importantly, that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is properly called a plague.
And then consider every day the leg and study with it by further study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and as any of those causes occurs, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary so that it may be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and the like.
To the talus, fracture does not occur at all; but to the bones of the foot, fracture occurs some times; and to the toes of the foot, very little fracture occurs, and it does not occur to them except attrition in the middle of the disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot, fracture occurs and sometimes those bones be elevated above each other, then the patient places his foot on the ground prepared as if going.
And then place one foot upon that which is elevated of those bones, and then walk upon those, and press, and align those until they return to their places.
And then place plaster and stopa above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which there are two plastic caps.
And then strengthen that with the foot in a downward structure, because you have enveloped that with cloths and other causes of which you have indicated.
And as it passes three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because you will find the bones aligned, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as you know.
But if some toes are broken, then restore those, and align them as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then place on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and be a little wider than it; and below the foot, this table which I have recounted to you, and strengthen that with a decent structure.
But if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each toe a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the caps of the table, the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with what is necessary.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip bone of the woman and the bone of the thigh and the groin of the man.
When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a cell lowered, and then incline that to the side of the back a little, and it be held behind.
And then the woman impales the hip with a cot, and it is made in the hip of her as if she hopes; and then the woman is concuted, and elevates the back of her little by little, because all that is thrown out until it is before the part of the hip as if she hopes and the broken bone returns.
And then place powders on the back of her, and when she wants to urinate, she removes the cot with ease and then urinates, and return that according to the manner according to which you perceived that at the beginning, and then return to her first powder.
And do so for seven days or thereabouts, for that is the restoration.
And if you wish, take a sheep bladder and strengthen over the wound a straw tube; and introduce the whole bladder into the wound, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated within the wound, for the fracture returns.
And then fill it with wool and let it stay for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or a woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these proper fractures and that little is known, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest dispositions the right way in the restoration and in the tightening of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the leg of a man when it is broken, take a bandage of wool, and put the leg in that; and then place a wrapping of cloth over it, and have it enveloped, and then leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when it is accompanied by a plague.
It is convenient for him to whom a fracture occurs with plague, and especially if the bone is large as is the bone of the hip or the humerus, or similar to that, that you take care and flebotomize him as soon as the conditions of flebotomy to you or testify as we have said before.
And if the plague flows blood, then you must take care to the retention of it as much as you pulverize over it  zegi trissat, if to you another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not encounter an abscess.
But if an abscess occurs, cauterize it, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause to happen bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered joint, then you must take care to reduce it and align it with your hands with as much ease and as little extension as possible.
But if extension is not to your prepared and the alignment of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and the instrument is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that it is necessary to the physician that he prepares of those three or four according to the quantity that you indicate to it in the cure in all species of fracture.
And let it be rounded, and let it have little thickness so that it not be bent of necessity the comprehension over it in the hour of the operation.
And let it be of sharp extremity at which let it be margin in its extremities; and let the underside of it be of tending thickness, and of the majority of it within the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is a little palette.
Because it must be placed the extremity of it attends elevated over the extremity of the bone prominent.
And impel it in a single stroke until the bone returns, and it is aligned with some alignment.
And therefore strive to align the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it broken is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with what we have recommended, then incise it with what you convenes to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it is to you possible.
And then scrape that which remains in the bone of asperities and of small splinters.
And as the bone is reduced, and then the reduction the patient suffers violent pain leading, then you know that the bone is not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great help.
As the restoration is completed which you make to the bone, and then immerse cloth in black stipt, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the plague cerot nor other cause in which there is oil, so that it not cause in it to happen putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stelas in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered as much as you incise the wound with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to happen over their patients death or illness corroding or ulcerating, so it is healed. And if your stricture is lighter, softer, different from the stricture of the other fractures.
And if the plague is large or the plague is bad, and you fear about that certain accidents evils the ones that we have recounted, and you feel pain in the place, then do not cover that with a plaster, but make a wrapping of hard cloths in that place instead of the plaster and tighten it with those.
And when after a day or two the plague begins to start, that in it there is generated a swelling, then you remove from above the cloth which you had placed on it with care, and then administer poultices, with those which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones to that.
And it is convenient for you that you untie the bandage and consider the plague every day morning and evening before it is consolidated and hardened, and that the limb be prepared in such a manner that the pus runs from it to the parts below with facilitated.
If to the plague pass many days, and it is not consolidated nor is the swelling separated from it, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones for which you must inquire the plague with a probe. And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that of them are not separated and put the limb and cause to happen pain, pierce you to incise those as to you it is possible.
And if it happens to the plague a suppuration or elution, it is stiomenios, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must put on each of those with that which is convenient to it of the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
And of this in which you must know the best sermon and you make present your patient: when the bone is broken, support the limb as the bone of the hip and the auxiliary and similar ones to those of the large members, and that you do not presume traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times happens by this the death; have left it until it can be healed, for very soon it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30. And then cure the plague if to you is seen, and if not leave that.
Chapter XX.
Of the cure of nodes that happen in the trace of any fracture.
Many times happens this node in the trace of healing of fracture, and mostly that it is near the joints, and is deformed by it the figure of the limb; and very soon prohibits the limb of its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the node is recent and administers in that medicines that have stipulated as such as aloen, and ensis, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar ones; in this way that you take from that some or all, and composes those with wine, or with album of hen, or with wine of vinegar, and put that on the node in linen, and constrict those on it by good constriction.
And leave the constriction that you do not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until that the node is removed; or strengthen on that lamina of lead descentment, because lead has property of removing all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the node is already in a worse converted and tight is and necessity provokes to remove that coydament, and then you cut that by the part pus sovereign of it, and incise the superfluity and eminent, or rat that with some rezzors until it is removed; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the restoration of fracture when it is restored and then that the limb remains subtle and frail not according to its nature.
When fracture of bone is restored, and then that the limb remains subtle and frail, then that is not done but for many causes: of which the one is multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligament of it made not according to that which should be; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments until that the nourishment be prohibited to run to the limb; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for scarcity of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
And cure of that is to give to the patient to eat and to make the heart of him tender until that the blood be multiplied in him; and administer baths; and introduce gaug and letitia over him.
And then put a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continue embrocation of it with aygua tebeza, until that the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of the broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibits the operation of them of that which should be.
When it happens to the limb already restored during the healing of it of crookedness and eminence of the broken bone and node, and it is for that feeded of form of the limb, but however the limb is not prohibited of its natural operation, then you must not receive the word of that one who exists that member be of new broken.
But already there have been many foolish physicians and restorers the ones who have done that in our land; and this operation is very vituperable, producing great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
But if the lameness and node are recent, then you must be embrocated with aygua tebeza in which are put mollifying herbs, such as the leaves of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar ones; and be made a plaster with a mollifying plaster such as dyallaquilon well made; or that is taken mucillage of root of altea and is contused with gray of gualina or with oil of cera, and be plastered with that; or that are taken figs fat and are trissadas with feathers of dove, and similar ones of the medicines that are called amermans consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with continuous light friction with the hands, and movement of the limb is administered throughout the day.
But if the curvature has already been added and is made strong and converted into a worse condition, and the need for its cure with iron arises, then it is necessary that it is the most exposed part and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and that which is superfluous of the knot of that part is cut with the bone with subtle scissors, and it is administered facility in that with diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints of its place, so that movement is prohibited, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and it brings upon the patient pains and great injuries.
Therefore, when an accident occurs to any dislocation, it is necessary to immediately try to reduce it, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place is inflamed and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason, one should not be harmed or stretched during the time of inflammation, because many times it brings on spasms and sharp pains.
But when this happens, it is necessary that you get to the flaying of the patient, and then let it rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb is wrapped with warm water and oil, and it is reduced with facility.
And every member should be cured with that by which the memory will come back to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what has preceded in fracture; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most inferior.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So the two jaws are dislocated if it is not tardy; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that they are pulled from their places by little movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and complicated, so that they are softened at the junction until the saliva of the patient flows and that it cannot hold it or close its mouth, and the tongue of it is enveloped in its word.
But when the dislocation of it is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it is necessary that the reduction of it be administered lightly, and not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts his thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw from the inside of his mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he inserts his two thumbs together, if the dislocation is of two parts, and the other said of his hands are outside with which he equalizes; and he commands the patient to cease his jaws and let those go from each part; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer vaporization with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made lightly and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then put on those powders of cloth with cerot, and it is made of wax and oil rubbed; and then it is applied with facility with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be standing between two pillows, so that it does not harm him to the right or left part; and do not let him chew for any cause; having his food be forbidden lion, until when the pains are reduced and the jaws are healed, then let him chew as he wants.
And this be administered with facility, and do not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient, the eating and drinking and spitting, until the jaw is healed and cured.
And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and are not converted to their places, then many times this happens fever and continuous soda, and very much is alerted the belly of the patient, and very much and vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times that one dies who this happens to in ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the place from its continuation with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outside part, and this is declared to the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then grasp the place with your palm with firm grasp, so that it will return.
And then put on that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which is joined and continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and equalized according to what we have said and according to what is your equipment.
And then place a plaster, and powder, and bandage on it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this same cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the part of the thigh to the part below.
And the second is that it is dislocated in the part below the muscle, and that is done quickly; and it is not dislocated in the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the parts in front by the nerves.
And most commonly it is dislocated and thrown out to the parts below the thigh, and most in those whose flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is thrown out with difficulty.
And often accidents happen to some men by a blow or fall, and the muscle of them is separated from its place by a cauterized abscess, and it is cured by that which is already dislocated.
Therefore, know that you should reduce it while you are above it, and then proceed in the cure of it.
And it is known that the dislocation of it is when it is in the parts below the thigh; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you find between those a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle concavity and below the thigh the touch of the head of the muscle as if a gourd, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it by all movements.
If it is dislocated below the foot or above, and then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation is made a light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates his hand to the parts below; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates his hand, and extends that upwards; and then places that below where it returns slightly.
But if by what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then know that the patient should be bathed in lukewarm water and administered a poultice that softens and lubricates as if it were made of boiled roots of aloe, fennel, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid on his back and placed below the thigh of him, waiting for a bandage between elevation and constriction, and the physician places his hand on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle upwards, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not moved to the parts below, for that instantly returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and that is that you make a man present who is longer than the patient, and he is on the part of that side, and interlaces his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates his thigh to the parts above while the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below his belly. But if the patient is light, then know that with him that other cause should be suspended, so that the heavy one is supported, for the dislocation returns instantly.
And it is reduced easily in another manner: and it is that a long staff be placed on the ground, the head of which is rounded in shape, as if a mortar, that it be neither thick nor thin, and then placed below the patient; because on the head of the staff, linen cloths are placed, and the patient stands according to the length of the staff, and then the hand of him is extended to the parts below the other side; and the body of him is extended from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a staff the length of which is in the length of two arms, and the width of it is of four fingers, and the thickness of it is lessened in the middle of the thigh according to this form:
And on the rounded head, there are placed linen cloths so that the staff does not hurt the patient.
And then it is placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm is extended over the staff into the parts below, and the staff is tied over the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand is extended to the parts below, and the other body is suspended from the other side, for the joint enters instantly.
And as the entry of it is completed in whichever manner that is possible to you, then know that you should place below the thigh a bandage of linen of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powder of meal mixed with eggs and albumen of egg over the whole muscle, so that it is rolled upwards, and then a strength below the thigh with decent constriction; and the ligament is rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him is attached to the neck of him, and it is left, and the hand of him is not moved for seven days.
And that the patient's food be kept small, until the limb is comforted, for it is lighter for its healing.
And then when the food is given greater near the fifth or sixth, and movement is exercised; and therefore if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that happens to it or for another cause, then it is necessary that in that one cautery is administered with three points, according to what is said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the constriction are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and it catz and cannot elevate that arm to the upper parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that one which is made of the foot and the heel or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And let the other constriction be administered in that one, and care for that one until it is healed.
And if it happens that during healing gravity falls on the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses baths many times until that gravity is relieved and returns to its nature first.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns with difficulty; and that is dislocated to all parts, and more to the front part than to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not easy to be known because it is hidden from the sight or from the touch according to what figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the hand, this is declared to you manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that one its muscle.
And that you set the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess comes to it, for if it comes to it an abscess, the reduction is difficult, and it is not healed of all; and more so when it is in the back parts, because it is worse of all the other kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they leave to it death.
And the restoration of it, when that one is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be extended with two hands, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the doctor be over the hip and under it, and he pushes the joint with the knuckles of his hands together, or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns as if bending the hand with its hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that raising of the ministers so that it is not remounted from the extension.
And then be revolved the arm completely, because it is enveloped cloth folded long over the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that one with some oil so that this is those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and then pushes the joint with impulse vehement until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it is necessary that it be laid upon that plaster in which there is sticking and application with album of egg, and be extended with a descending constriction, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave it.
And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you reiterate the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and after loosen it.
But if it happens to it gravity after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place over the joint a poultice of greasy matter; and then be bound, and leave it over the bones both day and night. And after you remove that, and put that one in a bath; and when it is dry, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then reiterate over that poultice, so is a poultice of greasy matter, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already arrived upon the tooth inside the mouth, while it is still soft.
And if you want, place over that a piece of cowhide wet and scalded with butter and strengthened over that; and do this some times, because that one is wet and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the malassen, so is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen of the hand some times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is lighter, and the contrary is of the other joints, but however, it is necessary that it be velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is apostematized or that something happens to it abscess.
And the reduction of the dislocation of him is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it in while it returns to its place.
But however, it should be considered if the palm is already placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table,  and the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent, then the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor lies on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns at once, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that with a poultice,  yielding the abscess and leaving it; and do not repeat this, because if not, do not suffer nor can you over the reduction of it more than days pass.
But however, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are broken or twisted, and then there is no remedy in it except that it be strengthened with a cautery near the place of it and very strongly confer any cause.
Therefore, as the malasse is returned, then place on it the poultice which have recomposed, and let it be left and strengthened for 5 days; and then it should be removed and let it be left and the hand of it be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stayed and there is any weight on it, then gently that with water cauda and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter .xxix.
Of the cure of dislocations of the said.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in every part.
And when a finger is dislocated of those at the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation of it with your fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until straight it is healed in that its day.
And when it will be night, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that in the night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do seeming with this, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do with this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When an accident happens to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck, a complicated dislocation, and the movable vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death takes hold of the patient.
And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot retain that; and many times are softened some limbs of him or two legs of him or two arms of him, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times is made the removal of those to four parts.
Therefore that is already removed to the parts behind and is called gelbozit.
But the cure of it is that then you consider if the gelbozit accident of puerility, because then in that there is no cure nor of that there is no healing of all.
But in that which comes by accident or by percussion or seeming to those, already said the Ancients the ways of cure with sermon prolixs, of which the most returns with prophecy; but I have already and abbreviated of that of which the few excuses of the trop of it, for the my better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with which I have this exposed and formed ex instrument divers of that with which I show this and expose that.
And of those there is no cure except that which accidents in the back properly with this that I have recomposed.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face over a pug even proper of wall, and be extended below him instrument molh so that not be lifted the feet of him.
And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the earth at the extremity of the pug around the head of it, and another stick in the aviro the feet of it at the other extremity of the pug.
And the assistant holds the stick, and it not be fixed in fossa; and another assistant holds the other according to that form.
And then envelop over the head of the patient and below the titilllic liamen leon firm; and extend the extremity of the liamen to the stick which is of the head of it, and tie that in it; and then strengthen the other liament over the hips of it the denols of it, and of the legs of it; and then adjust all the liamentz and tie those in the other stick which is of the feet of it.
And then the minister, having casqued, extends the ligament to the part of the shaft, and do not be removed the two shafts and ligaments of their places in which they are placed, but however do not be stopped as we have said.
And the physician places his palms on the spine with strength while it returns, or that which places upon that a table, and then that adjusts upon the table his feet while it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length be in a ratio of three braccia, and carve in the wall of which we have said that it is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table. And then place the majority of the table upon the spine, and the physician places his feet upon the other extremity, and strengthens well until the spine be contracted and that it returns to its place.
And if you wish, open with a turn the one that is revolved with the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground the head of the patient in the rear of the pug two shafts, the length of which be of one braccio, and in the rear of the pug also two shafts; and be the length that is between each shaft a palm, and already is made in each shaft a trough in which runs the turn, and each one be firmly fixed on the ground so that it not be moved.
And be also a shaft rounded in which is the turn, and be revolved in the two troughs of the two shafts.
And in the extremity of it is a trough in which is formed the shaft, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other shafts is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments that you have straightened in the feet of the patient in the trough which is in the rear of the head of it, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of it in the turn which is in the rear of the feet of it.
And then place each turn and stay a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the physician engualhe the spine according to what we have said.
And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then cover that you place a plaster exsiccative with album of how, and then cotton; and then place upon the plaster a table of which the width be of three digits or around those, and the length of it be the quantity that prengues the place of the yellowness, and upon the part of the spine it be.
And then tie it with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment until it be healed.
And if there remain any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that medicines be administered that soften and cleanse with administration of the table for long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a lamina of lead.
And some times accidents imminence in the rear of the spines of the two, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already imineys for that you cover that it be made prosompcio to it with this medicine, because very strong it will make you to happen death.
Chapter .xxxI.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be dislocated only, and accidents do not happen to those that happen to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four manners, because it is dislocated to the parts in front, or to the parts outside, or to the parts behind, or to the parts in front.
And mostly it is dislocated to the parts in front, and few to the parts behind or to the parts in front.
And the sign of the dislocation of it to the parts in front is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is longer and the tendon is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their leg in front of the knee, and it is the place that if the knee is inflamed with cautery, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation is to the parts outside, is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the parts in front is that it expands its leg according to its complement, but however it does not bend that which is pain in the tendon, and if it persists to go and cannot over that to the parts in front; and the urine of it is retained and the groin of it is inflamed, and of the ambulation of it over the heel.
And the sign of that one which happens dislocation to the parts behind is that it does not expand the tendon, nor can it bend that which bends the groin, and the leg of it is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is in that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already fixed with that one, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore you cover that in that one be made prosompcio.
But in the case of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then take hold of that which you want to return the joint and extend it to the inside and outside parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will return very quickly and does not need other care.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take hold of that which you prepare, and extend the leg of the patient from the back part, or by his hands, or by a bandage which is tied above the knee; and another minister extend the hand of that one from below so that he puts his hands behind the knees of him; and then tighten with a bandage on the root of the groin, and hold another minister the extremity of the bandage.
And the extension of him or from the inside part to the angle of the collarbone, or from the back part to the part of the spine.
And the extension of all those at once while the patient is elevated with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is special common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to all species that we will say of the proper cure.
In the reduction of him proper, when he is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inside parts, then the patient must be laid on his side; and then place the bandages on the root of the groin in that place which is between the head of the groin and the place that is below the collarbone; and then extend the bandage from the top of the collarbone to the highest part of the furcula.
And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and warm the thick place of the groin of the patient and extend to the outside parts by vehement extension, for that returns to its place.
And this species is of lighter cure with which this member is reduced than the others.
But if it is excused over you and does not obey the entrance with this species of cure of all, then it is necessary that the two legs of the patient are tied together with a strong, light bandage, on both the ankles and both the knees.
And the length of each of its parts is the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the top of the pole, and that he is in the middle; and the length of him from the ground is the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the groin, and that he is suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man pulls the groin with strength and pushes, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is to the outside part, then the patient must lie on his stomach according to what we have recommended in the having of the groin; and be tightened the bandage on the leg of the patient properly and on his feet.
And then two poles are placed, one at his feet, and the other at the head; and then poles are placed adjusted in the middle of the groin, on which damp cloths are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged because the pole is between his thighs, for that the extension to the inside parts is not pulled.
And then each minister extends his part, and the doctor with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then the leg must be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about groin; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the groin of the patient, and then pulls that with the other hand, and with that pull he pauses that extended to the inside parts to the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then the patient must not be extended to the inside parts, and it is elevated above the ground; he must be placed on a hard cause, as if the dislocation is to the outside parts, according to what we have said of the placing of him on two planks; and it is on his back and the bandages are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it must be administered compression with a board over the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what you must — the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend from the patient two legs, and when you see those engulfs and the patient extends his leg and expands that his excuse, then you know that the member according to what you must is returned — and then you adjust two bandages and pause ointment and extend with bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
And then untie the bandage and the ointment, and compare one leg with the other.
Now, if you see those joints in alignment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and plaster that, and stretch that according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then unwrap that, and make that one delay in walking for a few days, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways, which is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the parts in front to the parts behind; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient straight, so that he already extends his leg, if he can above that; adhere your two hands to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the knee of it to your palms, and keep those between your fingers on the knee of it with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of the return of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh with lightness without labor.
And then plaster that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those immediately with a bandage for three days or for four, and then unwrap those.
And do not use the patient for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hamstring preceding narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is dislocated by small movement, and some times is dislocated according to compliment, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the dislocation of it is of lightness reduction, and is that it be extended with facility with the hands and be aligned while it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, it is necessary that you make the patient straight, and have one strong and valiant minister of the part behind the two of it in the middle location of it.
And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part more below the foot in the location of the ankle.
And then you pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right, so that the leg works.
And do this two times according to that we have counted.
And then push the foot of the foot to the leg the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one time or in two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, because that returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of it with that we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his two on the ground, and stretch a padded mat on the ground firm, and that it sits between the thighs of it, and you already have enveloped over it cloth so that it does not scratch the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the leg with its hands or with a ligament that lies on the collar of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of its part, and the mat be extant between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of it not be pulled to the parts below because of its extension.
And then the physician aligns the dislocation with its hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the parts below, because the dislocation returns with facility.
And therefore when it returns the dislocation and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause plaster and extend that with ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with ligaments to the leg.
And be careful and guard yourself of the nerves which are behind over the ankle, so that the ligament over it not be vehement and injure it strongly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extend it.
And then unwrap it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for forty days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done safely that the dislocation not be over it dissolved and corrupted, and then that it does not receive cure.
And if it happens to it an abscess, then you must administer in the reduction of it that in the location of our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes.
So that the one that is dislocated be straightened with little extension of his work; and that which is not difficult, lift it lightly.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you must make the patient put his foot on a level place of the earth or on a table, and standing thus as if he were going.
And then you stand beside his feet, and place your foot upon that which encroaches from the joints, and then press it with your foot with virtue until it returns, and that you see it already straightened and does not appear in the place eminence.
And then place under the foot of him a table that supports the whole foot, which has two heads, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then untie it and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of them together.
When any of those causes occur, and you are engaged in the cure of it and in the restoration of it, many times it happens that death occurs.
And for this reason you must not presume over the cure of it, but rather the one who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not bold nor presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses as little as possible, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, except to the one whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of the illness, and in which appears some hope. And therefore strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an abscess.
And therefore if the limb returns as we want, then administer the regimen which causes abscesses and cures the plague with what is convenient for it of the dried herbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and it happens in the bones separated, then you pierce the stem of them, and do in that what we have said in the simple illnesses of that which is preceded in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to what has preceded you my preaching; for this is better to you, you owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God be the benefit. Amen.
